THE MOUNTAIN COTTAGER; OR, WONDER UPON WONDER. A TALE.

TRANSLATED FROM THE GERMAN OF C. H. SPIESS.

"Ye visions that before me roll, --
"That freeze my blood, -- that shake my soul, --
"Are ye the phantoms of a dream?"
H. M. WILLIAMS. PHILADELPHIA: Printed by W. W. WOODWARD, No. 17 Chestnut
Street, for SAMUEL HYNDMAN. 1800.

THE MOUNTAIN COTTAGER.
CHAP. I.
AT the foot of the mountains which separate Savoy from Switzerland, there
lived, at the end of the last century, in a humble village, and a yet more
humble cottage, a poor Savoyard. In his youth he had traveled through Germany
with a marmot, and, by the exhibition of this animal's tricks and gambols, had
not only gained a livelihood, but had also, by his extraordinary frugality,
saved a tolerable capital. With this he returned homewards, resolving to build
himself a little cottage in his native country, to take a wife, and to spend
the remainder of his days in quiet. As he passed through Swabia in his way
home, he became acquainted with a poor but lively young maiden, who pleased him
extremely. He made known his sentiments to her, his suit was crowned with
success, and she accompanied him as his wife into Savoy.

After an union of thirty years uninterrupted happiness, she died, and left him
six sons, the three elder of whom were settled in France in the business of
cleaning shoes; the two next worked in the mines of their own country; and the
youngest, as his mother's favorite, was still at home. He was a stout comely
youth of seventeen, and would, if better dressed have excelled in appearance
many Barons and Counts, and have engaged the attention of many fair ladies. "It
must not go on thus any longer," said his old father to him one day; "here, if
you work like a beast of burden, you can scarcely earn dry bread; follow the
example of your brothers, and go into some other country. They have succeeded
by this means and so did I, and there is no fear of your not doing the same.
The sooner you go, the better; I give you my blessing, and for your mother's
sake, a dollar for your journey, and thus furnished you are secured from want."

The young Wolfgang, for such was the name which his mother had given him,
accepted the blessing and the money, and sat out the next morning. The charming
descriptions this tender parent had often given him of her native country, had
long excited his curiosity, and he now determined to gratify it by going
thither. Before he arrived there, he laid out his whole capital in mouse-traps
and hatchels, which he understood how to make himself, and which his father
told him were a welcome commodity in every German village. The truth of this he
soon experienced. He perfectly understood the German language, and with the
innate eloquence of all Savoyards, knew so well how to recommend his ware to
the old mothers and the young maidens, that his capital was often returned in a
week with reasonable profit; besides which, he had generally a bit of bread
given him, sometimes a dinner or supper, and always a night's lodging. By all
these means he was enabled, as early as from Nuremberg, to remit two dollars to
his father by a fellow countryman, who was returning home.

From Nuremberg he went into Baireuth, and wandered accidentally into the
neighborhood of the celebrated Fichtelberg, Here, as he came one evening,
quite fatigued; into a village, he knocked in vain at several doors for
admission, being every where, to his great surprise, turned away
contumeliously, and was thus obliged to do what had seldom happened to him,
seek his night's lodging at the public-house. Scarcely had he entered the door
when the host came toward him cap in hand, and expressed the highest
satisfaction at having the happiness and the honor of entertaining so
illustrious a guest. With a profusion of these compliments, he compelled the
Savoyard to go into a little parlour, and, without paying any regard to his
remonstrances against this, he called to his wife, who was in the kitchen
preparing supper for her servants -- "Kate, give up whatever you are about!
kill the finest chicken! mull some wine! cook the best of every thing that you
have in the house! the long expected guest is arrived! make haste, and let
nothing be wanting!" The hostess welcomed this news with loud acclamations of
joy, and prepared to execute these orders with the greatest expedition.

Wolfgang, who could only imagine that they were in some error respecting him,
now seized the hand of the busy host. "Sir," he said, "you must be mistaken
about me; I am only a poor Savoyard who sells mouse-traps and hatchels, and how
can I, therefore, deserve such a reception?"

Host. "Sit down, noble Sir, sit down! you must be tired! When a person travels
so far on foot, who is not used to it, he must be doubly tired! -- Ha! ha! ha!
I mistake! ha! ha! ha! I do not mistake. I am indeed only a poor host, but yet
I know much that others do not know. Such a happiness, such an honor, does not
happen to one every day, and one must endeavor to make oneself worthy of it."


Wolfgang. "Dear honest man, it is impossible but that you must mistake me! I
repeat it once more, I am a poor Savoyard, and earn my bread by this little
trade, and only beg for a night's lodging."


Host. "Ha! ha! ha! quite right! that you shall have indeed with all my heart.
I only regret that I am not in a situation to receive so illustrious a person
according to his deserts; and I hope your honor will take the will for the
deed. A knave only gives more than he has."


Wolfgang. "Sir, tired as I am, you will constrain me to go and seek a night's
lodging with some peasant. Here must be some mistake, of which I will on no
account take advantage."


Host. You will not make me so unhappy! will not despise me! certainly,
certainly, I understand it. I have blundered to be sure, but out of pure joy,
out of pure delight! I should not have been so stupid -- I should have
considered you as what you would be considered! I beg pardon a thousand times;
but, stay now! I shall quite despair if you despise my house, and would seek a
night's lodging elsewhere."


Wolfgang. "I understand your excuses as little as your invitation. You call me
'Noble Sir, your Honor!' I repeat it again, you must mistake me, and while you
do this, I cannot possibly consent to remain at your house."


Host. "Well, well! I willingly own that I have blundered. I understand my
error, and beg pardon. I know, and believe indeed that you -- yes, that you
come out of Savoy, and deal in mouse-traps and hatchels. Are you easy now? Are
you satisfied? Will you stay with me?"


Wolfgang. "With all my heart; it is indeed my request. But now you must forbid
the supper which you have ordered.


Host. "No! no! any thing that you will but that. I know what is proper and
becoming. I love the Savoyards with all my heart, and you must give me leave to
entertain you in the best manner that is in my power."


Wolfgang (laughing.) "My hunger would make that very agreeable, but it would
be very ill suited to my purse. And in order still further to convince you of
your error* I must tell you, that my whole store would scarcely be sufficient
to pay for this repast."


Host. "To pay! Who speaks of payment! it is not as a landlord, but as -- as a
good friend, that I entertain you with what little I have. To pay! no, no!
understand me better. If you would give me a handful of ducats, I would not
accept a single one of them. Stay a week, stay a month, stay a whole year with
me, and I give you leave to call me the meanest fellow in the world if I should
desire a single kreutzer of you! I have been in foreign countries, and I know
how it is when one meets by chance with a good-natured man, who will share his
little with one. What I do, I do with an honest heart, out of good will, and
you must not despise it."


Wolfgang. "No, certainly not. I accept it, on the contrary, with many thanks."


Host. "You make me quite ashamed! You thank me! -- I have said truly, I do it
out of no selfish views, but merely, if you will, as a good work; and such are,
perhaps, often richly rewarded before one expects, or has formed any idea of
it. You will stay with me?"


Wolfgang. "How can I resist such an invitation! My father, who was also in
Germany -- "


Host. "Aye! was he? was he? well that doubles my joy, if he has indeed been in
our country."


Wolfgang. "It is very possible."


Host. "Aye, aye! ha! ha! it is very possible. But you were going to tell me
something of your papa -- of your father, I would say."


Wolfgang. "My father has related much to me of the honesty and goodnature of
the Germans; but such an honor, such an invitation, I believe scarcely
happened to him in his travels."


Host. "Well, that rejoices me; rejoices me exceedingly! But now sit down."


Wolfgang (sits down) "I must entreat you once more, if you are mistaken in my
person and sooner or later discover this mistake, that you will not impute any
blame to me. I think I have done everything in my power to convince you that I
am nothing but a poor Savoyard! Read my passport, which will yet more fully
confirm it."


Host. "I believe it, indeed! -- but because you command it, I will read the
passport, (reads it, and gives it to him again, laughing.) Aye, aye, all right,
exactly as you have said! A passport is always necessary on a journey, whether
one travels as one of us or as a great person incognito: but I must now give
some directions; I shall not leave you for a long time; I will be here again
immediately."


The host ran up and down, rinsed the glasses, brought a clean table-cloth, and
cleaned the tin spoons with chalk, while Wolfgang sat, not knowing what to
think of these preparations. He was often tempted to doubt whether the host was
in his right senses; but all the rest of his actions, and particularly the
accuracy with which he heard him in the next room, noting down to every guest
his mug of beer, convinced him to the contrary, and increased his surprise.

The supper was served up, with an hundred apologies from the host for not
being able in such a hurry, to get any thing better. The hostess added herself
to the company; but, notwithstanding Wolfgang's most earnest solicitations, he
could not prevail on either her, or her husband, to sit down with him to table;
both stood behind his chair, and waited his commands. He, who had never been so
handsomely entertained in his life before, forgot all his scruples at the sight
of the smoking dishes; and to the great joy of the hostess, he ate heartily,
and drank several glasses of the light wine of the country to her health.

After rising from table, he was, with a thousand compliments, conducted to the
bedchamber, where the host and hostess entreated him to put up with their mean
accommodations, and to consider, that they had not so soon expected so welcome
a guest.

CHAP. II.
WOLFGANG, as soon as he was alone, began to reflect on his unexpected good
fortune. He could not imagine how these people came to distinguish a poor
Savoyard by such kind behavior, unless from some mistake, and only composed
himself by the recollection of his not having by any means contributed to this.
The soft bed soon prevented all farther reflection, for he fell into a sound
sleep, out of which he was first awakened, late the next morning, by a gentle
knock at his door. He arose, and dressing himself hastily, opened it to see who
was there, when the hostess stepped in with coffee, and every thing proper for
breakfast; hoped her guest had slept well, and asked if he would permit a
gentleman out of the neighborhood to breakfast with him. Wolfgang replied, that
he had nothing to command here, and consequently as little to permit; that a
breakfast, as well as such a visit, was to him an undeserved and unexpected
compliment, and must entirely depend on the gentleman's inclination to do him
this honor.

The hostess went out, and returned in a few minutes with a rather elderly
looking gentleman, dressed in a suit of green clothes laced with gold.
Wolfgang's embarrassment at the sight of him was very great; he had never been
used to visits of this kind, and knew not what to understand by it. The only
conjecture that seemed plausible to him was, that this gentleman was come with
the view of setting the host right respecting the incomprehensible error that
he had fallen into with regard to him. It was therefore no wonder that he stood
quite confounded, and began to tremble, and, but from the consciousness that he
had in no way contributed to this error, he would not have been able to support
himself; but confused as he was, he soon saw, to his great astonishment, that
his visiter was not in a better situation: for after making many silent bows,
and then a profusion of compliments, begging pardon for the liberty which he
had taken, and speaking of unexpected happiness and honor, he remained quite at
a loss; and endeavored, by coughing frequently, to conceal his confusion.

Little as Wolfgang knew of the world, he soon perceived that this gentleman
was not come to threaten, or injure him in any way; and he waited quietly for
what was to follow this extraordinary behavior. He entreated the stranger to
sit down, who, in return, assured him that he could not on any account obey his
commands, till he did the same himself. They then sat down together, and the
busy hostess began to pour out the coffee.

Wolfgang now learned from her conversation, that his visiter was a person of
rank, and Lord of the Manor of this village; and that he had a fine castle
about a mile and a half from thence, where it was his pleasure to entertain all
foreigners.

The noble Baron, who* as I shall conceal his real name, will be called the
Baron von Tiefenthal, confirmed every thing that the hostess said, and added,
that he would esteem it a real happiness and honor if Wolfgang would visit him,
and spend some time at his castle. Much surprised as he had already been with
the Baron's visit, he was now infinitely more so at his invitation; his
amazement was indeed so great, that he had not power to make him any answer.

Baron. "I indulge great hopes of enjoying this happiness, and entreat once
more that you will grant my request."


Wolfgang. "Noble Sir, you confuse and surprise me to the greatest degree. What
can induce you, if I may be so bold as to ask the question, to invite a
stranger, a poor Savoyard, to your castle? you must, through some inconceivable
error, take me for another person of far more consequence. I assure you most
solemnly, that the coat which I wear is perfectly suited to my rank; that these
are my best, my only clothes; that my father is indeed honest, but one of the
poorest among all the inhabitants of Savoy. Now I have said this, it remains
for you to decide whether you will repeat an invitation that I so little
deserve."


Baron. "I not only repeat it, but assure you again that it will give me the
greatest pleasure if you will accompany me."


Wolfgang. "How I still deserve this honor after such a declaration as that
which I have made, I cannot comprehend; but it would be folly in me now if I
refused to accept it. The ways of God are wonderful; and that I, a poor
stranger, should find here a friend so disinterested and of such eminence, is
certainly his doing. I shall to day attend your Honor, and at least endeavor,
by my gratitude, to deserve the favors which you so undeservedly bestow on me."


Baron. "You mistake me, if you imagine that I think myself disinterested in my
invitation, or that I merit gratitude for it: I merely fulfill my duty, and a
vow that I have made, to receive the first foreigner who should visit our
country, at my castle, and render his stay here as agreeable as possible. But
now I have several petitions and proposals to make to you; will you be so good
as to give me your attention?"


Wolfgang. "Your generosity and courteousness quite confound me: command me,
and in whatever it is in my power, I will obey you."


Baron. "I wish to receive you at my castle as an intimate acquaintance, as a
friend. The clothes which you now wear, and your trading in mouse traps and
hatchels, would make this, if not impossible, at least too particular; for the
peasants of our country are, from a very unpardonable prejudice, extremely
distrustful of, and really churlish toward all foreigners, and especially the
Italians."


Wolfgang. "That I have experienced myself; for their inhospitable behavior
obliged me yesterday, against my will, to seek my fortune here at the
alehouse."


Baron. "For the reason already mentioned, which is strengthened by what you
say, it is my advice and request that you will lay aside your present clothes
and your trade, unless some secret vow expressly forbids this, while you
continue with me, and appear in a more suitable dress. I assure you that you
will attain the purpose which perhaps brings you here, far better than under
the character you have assumed."


Wolfgang. "Noble Sir, I do not understand you; but it is to me more and more
certain that you mistake me. It is impossible for me to do what you desire!
this purse contains my whole stock of money; there are seven florins in it, and
some kreutzers: judge yourself whether that is sufficient for clothing me
genteelly; and would I -- "


Baron. "Permit me to put in a word. I know very well, that you have but little
money with you, and may not have more; and for this reason, I entreat you to
permit me to provide every thing that is necessary for you."


Wolfgang. "I permit! -- I can no more make any answer to this than to much
that has passed before. If you will make a poor devil happy! if you have really
promised to receive a stranger with fatherly kindness, and if I am to be this
fortunate person, I must, I shall acknowledge it with the greatest gratitude. I
can make no other answer to your noble, generous proposals."


Baron. "Let us embrace! we will, we certainly shall, become intimate friends!
And now hear what I have to say: I had a son; he was of your age, of your size,
and you resemble him very much in countenance. He died last year at the
University, and his clothes were sent to me. My grief, for having lost an only
son so early in life, has never permitted me to open this box, and I long ago
destined the contents of it to the service of some poor traveller: here is the
key; the box stands by the door, and shall be brought in directly. I will wait
below till you have dressed yourself, and then take you in my carriage to my
castle, (looks at his watch,) it is almost noon, and we have therefore no time
to lose."


The Baron von Tiefenthal now left the room with many compliments, and Wolfgang
stood lost in astonishment; he had not recovered when the busy hostess and her
maid came in, bringing with them a large heavy box, which they sat down at his
feet.

"I lay a wager, noble Sir," said the hostess, as the maid went out of the
room, "that you would not so long have refused to accompany our noble Baron to
the castle, if you had known who you will find there!"

Wolfgang. "Who can I find there whom I know, or who can interest me?"


Hostess (in a low voice.) "A charming, beautiful, most lovely, delicious
creature our noble Lady Louisa; she is now only sixteen, but has the
understanding of a woman of eighty; she reads continually, plays on the
harpsichord -- in short, far and near you will not find her equal. And some
time or other she will be rich, very rich; she is heiress to two estates, is --
but here I stand and prattle, forgetting that you have to dress. Don't be long,
for the noble Baron waits below."


She withdrew, with a deep courtesy, and left Wolfgang to look into the box at
his pleasure; it stood there for some time unlocked, but at last he opened it,
and broke out into new wonder and transports at the sight of the splendid
clothes which it contained. I should be too diffuse if I were to describe all
the awkward, comical process of his dressing; he was more than an hour about
it, but was at last equipped like one of the first beaux. He had on a suit of
blue laced clothes; his long black hair, which he usually wore twisted in a
hard queue, was untied, and carelessly put up with a comb, the rest of it fell
in ringlets about his face, better than any hair dresser could have done it, as
it curled naturally; a large hat, which, after the custom of that time, was
also laced and ornamented with a feather, gave him completely the look of a
cavalier; at least, so the hostess asserted, who had been for some time at the
door; this was confirmed afterward by the host, and, at last, by the Baron von
Tiefenthal himself, who embraced him, called him his newly-found, his second
son; and conducting him to the carriage, drove away with him with the greatest
delight.

Wolfgang permitted all this in silence; he really believed himself dreaming,
and dreaded awakening too soon from so agreeable an illusion. He was
continually examining his fine clothes, or stroking down the ruffles of his
shirt, and felt the greatest impatience to have an opportunity of viewing
himself in a looking-glass. The Baron was very talkative, and often entreated
him quite to forget his former rank. Wolfgang answered merely in monosyllables,
and first remarked, almost at the end of their ride, that he had been very
ungrateful to the host and hostess, and never thanked them for the generous
reception which they had given him.

"If you are so conscientious," answered Tiefenthal, "you may do this today,
but perhaps you will be able to reward these people in another manner." As he
ended this speech, they stopped at the castle. A servant assisted them both out
of the carriage; and Wolfgang going up the steps to the house, by the side of
his new host, was carried by him into a room, where they found his daughter
palying upon the harpsichord. "There, Louisa," said the Baron, "I bring you a
guest who has promised to walk, and sing, and read pretty books with you, to
pass away your time when I am hunting."

After this introduction Wolfgang made some awkward bows, and would have said
something of the favor and honor of being acquainted with her; but he could not
arrange his ideas properly, and was obliged to leave it to her imagination to
fill up what he had murmured in broken sentences. Louisa, who had been already
apprized of his arrival, paid her compliments to him, and congratulated herself
on having the happiness of becoming acquainted with a man who was so much of a
traveller. "Italy," she said," has always been described to me as a Paradise,
and I hope to hear from you a more particular account of that charming
country." Wolfgang, whom Nature had endowed with a good portion of wit and
understanding, now summoned all his powers in order to make some reply to the
fair lady. He assured her, somewhat diffusely indeed, but yet with a great deal
of naivete, that it was impossible Italy should deserve to be called a
Paradise, because it wanted the principal requisite, a fair Eve; but that
Germany justly deserved that appellation, because he now enjoyed in it the
happiness of paying his respects to the fairest Eve in the world.

Father and daughter united in admiring, and laughing at this sally, and
Wolfgang got time to examine himself in a large looking glass, to which he
stood opposite. He found that, dressed in his fine clothes, he was really
handsome, and might very well perform the part of cavalier: this conviction
made him vain, and lessened his bashfulness; he looked about more unreservedly,
and fixed his eyes full on Louisa's; she was not able to bear this rather free
look, and cast here is modestly to the ground. Wolfgang was a very fine man, and
Louisa one of the most delicate of woman; but there was a striking contrast
between them, as will appear from the following descriptions.

Wolfgang was in person tall, strong, and well-made; his complexion was
sunburned, he had a high color in his cheeks, and large black eyes, with
altogether a handsome face, and long shining black hair.

Louisa was rather little, her form remarkably fine, if any thing rather too
slender, her hair very light, her complexion delicately fair, the color in her
cheeks pale, and her eyes of the clearest blue.

A summons to table put an end to their conversation. Louisa presented her hand
to Wolfgang; but he, instead of accepting it, made a silent bow, and went out
of the room before her, and she followed, in the full conviction that this must
be the custom in Italy. His rustic behavior at table was viewed by her in the
same light; and informing her opinion of him, she determined that when he was
better acquainted with German manners, and had acquired a little French
politeness, he would be a very agreeable man, and highly deserving her esteem.

CHAP. III.
THE company at table had just emptied their last glass of wine, in which the
Baron and his daughter had once more drank the health of their new guest, as
the sound of a post-horn drew them to the window. A carriage with four fine
horses drove up to the door, and the Countess von M -- alighted from it.

The Baron von Tiefenthal, who never remembered having the honor of a visit
from her before, hastened with his daughter to meet her excellency. Wolfgang
remained in the room, and was thinking, with great anxiety, how long this
agreeable dream would last, as the Baron returned, handing in the Countess.

All his former confusion was now renewed, for he knew not how he ought to
behave to this lady, and yet sincerely wished not to put his kind host to the
blush for him. Tiefenthal had in the meantime conducted the Countess to the
sofa, and turning to Wolfgang, said, "Her Excellency the Countess von M --."
Then turning toward her, and presenting him to her, "This," he said, "is a
very good friend of mine from abroad, who will do me the honor of spending some
time at my castle." Wolfgang bowed very profoundly to her, and to his
astonishment she continued standing, and returned his salutation in the most
courteous manner.

Countess. "I esteem it a particular honor, Sir, to become acquainted with you;
may I take the liberty of asking your name?"


Wolfgang. "I -- I am called properly -- "


Baron (interrupting him.) "Your Excellency sees the confusion of my friend.
Certain circumstances prevent his making his name known in this country; he is
come incognito, and means to continue so during his stay here; but I have the
honor of assuring your Excellency, that my friend is descended from a very old
and respectable family, and that it is neither from guilt, nor misfortune, that
he is induced to conceal his name.


Countess. "That I should have believed, Baron, without your assurance. My dear
unknown, you must pardon me for calling you thus, come and sit by me! Oh
nearer, nearer than that! do you take the German women for prudes; or, what
would be certainly a great compliment to us, as too dangerous to approach.


Wolfgang made no answer to this, but drew his chair nearer to the Countess.

Countess. "You cannot imagine how much I esteem traveled, and consequently
learned men; how much I enjoy their conversation, and the account of their
adventures. Do you come directly from Italy? or -- "


Baron. "I beg your Excellency's pardon! My friend does not come out of Italy,
he never was there; he is no Italian."


Wolfgang was quite lost in astonishment at these assertions; he could not in
the least comprehend why his host should tell the Countess such direct
falsities.

Countess (much surprised.) "No Italian! never been in Italy! I could have
sworn, would have wagered my little face, all my moderate share of
understanding, that your unknown friend was an Italian. His Roman nose, his
black eyes, and black hair, seem to prove it clearly; but one may be mistaken,
and one may be also, from private reasons, purposely misled. What say you to
that, Baron?"


Baron (confused). "I can only repeat what I have already said. -- Will your
Excellency drink a dish of coffee? Louisa, ring the bell, and let us have
coffee directly."


The conversation now took another turn: the Countess protested against having
coffee; the Baron persisted in having it, and it was brought. They talked of
the weather, of husbandry, of state affairs, and whenever the Countess
addressed any question to the stranger, Tiefenthal constantly interrupted it by
some other question, so that Wolfgang, to his great satisfaction, played the
part of a mere spectator, and only now and then expressed his applause, or
surprise, by his looks. After many very visible, but ineffectual experiments to
become better acquainted with him, the Countess at last rose from her seat. The
Baron indeed begged to enjoy the honor of her company longer, but this she did
not comply with, as the sun was then very far gone down, and she wished to
return before it was set. She took leave, with many compliments, and regretted
extremely that she had not become more sociable with the foreign gentleman.
"You have really," she said to Wolfgang, "scarcely spoken a word to me the
whole time that I have been here. You know very well that I may with justice
take it ill of you."

Wolfgang. "Your Excellency, pardon -- "


Countess (laughing.) "That I am silent again already! Well well, I forgive you
willingly, because I guess and approve your reason. But you shall not escape
quite unpunished, and therefore I insist on your conducting me to my carriage."


She now made a deep courtesy round to the company, took Wolfgang by the arm,
and drew him down the steps with her, the Baron and Louisa following them. The
Countess made a pause at the coach-door, and looked about her. "A glorious, a
beautiful evening!" she cried out at last. "Yes, indeed, a glorious evening,"
stammered out the confused Wolfgang after her.

Countess. "Then you have also a taste for such scenes, and nothing shall
prevent our enjoying this evening together. You shall accompany me to my
castle, and then you may return in my carriage."


Wolfgang. "Your Excellency -- "


Baron. "My friend knows how to esteem this honor, but -- "


Countess (interrupting the Baron, and speaking to Wolfgang.) "You shall not
refuse me; you must not deny my first request. For Heaven's sake recollect that
I am a woman! now get in!" The busy servants seized Wolfgang by the arm, and
hurried him into the carriage; the Countess followed him, the door was shut,
and they drove off directly. Notwithstanding the noise of the coach, they heard
the Baron's voice remonstrating against this proceeding as he actually ran
after them. The Countess put her head out of the window, and smiling, excused
herself with many fine speeches, and assured him his guest would soon return.
The frolicsome horses soon left him behind, and the Countess turned to
Wolfgang, who, filled with anxiety, sat shrinking into one corner of the
carriage.


Countess. "It is indeed one of the finest serenest evenings that I have ever
seen."


Wolfgang. "Yes, your Excellency, yes."


Countess. "Have you read Tasso?"


Wolfgang. "Read! no!"


Countess. "Then you are really not an Italian?"


Wolfgang. "No! I -- I am from Savoy!"


Countess. "Poor man! how ill dissimulation becomes you! Though you always
endeavor to be on your guard with a single yes or no, you only betray yourself
by it. With me dissimulation is useless; I know you, Signor; you may be assured
that I know you!"


Wolfgang. "Your Excellency know me!"


Countess. Yes, yes!


Wolfgang. "If your Excellency really knew me, you would scarcely ride in the
same carriage with me."


Countess. "Ha! ha! you would lead me astray again; but I know even this
already. Were you not yesterday evening at the alehouse at L --? Was it not
this morning that you first became acquainted with the Baron von Tiefenthal?
Are not these his son's clothes?"


Wolfgang. "As your Excellency knows every thing, I do not want at all to deny
it; I do not perceive any reason why I should deny it. Yes, your Excellency, I
am a poor Savoyard: hitherto I have endeavored to earn my bread by selling
mouse-traps and hatchels; and yesterday evening as I was wandering upon the
road, I never dreamt of the good fortune which awaited me. But to this hour I
know not, and cannot in the least imagine, why the Baron von Tiefenthal treats
me with such extreme generosity and fatherly kindness, or why he represents me
as a person of rank, and calls me his friend?"


Countess. "You really do not perceive his design?"


Wolfgang. "No!"


Countess. "You possess more dissimulation than I at first believed. How do you
like Louisa?"


Wolfgang. "She is a very pretty woman: and if it were not the greatest
presumption in so mean and poor a man, I should say she pleases me very much."


Countess. "Ha! ha! ha! and you do not yet perceive Tiefenthal's view?


Wolfgang. "Excuse my ignorance; but, I must repeat it again, I do not
understand his design, and as little your Excellency's meaning."


Countess. "As you constrain me to it I will tell you plainly, that the Baron
von Tiefenthal hopes to see you soon the bridegroom of his daughter"


Wolfgang. "Such a design I should certainly never have guessed; but I guess
your Excellency's perfectly. You joke with me, you would make sport of me, and
however this jest vexes me in respect of my benefactor, I must be content with
it. But I beg your Excellency to consider, that the Baron von Tiefenthal knows
me; that he knows, as well as you do, that I am a poor Savoyard; that I did not
conceal my situation from him, but have earnestly warned him from every
mistake; and he has assured me that it is merely on account of a vow he has
made to make a poor foreigner happy, that he entertains me so generously."


Countess. "Oh the generous man! But that you should be caught in such a trap I
really could not have believed. Yet you believe, and say what you will, what
appears necessary to you. -- Pardon, my dear Signor, my interfering in matters
which do not concern me. I promise you not to speak another word on the
subject. I only entreat you to permit me, when I one day pay my congratulatory
visit on the happy marriage, to remind you of this, and that I may at the same
time call on you to witness, that we Germans sometimes know more* than we
appear to know."


Wolfgang. "I do not in the least understand your excellency. This must be the
clearest proof to you that you deceive yourself in your opinion. Every thing
which has happened to me since yesterday is to me a perfect riddle."


Countess. "I believe it with all my heart."


Wolfgang. "Sometimes I am certain that there exists a mistake respecting my
person: and then again I cannot comprehend how such a mistake can subsist, as I
have done all in my power to prove that I am the person I give myself out to
be."


Countess. "That I must bear witness to! You have already repeated it to me so
often, that it would be folly, or rather ill-breeding, to doubt it."


Wolfgang. "Will your Excellency permit me to ask one question? Forgive the
liberty which I shall take in it, but circumstances urge me to it."


Countess. "My dear Signor, ask me what you will, you shall find me ready to
answer you sincerely in every thing."


Wolfgang. "Are you not also mistaken in my person? Do you really take me for
what I am, for a poor Savoyard who has no fortune, nothing which he can call
his own?"


Countess. "I -- I certainly consider you as such, and believe it firmly."


Wolfgang. "And yet ride with me in a carriage!"


Countess. Ride with you in a carriage!"


Wolfgang. "Treat me as one of your equals!"


Countess. "I not only treat you so, but I shall esteem it the greatest honor
if you think me your equal."


Wolfgang. "Comprehend it who can, I am not able! I have often heard wonderful
histories of the peculiar good fortune of some men; but such luck, such honor
has never happened to any one before. Yesterday I worked for my bread, and
today ride in a carriage with four horses, with an illustrious lady, and hear,
from the mouth of the same lady, that she will reckon it an honor if I consider
her as my equal. Pardon me, your Excellency, I am a simple man; I do not
understand making compliments, but I feel this honor, this happiness very
strongly. I am so moved, so -- so -- I should not be able to restrain my tears,
if I had not once heard that illustrious ladies think tears a disgrace."


Countess. "Heaven preserve us from such an opinion: The sensibility of a man
is always affecting to us, and if he only appears to weep, our tears flow
directly. I give you the clearest proof of this myself, ( she wipes the tears
from her eyes) -- But, my dear Signor, we forget the purpose of our ride! We
are to enjoy the fine evening together, and we shall hardly do that shut up in
the carriage. Let us walk through the avenue; the coach may go on before us."


CHAP. IV.
AS Wolfgang and the Countess got out of the carriage, she presented her hand
to him, and he, by this time, understood that he ought to accept a hand so
offered. They went arm in arm, through the dark avenue, and the Countess
displayed all her sensibility in admiring the beauties of nature, on which
Wolfgang let her expatiate without interruption, for he was occupied with
feelings of a different kind. His companion's arm lay negligently in his, and
the novelty of this situation to him, excited emotions which he had never felt
before. He now first saw, as his eyes wandered insensibly toward her, that the
Countess was a young and beautiful woman. Her large eyes, her full cheeks, and
fine person, pleased him extremely, and fully employed his imagination. Might
I, thought he, but once call such a woman mine, such a woman must be heaven
upon earth! I would willingly part with my laced coat again, willingly work for
my bread these six years, if I might but one day have such a woman; willingly
-- But it would be tiresome, if I were to relate all the projects which came
into his head. Those, who have been in similar circumstances, will be very well
able to fill up the chasm which I leave here; and those, who have never felt
any thing of the kind, will thank me for dropping the subject.

Seldom, very seldom, and that only in phlegmatic mortals, is love accustomed
to come on slowly, step by step: it comes on, if I may so express myself, in
full gallop, surprises the secure unawares, and generally wounds him mortally.
Like the water-spout no rain, not even a single drop of moisture previously
falling, announces its approach; the cloud bursts suddenly, and the unprepared
traveller, finds himself up to the neck in water, and carried forward by the
potent stream, before he knows whence the power came which hurries him
irresistibly down into the valley. Any body is welcome to laugh at this simile;
it appears laughable even to me, and, nevertheless, I shall let it remain;
because a water-spout and impetuous love have often very similar effects, both
being destructive, but passing away again rapidly. The black cloud promises
refreshment to the thirsty land, and always lays it desolate. The lover hopes
to enjoy the most perfect felicity in the arms of his beloved, and sinks under
the too abundant possession of the happiness for which he sighed.

But to return to Wolfgang, whom my readers left, like the unsuspecting
traveller up to the neck in water, or to lay aside my simile, falling
desperately in love. The Countess, at last, quite tired of talking without
having any answer -- for it is very hard to find oneself not attended to -- was
silent for some time, and then asked him, rather with a tone of reproof, why he
spoke so little, and paid no attention to what she said? Wolfgang took no more
notice of this question, than he had done of what had passed before. He looked
toward heaven, and offered up a silent prayer that he might one day be blessed
with the object of his wishes, forgetting that she was now by his side. His
persevering silence made the Countess observe him attentively, and, not
unacquainted with love and its symptoms, she soon decided that he was under the
influence of that passion; and conjectured that his imagination now carried him
back to the beloved of his heart, with whom he was perhaps wishing to enjoy
this glorious evening. As nothing is more tormenting than a curiosity to learn
the truth of such, an idea, she resolved to gratify it; and her speaking only
being of no effect, she took more forcible means of rousing him. "Signor," she
cried, and shook him by the arm, "where are you? What is come to you?"

Wolfgang (as if awakened from a deep sleep.) "I -- I, (rubbing his forehead)
what has happened to me?"


Countess. "That I know not; and am extremely desirous of learning. You have
walked by me a quarter of an hour without speaking a word; looked to heaven as
if you were in an ecstacy, and appeared to forget the whole world."


Wolfgang. "I -- I know not, I was really musing."


Countess. (laughing.) "Yes, yes, that you certainly were; and shall I
interpret this musing? Shall I tell you what it was about?"


Wolfgang. "That your Excellency cannot do, that you shall never guess."


Countess. "No, we will see: This walk reminds you of a similar one, which you
took once in your own country. You were then with the object of your
affections: then found, perhaps for the first time, an opportunity hesitatingly
to avow your love, and were favorably heard. The remembrance of those happy
moments engage your imagination so much, that you forget yourself and every
thing else. -- Well, do you take me now for a prophetess? Shall you, in future,
place more confidence in my penetration?"


Wolfgang sighs deeply.

Countess. "If you confirm it with such deep sighs, you will make me proud of
my art. I have a great inclination to ask the name of this envied fair one if
it will not betray too much curiosity in me; and I have hopes of your
gratifying it. -- No, if you are so inflexibly silent, and will not give me,
even by a yes or no, encouragement for farther conversation, then I must and
shall remind you that I am a woman, and as women have a general claim to a
man's attention, consequently I ought not to be thus slighted."


Wolfgang. "How willingly would I* your Excellency -- *"


Before Wolfgang could speak another word, he felt somebody from behind pulling
him; he looked round, and a man, wrapped in a great coat, stood close by him.
"Sir, he said, "one expects you with the most anxious impatience."

Wolfgang. "Me, who?"


Countess. "Alas! undoubtedly a messenger from the Baron von Tiefenthal. It is
certainly very uncivil of me to rob him so long of his new guest; but really,
on his side, it is not polite to take him away from me in this manner. But I
must give way to the Baron's older and more important claims. I willingly let
you go therefore; yet with one condition which you must promise solemnly to
keep. Will you do this?"


Wolfgang. "Your Excellency has only to command with me. Whatever is in my
power, my abilities -- "


Countess. "Oh you are too complaisant, I do not ask so much; I ask nothing
that shall cost you power or abilities. Tomorrow at dinner you must be my
guest, and I merely desire it before you take leave, your promise that you will
be so.


Wolfgang. "I shall certainly come."


Countess. "Give me your hand in assurance of it (pressing it softly.) I expect
you then for certain (with a friendly look) and shall really take it for an
affront and neglect if you do not come."


The man in the great coat* "Sir, every minute is reckoned."


Countess. "Very punctual! but no matter! we shall meet tomorrow. Till then,
Signor, good night, We will renew our conversation when I see you* for you have
not yet satisfied my curiosity. Farewell."


The Countess departed, with a very friendly glance at Wolfgang, and after she
had gone some steps, turned and nodded to him once more, a kind adieu; as he,
quite transported, followed her with his eyes.

He would probably have stared after her as long as she was in sight, if his
new companion had not again admonished him to hasten his departure. Sir, he
said, it is full time, You must follow me, -- I am ready, said Wolfgang,
somewhat peevishly: and his conductor went on directly without saying another
word.

CHAP. V.
IN the certain conviction that this was a messenger from the Baron von
Tiefenthal, sent to bring him back to his castle, Wolfgang followed him, and
without observing the way which they went, gave himself up to his own thoughts.
These, as is natural to suppose, dwelt entirely on the beautiful Countess. She
had made so forcible an impression on his heart, it was so full of her charms,
that he beheld nothing but her image. He was even thinking seriously, for
impetuous love is very bold, how he might declare his passion the next day; as
his conductor, by saying, "Here we are; please to walk in," awakened him from
his agreeable dream. To his utter astonishment he now first saw that they were
arrived at a poor cottage, the door of which the man in the great coat opened,
and again desired him to go in. Already too far advanced to return, and still
believing that he might perhaps find the Baron von Tiefenthal waiting for him
here, he stepped into the room. It had been growing dusk for some time, and the
one little window of this place being very dirty, both together occasioned an
almost Egyptian darkness. No wonder therefore that Wolfgang, as he went in, saw
no one, and was greatly surprised on hearing the following discourse, --

A voice in a deep rough bass tone. "Do you bring him at last, James? Do you
bring him?"


Wolfgang's conductor. "Yes, I have fulfilled my promise; I have brought him!"


A languishing Female Voice. "Did he follow you willingly?"


James. "I cannot say that, but I did not stir from his side, and would not
have done it on any account."


The bass voice. "Where did you find him?"


James. "Where else should I find him but with the Countess, with whom he was
walking arm in arm."


The Female Voice, in a disconsolate tone. "Ah wretched, wretched me!"


The bass voice. "Weep not, Clara, weep not, there must, there shall be
something done now, either -- or, so I have resolved, and so it shall be,
James, light a candle. Sir, sit down."


Wolfgang stood there in amazement, and what had just passed did not tend at
all to lessen it. He heard the order for a light with great pleasure; as the
entrance of this, he reasonably expected, would produce the quickest and best
explanation of their probable mistake. James came in at last with the so much
wished for candle, which afforded indeed only a scanty, but yet sufficient
light for the display of the bare black walls of this room, and a tall
haggard-looking man, who sat upon a decayed bench in one corner of it, resting
his arm upon a still more decayed table, and looking earnestly at Wolfgang. His
white hair testified his being old, and his clothes, which betrayed indigence,
that he had been a soldier, as there might yet be discriminated upon them the
facing of an uniform.

Wolfgang kept his eyes fixed on this old man, impatiently expecting that he
would now perceive his error, acknowledge it, and beg his pardon. To his
astonishment, he at last arose from his seat, and seized two pistols which were
lying by him upon the table, and which Wolfgang now first saw. He put them,
with great coolness, under his arm, took the light with the other hand, and
going up to Wolfgang, "Sir, he said, "we have never seen each other before; and
woe to me, woe to you, that we are obliged to see one another now, follow me."
They went together to the side of a miserable straw bed, upon which lay a
woman, whose face wore the pallid hue of death; her eyes were closed, and her
whole appearance was that of extreme illness.

The Old Man (holding the light near her.) "Villain! there, you see your work!
Clara, dear Clara, awake, he is here, darling Clara, do you not hear me?"


James. "How should she hear you? At sight of this wretch she has fainted
again. Was it but the calm of death, her sorrows would be ended!"


Old Man. "Villain, infamous, detestable villain, seducer of my dear good
child, all, all your work, Oh we have a long, a dreadful reckoning to settle:
You have deprived me of health, happiness, honor, and the peace of my old age,
How will, how can you repay all this?"


Wolfgang. "Sir, -- "


Old Man. "Silence."


Wolfgang. "Permit me only -- you mistake."


Old Man. "Silence I say; the turn for you to speak will come; but, till I have
concluded what I have to say, you must not interrupt me, lest my old weak head
begin to ferment, and I forget that I would first be the father, and only, if
driven to the terrible necessity, the avenger. I am the aggrieved, the deeply
injured. I am the accuser, you the accused. Let me end my complaint, and then
you can speak. She (pointing to the woman) shall be the judge between you and
me. If she would have compassion shown you, it shall be so; if she requires
vengeance, then, villain, I shall require it also; and if there be a God in
heaven, the protector of innocence, it will be poured on you in full measure
running over. Review your own conduct, and if your misdeeds admit of no excuse,
if you have nothing to urge in your defense against my complaints, then
acknowledge your crimes to your judge, and throw yourself on her mercy. Oh! she
is a tender, a compassionate judge! compassionate as heaven itself, whose very
image she once was!"


Wolfgang. "Dear, good Sir! let me only -- "


Old Man. "Silence, wretch! I perceive you will irritate me to violence, will
make me an assassin in my old age! But, mark me; if you are not silent, if you
interrupt me again, one of these pistols shall lay you dead at my feet; and, in
the presence of the eternal upright Judge on high, you shall receive your
sentence! Woe, woe to thee! it would sound horribly! -- Now hear my complaint,
dear Father in Heaven! (he takes off his hat lays the pistol within it, and
clasps his hands together) hearken to it, and, if the obdurate wretch shall
refuse to render satisfaction, write it in thy universal register! But if he
sink repentant at her feet, and promise to atone for his offenses, let it be
blotted out -- let the numberless tears shed by this unhappy creature efface it
for ever?

"I am now sixty-eight years old; from my earliest youth I have struggled with
sorrow, poverty, and misery of various kinds. Five and forty years I have
served my prince with inviolable fidelity; I have sought valiantly in support
of his rights; been five times wounded, and am now, in my old age, dismissed
without reward as a cripple, and am even destitute of a maintenance! -- Dear
God and Father in heaven, thou art an all-wise Being! thou know the most
secret thoughts of men! before thy all seeing eyes, I now stand in the
undisguised simplicity of my heart, and ask thee if I have ever murmured at
these things? have ever once complained of this injustice? have ever repented
shedding my blood in the service of my country? Oh be thou a severe Judge over
me, if I do not speak the truth! If I have uttered a falsehood, annihilate me,
rob me of the only hopes which have consoled me in all my misery, that thou will reward me hereafter for all that I have suffered here.

"The joys of life have been measured to me with a penurious hand. Three times
only, during the long course of my existence, have I enjoyed perfect happiness;
once when my excellent, my charming, my beloved wife united her hand to mine,
when she vowed to be mine for ever, and courageously to to share with me
whatever afflictions thou might send for our trial; again, when this son was
born to me; -- and, for the last time, when this daughter came into the world.
But that joy was of short duration; for her life was her mother's death; her
birth robbed me of my support, my joy, my all!

"Lord! Father of all men; Searcher of all hearts; thou know the agony of my
soul, the weight of sorrow with which I was oppressed, as I approached her
corpse, and, for the last time, clasped her clay cold hand, and bade her
farewell for ever; Oh the feeling of that moment; it was like the last gasp of
suffocation; But I recovered my fortitude, repressed the tears which were
beginning to flow, and seizing my children, folded them to my breast, and
cried, 'You shall one day repair to me what I have lost, and thou Father in
Heaven, wilt reward to the deceased a thousand fold, her love and fidelity!'

"Eternal God! I now present myself again before thy judgment seat, with these
two children, the only treasure which thou ever gave me, and ask thee if I
have not fulfilled my paternal duty with the strictest integrity? If I have not
done every thing for them that lay in my power? If I have not often eaten the
coarsest bread myself, that I might be able to buy the best for my poor little
ones? If I have not as they grew older, often pinched myself to pay a master
for them, who would instruct them in thy religion, and in various kinds of
knowledge? If I -- but I will not reckon the performance of my duty any merit,
for it cost me little, as I found my greatest pleasure in cherishing these
young plants. I seek merely to prove that I performed my duty faithfully, and
therefore had reason to hope for reward, not punishment. And yet, omnipotent,
righteous God! yet is the latter in full, in over-full measure, fallen on me!

"This maiden, whom I here present before your judgment seat, wretched and
struggling with death as she now is, once bloomed like a rose, and was not less
innocent and pure! She was the comfort of my old age, and should have been also
its support. When I engaged to instruct my son in his duty toward his
Sovereign and his country, when I went with him against the enemy, then I
recommended her to thy Almighty protection. Without thy will, thou say
thyself in thy Divine revelation, not a sparrow falls to the ground. On this
promise I relied, and went quite easy into the field, to present my old body to
the balls of the adversary. In the mean time came this villain, ( pointing to
Wolfgang) who feigned love to this inexperienced creature, and won her innocent
heart; polluted her pure soul with voluptuous ideas, painted to her imagination
the most charming representations of the future, and beguiled her of her honor
and peace of mind.

"When the poor sallen one perceived the consequences of her folly, and mourned
it with the bitterest tears and lamentations, the seducer swore to be a father
to her child, and left her, as he said, only to obtain his father's consent to
their union, and then return to her arms. Daily she expected his arrival, but
daily expected it in vain. A letter, sent without her knowledge, acquainted me
with her sorrows, and I flew to console her. The pain which I felt at the first
sight of her, I will not describe, Oh God! thou wast witness of my sufferings,
thou heardst, for the first time, my complaints; The lovely rose was faded, her
happiness annihilated, all my hopes trodden in the dust, all my prospects
darkened! Lord, in thy presence I swore to demand revenge, to take revenge on
the villain who had so shamefully abandoned her, and who, perhaps in some
distant place, makes a jest of here is, and her afflicted father's sorrows. My
heart was hardened, but her tears softened it; and, at her irresistible
entreaties I promised to forgive the wretch if he would mary her, whom he had
forsaken, and become the acknowledged father of her child.

"With her I have followed his footsteps till we came to this cottage, and here
she has given birth to a child who has no father. Nurtured with misery, with
tears in its mother's womb, it died in the hour of its birth, and went out of
the world a bastard! (he throws aside the covering of the ^^d, and points to a
dead child lying by the side of its senseless mother.) Look there, villian! it
is your child! you are its father and its murderer. Its spotless soul now
stands as your accuser before the judgment seat of God. This innocent creature,
also sacrificed by you, who is, perhaps, even now, released by death from her
calamities, was my child, my daughter! Oh my heart breaks, I can no longer
support my misery! Forgive me, Almighty Father, I must complain, Oh it almost
choakes me. I must weep (he wipes the tears from his eyes.) Eternal God! let
not my lamentations rise up in judgment against their author, if, moved by my
sorrows, he repents his crimes, will awaken the sufferer from her swoon with
his caresses, and restore her smiling to my arms, as I was accustomed to see
her in our happier days!

Man (he grasps Wolfgang's hand,) if your heart be not of stone, if your soul
be not quite depraved, pity this poor creature, who in spite of all her
sorrows, all the nameless miseries which you have brought on her loves you
still, tenderly, sincerely loves you! Inhuman wretch, hear how she shames you,
what a pearl you have cast away! This child died two days ago, but we have not
ventured to take it from her yet. In her short intervals of recollection, she
presses it earnestly to her breast, and laments that her only remembrance of
you should become the prey of corruption. Ah you weep, you are moved! God has
blessed my words! I have finished -- do you begin now! but this I must tell
you, had you beheld this scene unmoved I would have fired these pistols through
your head, and then surrended myself up to justice. I have killed the murderer
of my child, and of my grandchild, I would have said; condemn me if you can
condemn me!"

The sight of the suffering female and the dead child, with the harsh language
of the injured father, had made so strong an impression on Wolfgang's ingenuous
heart, that he wept bitterly, and inwardly cursed the author of all these
sorrows as fervently as the wretched parent himself. It was now his turn to
speak, for the old man was silent, and awaited his determination; but he was
too much affected, at present, to attempt entering on the explanation necessary
to his acquittal, and indeed felt that it would be in pain till the swooning
female was recovered. For as it plainly appeared from the old man's discourse
that her seducer was not known either to him or his son, she was consequently
the only person who could, at once, set right this mistake. As he began
therefore to recover himself, and to reflect on what had passed, he waited
anxiously for the moment when her returning senses would enable her to see this
error, and acknowledge his innocence.

But this moment came not. Tortured and debilitated as she had been by all her
sufferings, this unfortunate creature could not support the account of her
betrayer's being walking arm in arm with another woman, at the very time when,
according to her hopes and ideas, he was returning to her. This last blow
snapped the thread of life; and while her father was endeavoring to soften the
heart of her seducer toward her, her soul was flown to a better world, there
to receive a recompense for all its wrongs.

The old man, who watched Wolfgang's emotions, and saw how earnestly he looked
at his daughter, went up at last to her bed. "Clara," he said, "dear Clara,
revive, awake to joy, to happiness, your deceiver weeps, he loves you still:
How often, with the bare possibility of this being so, have I roused you from
the strongest swoon, will you not revive at the certainty of it? (he seizes her
hand;) hear what your fond old father says to you, What is this? Her hand is
stiff, cold, Clara, are you dead? (sinking back) Ah she is! she is!" --

James, who had hitherto stood silent, now sprang forwards and raised the old
man upon the bench; then, with a countenance full of anxiety, he approached his
sister's bed, and, in a mournful tone, confirmed the old man's apprehensions. A
long and awful pause ensued; the father and son, in deep despondency, felt
themselves destitute of all consolation; and Wolfgang, full of anxiety as to
what the issue of this affair might now be, sought in vain for any hopes of its
coming to a happy conclusion. The old man at last broke silence: like a
lioness, robbed of her young, he started up suddenly, and seized the trembling
Wolfgang by the breast -- "You have snatched her away from me, You have killed
her," he cried with a dreadful voice. "Are you omnipotent, then revive her
again! but if you are not, then despair, no, pray, pray, your hour is come: you
must be sacrificed for my child, I will not be answerable for your future
wickedness, will not suffer you to mislead more daughters, to make more unhappy
fathers! you must die. Your father also shall feel what it is to have his
dearest hopes borne to the grave, to be, with one stroke, robbed of all the joy
of life, Why did he give existence to such a villain?"

Wolfgang, who now perceived that silence would only aggravate his misfortune,
who was conscious of his innocence, and that, by an extraordinary accident, he
was in danger of being made to expiate the fault of another, had now recourse
to entreaties. He conjured the raving father to be calm for some minutes, and
hear what he had to say; and, if he did not then find him quite innocent of
this crime, he would willingly undergo the ignominious torture of the most
dreadful death that could be inflicted on him.


Old Man (seizing the pistols again, and standing opposite to Wolfgang.) "What
can you say in your defense? How excuse your profligacy, your flight, and your
silence? Speak, but woe to you if you do not adhere strictly to the truth; The
first lie that you utter, I will shoot you through the head, and you will
certainly then go damned out of the world."


Wolfgang. "Only permit me to ask some questions, and consider them well
before, through a rash deed, you make yourself and me unhappy. As I understand
from what has passed, you have never seen the seducer of your daughter?"


Old Man. "No, I have never seen the murderer of my daughter."


Wolfgang. "Has she not often named him, often described his person to you?"


Old Man. "Oh often! but too often! He had black curling hair like yours; was
like you, hypocritical and flattering; soft and smiling, full of tenderness and
love; and yet with a heart, as black as his hair, full of tricks and
wickedness."


Wolfgang. "Sir, I conjure you, by the soul of your deceased daughter, by your
own hopes of salvation, to examine this affair accurately, to listen to me
patiently. I will lay before you undeniable, irrefutable proofs that you have
mistaken me; that I am quite innocent of the death of your child; that, God be
eternally thanked, no such crime oppresses my conscience! I am a foreigner, who
-- "


Old Man (furiously.) How! do you deny the fact? You would avail yourself of
the circumstance of my not personally knowing you! Would turn the death of my
child to your advantage! would disown this deed, perhaps, to perpetrate future
crimes of the same kind! Ah, such an attempt is yet more shameful than her
murder! This is your repentance, This the reason of the hypocritical tears with
which you endeavor to move my compassion!"


Wolfgang. "For God's sake! only listen to me, only -- "


Old Man (more furiously) "No, compassion were here a sin, die, profligate
villain! and try if you can also deceive the Almighty!"


As he said this, he fired a pistol at Wolfgang, but as he trembled extremely,
both from age and passion, the ball only passed by his head without hitting him.

Self-defence and preservation are mechanical. Every one who falls, without
knowing it, puts his hand before his face, as in the greatest danger of being
injured by the fall; and every one who is attacked, endeavors to defend himself
on the same mechanical principle. When the old man, therefore, aimed the second
pistol at Wolfgang, the latter seized his arm, and struggled with him for it.
James hastened to the assistance of his father, and, at this moment the pistol
went off, and shot him through the head, as he was bending forward to lay hold
of Wolfgang's arm.

James fell instantly, and, in his fall, extinguished the light which stood by
Clara's corpse. The old man had been thrown down in the scuffle; and, not
knowing that he had killed his son, he called to him for help, and raved with
the greatest desperation.

Wolfgang, who merely wished to save his life, not revenge himself, took this
opportunity of trying to make his escape. He had reached the door just as it
was opened, in a great hurry, by a peasant who lived in the same cottage, and
who now came in with his servants on the alarm of hearing the pistols, with a
firebrand, by way of light, in his hand. They forced Wolfgang back; and seeing
James in the agonies of death, and the old man struggling upon the ground
raving with all the frenzy of despair, on the murder of his child, it is no
wonder that they took the former for the perpetrator of this deed, and, without
listening to his excuses, bound him, and dragged him out of the house directly.
They threw him down in the yard, and one of the servants was left to watch him,
while the others returned into the room to the assistance of those within.

After a short interval, the peasant came out again, and ordered his servant to
make haste, and put the horses to the wagon, and carry the murderer before the
Justice immediately. He stood guard himself while the servant went to execute
this order; and though Wolfgang earnestly endeavored to prove his innocence to
him, his proofs made not the least impression on the peasant. "Defend yourself
as you can before the Justice," he said; "it is of no use your doing it to me.
But it will be a hard matter for you to prove your innocence there. The wounded
man is already dead; the old man lies in the last extremity, and will soon be
dead also. How it is with the daughter I do not know yet myself, but probably
not much better, for she is as cold as ice, and as stiff as a board. It is very
possible that you may have the lives of all these to answer for, I would not
take one of them on my conscience."

Wolfgang, who shuddered as much at this account as the good-hearted peasant
himself, now entreated that they would carry him either to the Baron von
Tiefenthal, or the Countess von M --. "Both know me," he added, "and both will
attest my innocence."

"Tell all this to our Justice," said the peasant; "if he believes what you
say, it is no concern of mine; I have fulfilled my duty, and wash my hands of
it. But you may be sure that I shall openly witness against you what I saw and
heard. It is detestable to murder any man, but it is doubly detestable and
cruel to murder such excellent people; and if you are the stray bird, whom the
unhappy young creature sought for so earnestly, the Lord be merciful to your
poor soul! You will then certainly be damned; for the favor of the great is
not current in heaven; the nobleman reckons for no more than the peasant there."

With such very poor consolation the cotager entertained his prisoner till the
servant had put the horses to the wagon. Wolfgang begged that if they would
not quite undo the cords with which he was bound, they would, at least, loosen
them a little, as they obstructed the circulation of the blood, and occasioned
him almost intolerable pain. But his petition was not attended to; they threw
him into the wagon, and the servant set off with it directly.

CHAP. VI.
WOLFGANG's situation grew worse every moment; for the cautious peasant had
swathed him with cords till the blood was almost stagnated throughout his whole
body. He lay nearly senseless in the wagon, when he all at once heard a great
noise about him, and several voices plainly call, "Hold! Hold!" He looked up,
and perceived a number of horsemen, one of whom held the waggoner by his coat,
and asked who he was carrying. "A murderer," answered the man: "do not detain
me, for it may be the worse for you."

A horseman. "The worse for us, rascal! take care that it is not the worse for
you!"


A stroke, with a naked sabre, cleft the waggoner's head, and he fell dead from
the horse. "Well done," cried a voice from amongst the crowd which thronged
about the wagon, "the fellow must die, or he might betray us!"

A second Horseman. "Let us not, with our too great caution, forget the
prisoner! I will wager that the fellows have laced him so together, he can
scarcely breathe."


A third Horseman. "It must certainly be so, or else he would, at least, have
spoken."


Some of them now raised the benumbed Wolfgang, untied his bands, and placed
him in the straw, of which there was abundance in the wagon.

A Horseman. "How are you now?"


Wolfgang. "Something better."


Horseman. "You answer very weakly though; the amendment can be but just
beginning. Anxiety and fear, before the Justice, may have had a strong effect
on you. But you might have relied boldly on our assistance."


A sesond Horseman. "The devil fellow, do not talk so long! recollect that we
are not Judges! Hollman, do you get upon the horse, for he is not able to ride
yet. Go on as fast as you can, that you may be soon over the frontiers, and
stop at the oak. We shall expect you there, or at least not be far behind."


Hollman got upon the horse, and threw his mantle to Wolfgang. "There," said
he, "wrap yourself in that, and sleep away your fear; for when we get home, you
must be jovial. We have all resolved to drink your health to night." He now
gave the horses a whip, and drove on to the left. The troop of horsemen
followed them at first, and afterward took another route.

To describe Wolfgang's feelings is impossible. Of all the enigmatical
occurrences which had befallen him for the last two days the dreadful incidents
at the cottage, and his present extraordinary deliverance appear-to him the
most so; and though he could only suppose, as in the former instance, that they
originated in mistake, he perplexed himself in vain to find out from whence
these mistakes could arise, and because so confused with a multiplicity of
conjectures on the subject, that he lay, for some time, like a person in a
dream. But, as his blood began to circulate again freely, and restored the full
powers of his understanding, he gradually lost the recollection of his past, in
the examination of his present situation; and, from the singular discourse and
behavior of his deliverers, he soon concluded that he was not in very good
company. At first he resolved to enter into conversation with his driver; but
when he considered that, by this means, they might easily discover their error
respecting himself, and that this man might not be pleased to find he was
carrying an entire stranger, he thought it best to be silent. Reflecting then
on the fate of the poor servant, and the indifference with which he was
murdered, he believed, not without reason, that the end of this adventure was
to be dreaded, and therefore determined, while it was possible, to make his
escape.

As he made this resolution, they were going up a steep, woody hill. It was so
dark that Wolfgang could see neither the horses nor driver; and taking
advantage of this favorable obscurity, he crept slowly and silently out of the
wagon. They were then at the top of the hill, and to his great joy the man
drove on very fast.

Alone, and without any knowledge of the country, Wolfgang stood, for some
time, undecided what course to pursue. At first he thought of going back to a
village at the bottom of the hill, through which they had passed; but then
recollecting that the horsemen might be behind, whom he by no means wished to
meet, he gave up that idea, and sought for a bye-way, which might carry him in
security, either to the right or left of the road. After groping forward for a
little while, he saw, notwithstanding the darkness, a road open to the left,
upon which he walked forward as fast as possible. This became gradually
narrower, and was so steep and rugged that poor Wolfgang laid down at last
quite tired, glad rather to await the return of day there, than to go on any
farther in such uncertainty.

He soon fell asleep, and did not awake again till the sun was risen, and gave
him an opportunity of examining his new lodging, which was in a craggy dell
amidst some high rocks, from whence, in the dark, he must have vainly
endeavored to find his way out. After clambering about now for a considerable
time, he came to a kind of path which led him from his rockey vale into one of
a far more agreeable nature. A beautiful meadow, enamelled with flowers, and
surrounded by a thick wood, lay before him; and the lowing of a little herd of
cattle, which was grazing not far off, gave him hopes that he was near some
inhabited place. Still trembling from the yesterday's adventure, he wished
first to see something of the inhabitants of this valley from a distance before
he ventured amongst them, and with this view stood for some time under a tree;
but as he saw no living creatures besides the herd, which could not at all
satisfy his curiosity, he ventured at last to go on, and soon came in sight of
a small neat cottage. Agitated between hopes and fears, he went thither,
wrapped in his mantle, and knocked at the door, wishing to obtain there both
the means of satisfying his hunger, and a guide to conduct him on his way.

After repeated knocking, an old woman came to the door, asked him, in a very
rough manner, why he knocked so violently, and what he wanted there?

Wolfgang. "Dear mother, I lost myself yesterday in this solitary country. I
slept last night in the wood. I do not know my way, and seek now for a guide
who may conduct me again to the road."


Old Woman (in a milder tone.) "Step in here for a little while. When I have
cooked my porridge, I will be your conductor myself."


Wolfgang followed her joyfully into a neat little room, the walls of which
were hung with very pretty prints, and altogether gave him the idea that it
could not belong to a quite common possessor. He had just accepted the chair
which was offered him, as he saw, in one corner of the room, a young maiden in
a neat peasant's dress, who was combing out her long hair, and did not appear
to concern herself with the entrance of a stranger. "Make haste, and get
yourself ready," said the old woman to her, and then went out to cook her
porridge. The maiden now finished her employment, plaited up her hair, and
turned round to their guest.

"Good morning, Sir," she said, smiling; "from whence come thou so early?" It
seemed to Wolfgang as if he had heard this voice before, He looked at her, and
his surprise was excited to the highest degree; for not only her voice, but her
face, her whole figure, her manner, were perfectly like the Countess von M --,
with whom he was walking the evening before. Doubting, however, the possibility
of finding her here, he looked at the maiden again, and the resemblance
appeared to him so strong, that his doubts began to give way to the evidence of
his eyes; and he was just going to ask her by what miracle she was there, and
in that dress, as the old woman came in with a bowl of porridge, and
interrupted his intended questions.

Old Woman (to the maiden.) Are you ready at last? -- Come, eat a few spoonsful
quickly, and go out; it is high time."


Maiden (setting herself to the table) "He will not come so early."


Old Woman. "You speak as you think." --

(To Wolfgang) "Sir, if you have a mind to eat a few spoonsful, pray seat
yourself without any ceremony."


Wolfgang accepted her invitation in silence, and continued looking steadfastly
at the maiden, whose likeness to the Countess increased on him, till he thought
it certainly must be her; but to his great astonishment she did not appear at
all to know him. The old woman in the meantime helped him to some porridge, and
begged him not to be afraid to eat.

Old Woman (to the Maiden.) "I beg, above all things, that you will make haste,
and do not forget a word of what you have been taught, for it is all of
importance. Are you sure you are perfect in it?"


Maiden. "O yes, quite sure; I can repeat it as perfectly as the Lord's prayer."


Old Woman. "Let us try. What will you do when you see him coming up the path?"


Maiden. "I will arise, and go toward him, and say, Good morning, Mr.
Wolfgang, from whence come thou so early?"


Old Woman. "And if he should ask, how you come to know his name?"


Maiden. "O dear, Sir, I shall say, I know thee better than thou think. Do
thou not come from Savoy? do thou not deal in mouse-traps and hatchels?


Old Woman. "And if he should say, how come you to know that?"


Maiden. "Then I shall answer, my mother has told me every thing; and if thou
would know, Sir, of whom she learnt it, go with me to her; she lives down
here in the valley."


Old Woman. "But if he should say, My good child, I have not time at present; I
must go farther?"


Maiden. "Then I will speak kindly to him, and entreat him, till he shall at
last consent. Leave that to my care; come he certainly shall if he possesses
the least sensibility, and if he should please me."


Old Woman. "Please, or not please you, that signifies nothing! Remember that
yours and your mother's happiness depends on it."


Maiden. "Very right; but yet he must please me, or else I will not bring him."


Old Woman. "Wicked child! do you call that honoring your parents? do you call
that obeying them? if you will not mind any thing else, remember the fifth
commandment."


Maiden. "Well, well! I will think of it. In the meanwhile, adieu."


Old Woman. "Good luck to you! good luck!"


The maiden took a little basket of cherries upon her arm, and went out without
even looking at Wolfgang; whose astonishment, during this conversation, had
exceeded all that he had felt before, and by no effort of his understanding
could he form any conjecture that seemed plausible enough to elucidate this
mystery. The testimony of his senses almost convinced him that the maiden, who
had just left the room, was the Countess von M --, with whom he had been
walking the preceding evening, and from whom he was so unpleasantly separated;
and the sight of her rekindled in his bosom the passion he then felt for her,
and which the unfortunate adventure of the night had suppressed, but not
extinguished. Several times he was about to ask her the reason of her being
there, and in so different a dress; but her not appearing to know him, and her
generally indifferent and even repulsive behavior toward him checked this
inclination.

As he still farther revolved in his mind the strange circumstances of the
Countess being there in that dress; being sent out to watch for him, and invite
him thither; of her behaving so kindly to him the day before, and now, as if
she did not know him; of how they knew that he would come that way; and how he,
a poor Savoyard, could be of any importance to their happiness, he became more
and more perplexed. Unable to solve this in any other way, he began at last to
think that he was pursued by some hostile enchanter, who by his delusions
brought him into all these unaccountable adventures.

Some old romances, in which he had learnt to read, had rather given him a turn
for the mavelous; and his heated imagination represented the probability of
this, till he felt satisfied that all which had befallen him was the effect of
sorcery, and he sat in the utmost anxiety, expecting new wonders to arise every
moment.

In the meanwhile the old woman, whose face nearly resembled the physiognomy of
a witch, as they are described in Feenmarchen, and other romances of the kind,
was setting the room in order. Wolfgang, who examined her accurately during
this time, took her for the wife of the sorcerer, and had just resolved to be
on his guard against her, as she had finished her business, and came toward
him.

Old Woman. "When do you wish to go, Sir, and to what road shall I conduct you?"


Wolfgang. "To which ever my persecutors have determined on. But, however they
may attempt to delude me, I hope to God, that with his assistance, I shall
happily overcome all temptation."


Old Woman (stepping back frightened.) "Heaven protect me, the man is mad."


Wolfgang. "Not mad, but perhaps enchanted; But I am under God's protection,
and no one shall prevail against me."


As he said this with great emphasis, the old woman thought it best to make her
escape, for she believed him to be either a madman or villain, who under that
deception, came to rob and murder her. She went backwards to the door, and soon
as she had reached it, sprung out in a great hurry.

Wolfgang was still more confirmed in his opinion by her flight, and rejoiced
exceedingly that he had, in this manner, avoided all farther temptation.
Resolved not to stay any longer in this house, he went to the door; but the
cautious old woman had locked it, and was gone to a neighbor for assistance.
The fastened door, however, was not so formidable as she was; and, after
crossing and blessing himself several times, he endeavored to get it off the
hinges, but notwithstanding his adjurations, and his labor, he was soiled in
this attempt. Determined, nevertheless, not to remain here, he got out of the
window, and ran forwards, He had scarcely reached the wood, when he saw the old
woman and two peasants going to the house. At this sight he redoubled his
speed, and darted into the thickest part of it, where he was at last so
fortunate as to find a sootpath, which led him through a valley, and then up a
hill; and here he once more lost all traces of any human beings.

CHAP. VII.
AFTER walking till he was quite faint and tired, Wolfgang paused, and took off
the mantle given him in the night by the horseman who drove the wagon, and
which he had from that time kept wrapped about him, and folding it up, carried
it under his arm. By the height of the sun and his extreme hunger, he guessed
it must be about noon, as he came to a more open part of the wood, which he
judged to be near the end of it, and going on with renewed alacrity at this
prospect, he soon arrived at its termination. The joy which this at first gave
him was of short duration; for on looking down a valley directly before him, he
perceived, to his utter dismay, that he was opposite the same house from whence
he had escaped that morning. Firmly convinced now that he was enchanted and
constrained by the art of the old woman to return to this place, he had almost
resolved to resign himself quietly to a fate which seemed unavoidable, as he
heard a voice not far from him; and giving way mechanically to his fear, he
sprung into the thicket, and concealed himself under a bush. He distinguished
the sound of footsteps very plainly, and looking steadfastly toward the quarter
from whence they came, to his great astonishment saw the Countess von M --
approaching, dressed as a lady. She was reading, and walked slowly, followed by
two servants, one of whom he immediately recollected as assisting to put him
into the carriage the day before. A little dog, which was running after her,
coming up to his hiding place, began barking so violently that the Countess
took notice of it, and stopping, ordered one of the servants to see what
occasioned his making such a noise. Poor Wolfgang was now soon discovered
lying, drawn together in the smallest possible compass; and like a hair when it
is surprised, sitting, looking at the dog, not knowing which way to fly; and
the man returned to his mistress with the information, that the foreign
gentleman, who was with her yesterday, lay not far off under a bush.

"How, the Signor here!" cried out the Lady, and tried to make her way toward
him. Now or never; you must fly the enchantress, thought Wolfgang, and chose
the former. As he heard her drawing near, he therefore started up, and ran into
the thicket. The noise that he made betrayed his flight to the Countess, who
called very earnestly after him, "Stop, Signor! only hear me! I have something
very important to say to you. Indeed I will not ask you what you were doing
here!" But all her entreaties to him to stop, had no other effect than to
increase his impatience to get away.

As long as I can escape this Syren's voice by flying, thought he, it is happy
for me, while he assiduously endeavored to get through the underwood. His
purpose was soon answered, for the Countess was not able to follow him, as her
clothes hung in the bushes: and before she could disengage them, he was out of
the sound of her voice. He arrived at last, quite fatigued, at the foot of a
high hill, which he must either pass over, or return through the wood; his fear
decided for the former, but his extreme weariness induced him to rest a little
before he commenced this arduous undertaking.

He had wrapped himself again in his mantle, and laid down in hopes of getting
to sleep as the approach of somebody disturbed and alarmed him. He looked up
with anxiety and saw to his utter amazement that it was the Countess von M --,
as he had seen her in the morning at the old woman's in her peasant's dress,
and with the basket on her arm. Though he crept close to the hill, (for he was
unable to fly) it was impossible but she must see him, as she came along a
footpath, which he had not perceived before, directly opposite to where he lay.
She stared at him, and stood still in apparent irresolution. In order to
conceal her embarrassment, she began to tie her shoe-ribbon, which had got
loose, and glanced sideways at Wolfgang as he stood there in his mantle like a
statue. He had now an opportunity of seeing one of the prettiest feet in the
world; but he purposely turned aside his head, to avoid, as he believed, a
temptation thrown in his way by the devil.

When she had tied her shoe, she surveyed him attentively, but did not dare to
advance; and he was still silent, but involuntarily stole a look every now and
then at this charming creature. At last she began to speak. "Sir," she said,
timidly, and came two steps nearer to him, "I hope I have nothing to fear from
thee. I am hastening home, for my mother is certainly expecting me with
impatience, and I entreat thee not to prevent my going."

Wolfgang. "Go, in God's name! I do not desire your company! But do not betray
me. And if you have any compassion for the unfortunate, tell me the nearest way
out of this place."


She now took courage, and darted by him as quick as an arrow. When she was
about three steps from him, she turned about, and said, "Sir if thou art the
unhappy murderer whom they have been seeking for today in the wood, fly
directly over the frontiers; go up the hill to the right, and straight down
from thence thou will find the way, and may get there before night." Having
said this, she soon vanished, and left him in the greatest confusion.

Nothing was really more probable than that he was taken for a murderer, and
pursued as such; yet it seemed much more probable to him that this caution was
only the deceit of the sorceress, who, by means of her colleague, wanted to
frighten him into following the path to the right, that he might come again to
her dwelling, and at last fall into her snare. He resolved therefore to
continue his course to the left, and rather to remain all night under a tree --
rather to die for want of refreshments, than to go any more into that
neighborhood; and exerting all his strength, he began to climb the hill. After
much labor he arrived at the summit of it, from whence he overlooked the whole
country, and saw at his feet a large village, toward which he went, resolved
there to enquire his way to the Baron von Tiefenthal's, and if possible to
obtain from him his passport his clothes, and his wares, and then for ever
leave a country in which he thought the welfare of his soul in danger.

Near him as the village appeared to lie, owing to his fatigue, and
accidentally taking the longest way, he did not get there till the evening.
Wrapped in his mantle, and without a hat, for he had lost that, he knew not
where, the night before he went into the alehouse of the village, and seating
himself at the nearest table, asked for a glass of beer and a bit of bread. The
host, an unwieldy corpulent man, who was sitting in an old arm-chair, was the
only person in the room, and he let him ask two or three times before he went
out to fetch what he desired. At last he brought the refreshment so much wanted
by Wolfgang, who ate and drank heartily, without observing that the host stood
by examining him very narrowly. -- "From whence come you thus alone?" said he,
after some time; "and which way are you going?"

Wolfgang (somewhat confused, but soon recovering himself.) "I come from
Nuremberg, and am going to the Baron von Tiefenthal's whom perhaps you may
know."


Host. "O yes, I know him very well; his Castle lies about eight or nine miles
from hence."


Wolfgang (much rejoiced at this answer.) "I lost myself in the wood early this
morning, and for a long time sought my way out of it in vain, till by good luck
I found the path to this village. Will you procure me a guide, who may conduct
me tomorrow to the Baron von Tiefenthal's castle?"

"May be so," said the host, very phlegmatically, and went out of the room. Two
very stout servants soon came in, and seated themselves opposite to Wolfgang,
who began to forget the misery that he had endured in the relish of his bread
and beer, and the hopes of seeing the Baron von Tiefenthal again, of whose
existence, on the evidence of the host, he no longer doubted. Then, thought he,
I shall put on my jacket once more, and joyfully quit this (...) country."


Scarcely had this passed in his mind, before the host returned with some
companions. One of them, who had fetters in his hand, and the two servants,
drew near to Wolfgang. "Sir," said this man, "will you yield yourself a
prisoner, or must we seize and bind you by force? But I can tell you that
resistance will be of no service to you, for care is taken that you shall
neither elude nor overpower us; choose the prudent part therefore, and submit
quietly to be fettered."

Wolfgang's surprise at this speech may be easily imagined. "I shall not make
any resistance," he said; "do with me what you will, but I am innocent."

"That may possibly be," answered the host; "but probable it certainly is not.
The mantle, which the gentleman has about him, was stolen from me, together
with many other things, and some money, last week; and whoever has that, most
likely knows something of the rest of the property. If the gentleman can give
but an account of whom he bought it, or how else he came by it, after duly
examining his evidence, we will give the gentleman no farther trouble, but
leave him to go peaceably on his way."

"Yes, if the gentleman can do this," said the man with the fetters, "I shall
on no account put on the irons. Come, Sir, speak out, where had you the mantle?"

Wolfgang (in great confusion.) "This mantle? I found it today -- today, upon
the road."


Host. "Aha! the old story! the common cry of all rogues when they are taken
with stolen goods! Neighbor put on the irons. Our Justiciary will soon force
him to confession. I hope, with God's assistance, to get back all I have lost."

"I wish you may with all my heart," answered the man with the irons, as he
fastened them on Wolfgang's feet, who became contented with his new situation,
because he hoped to prove his innocence before the Justiciary, and to be
delivered at last from the perpetually renewed perplexities, and the eternal
anxieties in which he was involved. But as they took off the mantle, and all at
once cried out, "Heavens! this is the murderer who was sought for so
assiduously in the morning! every thing answers to the description of him! the
same clothes -- the same hair, the same face! his courage failed, and he began
to weep aloud. -- "God!" he exclaimed, "in what misery, in what sorrow, shall
I, though guiltless, be plunged!"


The bye-standers were unmoved by his distress. -- "Had you," said one of them,
thought of what you were about beforehand, you might have been spared your
sighs and tears. But these wash out no blood; that can only be atoned by blood."

Amidst these comfortable remarks, Wolfgang's hands were bound behind his back,
notwithstanding his entreaties against it, and his assurances that he would not
fly; and then all present held a council, how they could most expeditiously
convey this dangerous thief and murderer to prison while it was light, that he
might not again murder his conductors, and escape as he had done the day before.

Every word of this conversation added to Wolfgang's grief and despair. He had
been consoled all day by the firm belief that these terrible adventures had not
actually happened, but were only an illusion; and this was now entirely
destroyed, as he heard from every mouth a confirmation of the dreadful history.
One lingering hope still remained, that this might be a new delusion; but this
gradually forsook him, as they threw him bound into a wagon, surrounded by
above a dozen armed men, who threatened to shoot him if he attempted to stir,
and was completely annihilated, as at last, after a ride of two hours, he was
lifted from the wagon, and carried into a dark cave, the door of which was
closed after him, and carefully locked.

CHAP. VIII.
WOLFGANG lay weeping upon the cold damp earth, bemoaning his misfortunes, and
protesting his innocence in vain; for no one was near to hear and answer him.
The mossy walls indeed re-echoed his sighs, but this afforded him very little
consolation. Far better than that was the success of his efforts to set his
hands at liberty. The cord, with which they were bound, was accidentally
loosened in the wagon, and the negligent attendants had not examined it, as
they well knew that even with the use of his hands, he could not force his way
through the two iron doors which guarded the entrance of the cave. He was thus
able to wind them gradually out of their bonds, and render his situation by
this means somewhat less irksome.

Though he had a hard bed, yet he had a quiet conscience; and thus, in
consequence of extreme bodily fatigue, he soon fell asleep. About midnight he
was awakened by a kind of dull continued knocking; and, starting up still
confused with stupor, he rubbed his eyes to see from whence this proceeded, but
in the darkness which surrounded him he could distinguish nothing, and awaited,
in trembling silence, the event of this noise, which seemed to issue from the
farther part of the cave, and varied frequently in the sound. Notwithstanding
his being unable to see, fear kept his eyes turned toward this place, when,
all at once, he heard a loud crack, and saw a sudden ray of light which fell on
the opposite wall; and after the noise of something falling, as if not far from
him, the light increased, and by degrees illuminated the whole cave. His hair
stood now an end, and he would have moved from the place where he lay, but all
his faculties were centred in his ears and eyes; he was otherwise paralysed
with terror, and had not the power to stir.

A tall black man now came down into the cave, almost close to Wolfgang, with a
belt across his shoulder, marked with several kinds of necromantic figures. In
his right hand he carried a lighted torch, in his left a long staff, and under
his arm he had a roll of white cloth which he laid upon the ground. Another man
soon followed him, who appeared to be dressed in white, and had some tools in
his hands; but what they were Wolfgang was not able to discriminate, for he was
nearly deprived of all his senses by this unexpected appearance. With the
little strength he had remaining, he raised himself from the ground, and, with
an agitated and horrible voice, cried out, All good spirits praise God!'
Scarcely had he uttered these words, before the torch fell from the sorcerer's
hand, and he and the other man vanished directly.

The torch continued burning, and as Wolfgang came by degrees to the use of his
senses, it occurred to him that light was better than darkness; for terror
increased with the latter, and lessened with the former. He therefore
mechanically seized it, and trembling, surveyed his dwelling. At his feet lay
the bundle, and near it a pickaxe and shovel, which the sorcerer and his
companion had lest behind them. In looking carefully about to see if they were
hidden there, he saw the opening which they had made, and through that the
starry sky and the moon, whose rays then fell upon him. At this sight the love
of freedom, prevalent in every man, but most in the imprisoned man, banished
all terror from the heart of Wolfgang, and he thought only of being at liberty.

Without knowing the contents of it, he took the roll of white cloth under his
arm, and did not forget the pickaxe, in order, with the assistance of this, to
release himself from his setters. Holding the torch in his hand, he went
through the opening, and came into a garden; and having now light enough from
the moon, he threw the torch back into the cave, and hastened forwards. He had
scarcely gone a hundred steps before he came to an open door, and through that
to a plain, the extent of which he was not able to discern. He sat down on the
outside of the gardenwall, and striking his fetters with the pickaxe the
fastening of them gave way; and thus delivered, he walked briskly along the
plain. Being now desirous of seeing what the bundle contained, he untied it as
he went, and found a very handsome green coat and waistcoat. These, thought he,
are, without doubt, given me by the sorcerer with some sinister design, and I
certainly would not put them on, if I knew how otherwise to get to the Baron
von Tiefenthal's. But, as I am ignorant of the way thither, and must,
therefore, inquire it of somebody, it is very likely that, in my present
clothes, I may be again taken for a murderer, and as such, dragged anew to
prison. It appeared probable to him besides, that he should be pursued as soon
as his flight out of the cave was discovered, and that he should be known
directly by the same means.

All these reasons were so weighty, that they not merely overcame his fears of
the clothes, but gave him courage to put them on, which he did immediately, and
threw his blue-laced suit, which seemed to him at first so beautiful, into the
next bush. He then walked on considering over the adventures of this night.
That a sorcerer tormented him, and would for some purpose seduce him, no
longer, in his opinion, admitted of a doubt, after the experience of the last
two days, and his having, not above an hour before, seen him face to face. Yet,
that he could not mean very ill by him, as he always delivered him from the
greatest dangers, appeared probable, and of this he was still more convinced,
as he felt, by chance, in the pocket of his new clothes, and found a leathern
purse stored with twelve sine new dollars, and six shining pieces of gold. He
had never in his life been the possessor of so large a sum; his joy was,
therefore, very great, and if his conscience whispered him that he ought not to
keep the devil's money, his inclination to it persuaded him, on the other hand,
that one piece of it offered to the church, when he returned to his native
country, would propitiate the whole sin. The power of the sorcerer was also
become less terrible to him, since he found that he and his colleagues fled
directly on his uttering an exorcism. But then again reflection painted to him,
in strong colors, the danger of staying any longer in this enchanted country.
A beautiful female and a large sum of money are snares, thought he, that will
conduct me soon to the abyss which he has prepared for me, and then sorrow and
repentance will be too late.

The importance of these considerations confirmed Wolfgang in his intention of
going to the Baron von Tiefenthal's castle; and if he found him, as he had
reason to believe he was, in league with the sorcerer, to get possession, by
some artifice, of his own clothes, and, above all things, of his passports, and
then to fly away by night.

Amidst these projects and resolutions he had reached the end of the plain, and
come to the borders of a wood, into which he did not much like to enter at this
late hour; but yet the dread of being pursued, and sooner discovered in the
open country, determined him, at last, to give the preference to the former.
The moon was now going down, and his fears increasing with the increasing
darkness; and the thickness of the underwood making it difficult for him to
advance, he threw himself down under a tree, there to await the dawn of day.
Anxiety would not suffer him to sleep; every little noise, even a falling leaf,
was magnified by his terrors into a subject of alarm, that kept him constantly
on the watch.

As the first rays of the sun illuminated the country, he rose from his hard
bed, and, in hopes of finding a road, stole, like a frightened roe, to the end
of the wood, and looked toward the open plain which lay before him. He soon
started back trembling, then rubbed his eyes, and looked again, and trembled
still more violently. Willingly would he have persuaded himself that he had
seen wrong, but the third time that he ventured to look confirmed his terror.

The fatal house, from which he had not been able to get away the day before,
was now directly over against him. "Am I then condemned everlastingly," he
cried out at (...), "to wander about this ^^^cerer's house! What have I done,
that I must go headlong into the snare which he has spread for my ruin? But
if," added he resolutely, "all the powers of hell unite to lead me into this
enchantment, I will yet, as long as it is possible, wrestle against the
devilish temptation!" Armed with this resolution, he turned quick about, and
pressed, on the contrary side, through the bushes into the wood.

CHAP. VIII.
A FOOT PATH, at which Wolfgang soon arrived, seemed, by his view of it, to
wind down the hill as if it would carry him far from the house. Pleased with
this prospect he instantly struck into it, and, after some time, was so
fortunate as to come to the high road, where he had not proceeded many steps
before he saw a carriage, at a little distance, coming toward him. To escape
this he would, with all his heart, have run to either side of the wood, to hide
himself among the trees; but, before he could notice it, a dog, (...) with the
carriage, came barking after him, and detained him, by bringing to his mind the
yesterday's similar adventure. He endeavored, in vain, to keep him off, for
his eagerness to follow him was not to be subdued, and had just taken up some
stones to drive him away, if it was possible, as the coach drove past him.

"Heavens! that is the Signor!" cried a Female Voice. "Papa, the Signor is
here!"

"Hold!" cries a bass Voice, "Hold!" The carriage stopped, and instantly out
sprang the Baron von Tiefenthal and Louisa.

Baron. "It is fortunate for me that I have met with you, for it is entirely on
your account that I was now going to visit the lady, whose charms have made you
quite forget your first and sincere friends. I could not have brought myself to
do this, if I had not considered it as certain, that the crafty Countess had
expressly stipulated with you never to come to my castle again, and therefore
thought this the only means I should have of delivering to you myself the
packet you left at my house, which, I imagined, might contain matters of
importance, and of seeing you once more. These being the only objects of my
visit, this unexpected meeting gives me great pleasure, as I can fulfill them
here. I must own to you, at the same time, that it gives me great concern to
have lost you so soon. I had indulged pleasing dreams of the future -- but they
are past; I am awakened, and perceive clearly that dreams are not always
fulfilled."


Wolfgang would have let the Baron speak for an hour if he had chosen it,
without interrupting him, as he did not understand his discourse, and had not
courage to ask for an explanation of it, as the meeting him in the wood, in
this manner, appeared to him like enchantment. The Baron was now silen,t
expecting his answer; but Wolfgang stood, with the two great stones in his
hand, which he had seized to defend himself against the dog, with staring eyes,
and not speaking a word, awaiting the moment in which Tiefenthal, according to
his promise, would deliver him his property, the object, at present, of all his
wishes.

Louisa, at length, broke this silence. She was dressed today more
advantageously than ever; and a more attentive observer than Wolfgang in his
present situation could be, must have noticed that this was done purposely. A
light straw hat, which appeared, by mere accident, to be put on sideways,
discovered her light hair falling in natural curls. This hat, it is true,
rather hid the languishing right eye of the fair Louisa, but then it gave to
the left a more extensive range for its operations. The fresh morning air had
overspread her face with an agreeable color, which was yet more heightened by
the contrast of her entirely white dress. Thus dangerously equipped, she stood
now before Wolfgang, and shut out every other prospect from his eyes. "Signor,"
she said coaxingly, and took his hand which she held with both here is, "I have
also abundant reason to complain of your leaving us so abruptly. I also dreamt,
like my father, of enjoying your agreeable and instructive conversation for a
long time. I hoped that you would compensate to my good father the loss of his
son, by succeeding to his place. All these charming prospects are now vanished.
My father mourns anew, and I have no more a brother! With you, dear Signor, it
certainly remains to revive our hopes! What the Baron would not venture to do,
I, as a woman may, with more right to expect, at least with more hopes of
success. As, perhaps, it is not mere chance that has brought us together so
unexpectedly, and as the presence of the certainly charming Countess does not
annihilate all the force of my petition, I venture boldly to press you, to
entreat of you to return with us, to live with us, to command our house, our
fortune, as the master of them (pressing his hand softly, and looking
languishing in his eyes.) I shall, certainly, do every thing in my power to
make your stay with us as agreeable as possible."

Louisa paused, and Tiefenthal, who stood there full of expectation, like a
General who has sent the flower of his troops against the valiant foe, was
startled and grew pale as he found all his hopes disappointed, himself and his
army totally defeated by Wolfgang's answer.

"I regret," said the latter stammering, "I regret, with all my heart, that I
am not deserving of your kind invitation, and cannot accept of it.
Circumstances, that I am not able to relate, constrain me to leave this country
as fast as possible; and I was actually walking this way, in order to fetch my
small stock of clothes and the rest of my things, and then forever to bid it
farewell!"

Louisa ventured a new attack. "Well then," she cried out, "you shall keep your
resolution thus: you said you were coming to us, therefore, to expedite your
purpose, get into our carriage. I assure you we shall be very soon at the
castle. Come then, Signor! come!" (drawing him toward her.)

Wolfgang. "I must -- I can -- I entreat most humbly -- The Baron von
Tiefenthal had the kindness to promise, that he would deliver me my packet
here. I beg, therefore, very much -- very earnestly -- "


Louisa (interrupting him.) No! no! Papa, do not give it to him! The Signor
shall not have his way in every thing; he shall, at least, visit us once more!"


The Baron von Tiefenthal, who read a refusal of this invitation in Wolfgang's
resolute mien, thought it best to make his retreat in good order, and, if
possible, to retire with some booty. "What signifies all this?" he said to
Louisa; "if the Signor will not grant us the honor of a visit willingly, we
have no right to constrain him to it. Here, Sir, (to him) is the packet which
contains all that you left at my house. My servant will carry it after you to
the Countess von M -- 's castle, for that you are resolved, as you assert, to
leave this country, I do not at all believe."

Wolfgang. "The event will convince you of it. My parcel I shall carry from
hence myself."


Baron. "You are master of your actions. What I proposed, was merely on account
of the appearance; but as it would be, perhaps, impeding your purpose, I desist
from pressing it any farther (he gives him the packet.) My daughter has
ventured to add to this parcel some trifles made by her own hand. I hope that
you will not despise them.'


Wolfgang (with the packet under his arm.) "Certainly not, I thank you also for
all the favors you have shown me, and would yet farther have shown me. Were it
possible I should be the greatest fool in the world, if I did not accept your
offers. But -- you know every thing perhaps!"


Louisa (in a very wheedling manner.) "Signor, you will come with us!"


Baron. "Do not press the Signor any more, my daughter; he has explained
himself very sufficiently. Impossibilities we must not ask; no longer indulge
hopes that cannot be fulfilled. Farewell, Signor! Fain -- but every wish shall
be from henceforth suppressed! Only one petition I have yet to make to you, and
this I hope confidently that you will grant. Present me with some little
remembrance of you.'


Wolfgang. "Ask any thing within my ability, and I will promise it to you
unconditionally."


Baron. "Present me with the two stones which you hold in your hands."


Wolfgang, who now first noticed that he yet held them, cried out, full of
astonishment,

"How! these two stones!"

Baron. "Yes, Signor; they will be a remembrance to me. I shall always think on
you when I see them."


Louisa. "I shall also often look at them, and be reminded of your hard heart."


Baron. "And you will even refuse me this little -- to you so very little
expensive remembrance?"


Wolfgang (quite confounded.) "If you are really in earnest, and not as I have
imagined in sport, they are yours, with the most sincere wish that I could
convert them into gold, to give them some value in your eyes."


The Baron von Tiefenthal accepted these stones with much apparent
satisfaction; and whispered to his daughter, as he handed her into the
carriage, to ask for a similar remembrance. Louisa fulfilled her father's
commands, and the still more astonished Wolfgang made haste to gratify her
wish. It had rained, and in order not to soil her hand, he looked for some
clean pebbles, which he presented to her, with the wish that they might become
precious stones to ornament her hair. Louisa received the present and the wish
with many handsome acknowledgments, and Tiefenthal once more repeated his
regret at being so soon, so unexpectedly, separated from his new friend. But as
Wolfgang made no other answer than by a silent shrug of the shoulders, there
was nothing left for the Baron to do, but to order the coachman to drive on;
and the man, giving his horses a whip, the carriage was soon out of sight.

Happy as a poor sinner who has obtained pardon at the place of execution,
Wolfgang now breathed freely, and stepping aside into the thicket, began to
unpack his parcel. He found there his Savoyard jacket, his passport, some clean
linen, his wares, and at last Louisa's portrait very beautifully painted in
miniature, and set with pearls. Well pleased with the languishing maiden, who
appeared to smile at him, he looked at the picture for some time; but when he
considered that she was certainly the daughter of a sorcerer who persecuted
him, he cast it away, and began to change his dress. He soon became the
Savoyard again, with his hatchels and mouse-traps upon his back; and thanking
his Creator for having rescued him so happily from the threatening danger,
throw his green clothes into a bush; but the purse which he found in them he
could not resolve on parting with, the sum of money it contained seeming to him
too great to renounce.

With joy and alacrity he now ascended the hill, and saw, from the top of it a
village lying on the left in the valley, which he hoped, by the look of it, was
not that where he had been made a prisoner the day before. His hunger, which
had been for some time very considerable, increased on the sight of the
smoking chimnies, and he resolved to go thither to satisfy it, and then
proceed on his way into Saxony. An agreeable path, shaded with young beeches,
seeming to promise him a nearer way to the village; he turned into it, but had
not gone far, before he found himself surrounded with high rocks, and looking
around him, trembling between hope and fear, he heard a noise, and almost
immediately saw the Countess dressed as a peasant girl.

Maiden. "Art thou here at last, dear Savoyard; I began to doubt whether I
should ever see thee. Thanks be to the happy prognostic of my heart which drew
me irresistibly hither! More than a month I have sought thee here every day,
and have often repented the hours that I have waited for thee in vain; but now
as I find thee at last, I shall repent no more. Thou art welcome (she reaches
him her hand) thou art handsome, thou please me well! Will thou not accept my
hand?"


Wolfgang (falling on his knee, and holding up his hands to her.) "Sorceress, I
conjure you to desist, and let me continue my way in peace and quiet."


Maiden. "I would willingly grant thee thy first request, as thou can entreat
so well if it were not quite contrary to my purpose. I wish to detain thee a
long time with us, to go with thee every where, to pass away the time to thee,
to tend and take care of thee."


Wolfgang. "I thank you, I heartily thank you for all your kind intentions; but
I should thank you much more sincerely, if you would let me go on unmolested."


Maiden. "Thou disagreeable man, thou! then I please thee not? then thou will
not stay with us? but I know better, thou shall not escape me."


Wolfgang. "There! (throwing his purse to her) there, take every thing that I
have! what perhaps may prevent my flight. Take it, and let me go in quiet."


While the maiden opened the purse, and was looking at the gold and silver with
great delight, Wolfgang seized the favorable moment, and, urged on by anxiety,
clambered up the rock. When she looked up to thank him, and saw him already far
from her, she ran after him, crying out, "Stop, dear Savoyard, stop! I have
much more to say to thee! thou must go with me." But the cry of the hounds does
not increase the speed of the frightened hare, more than this cry that of the
flying Wolfgang. He bounded up the rock, and soon gaining the summit,
precipitated himself down on the other side, the breathless maiden pursuing him
all the time with her utmost speed.

CHAP. X.
AS it may perhaps be a long time before the poor maiden overtakes the flying
youth, or may even be possible that she quite lost him in the thick underwood,
I will, in the meantime, relate another history for the amusement of my
readers, which at first sight may appear to be out of its place here, and to be
as distinct from this as any other history in the world; but which they will
soon perceive to be very properly introduced, as having a particular connection
with the story recorded in the preceding chapters.

Ten years previous to the adventures of our Savoyard, there lived, in the
neighborhood of the Fichtelberg, a sturdy young village ale-housekeeper, who
had formerly traveled in many foreign countries as a, butcher, but returned
home, on the death of his father to take possession, as heir, of this alehouse
where the old man had gained an honest livelihood.

He married a handsome young wife, and lived jovially with her. His only
employments the whole day were, calling to her to go to the cellar when his
guests wanted beer, and sitting and drinking with them. He left the care of his
farm to his servants, and never saw his corn or his beasts before he carried
them to the market town to be sold, from whence he never failed to come home
intoxicated.

That such alehouse-keeping, and such farming, could only end in ruin, my
readers of any sense will already have foreseen. I shall therefore only add as
a warning to the imprudent, that at the end of three years, the ineffectual
dunning of his creditors was followed by a seizure and sale of his property;
and that Jacob, for so was this disorderly host called, being still pursued by
many discontented claimants, cut himself a stick from the next tree, and with
this last remains of his hereditary portion, wandered once more into the wide
world. He left his wife and child as security to his creditors, who were really
so compassionate as to allow them a maintenance.

Entirely unused to labor, and wanting subsistence, he begged his way into
Italy as a Pilgrim, and laughed at the pious zeal of the fools, who supported
him in his holy purpose with plentiful alms, while he was in reality a heretic.
Before he reached Rome, he fell in with some banditti who were going thither in
company to the Jubilee. The ability of the man, his strength, his intrepidity,
induced this troop to accept him as a member, and initiate him into their
mysteries.

Jacob was soon one of the most adventurous and formidable of the Italian
banditti. No one executed a murder, or any desperate undertaking, with such
cold blooded resolution. He was soon renowned amongst his brethren for his
great achievements, and wherever any hazardous enterprise was determined on,
however distant, the German Jacob was constantly sent for, who for double pay
always undertook and accomplished the deed to the great increase of his fame.
By these means it was no wonder, that, notwithstanding a life of pleasure and
expense, he soon amassed a handsome fortune.

His numerous murders having, at length, created a general alarm in the
country, the officers of justice were every where on the watch for him; and, as
the description of his person was circulated throughout Italy, he resolved to
avoid the storm which threatened him, and till it was subsided again, to return
into Germany.

After seven long years, when his wife, wearied with fruitless sorrow and
expectations, had given him up for lost; when his neighbors and acquaintance
never hoped to see him again, he arrived, dressed as an opulent batcher, with a
handsome cart and two fine horses, at the public house of his native village.
All the inhabitants, who soon collected about him, were astonished at his
respectable appearance, envied his wife, whom they had before compassionated,
and were quite stupefied with surprise when the oftentatious Jacob poured out a
great bag of sequins upon the table, and calling to his yet unsatisfied
creditors, paid them the principal and interest of his debt with friendly
thanks.

The whole country soon resounded with Jacob's return and great good fortune.
Every one was amazed at it, and every one asked how he had acquired it; but no
one could give any account of this, because Jacob himself answered every
question of the kind with a mysterious laugh, or yet more mysterious shrug of
his shoulders. Often, when he generously paid the reckoning at a drinking bout
for his former friends and neighbors, and thus awakened their curiosity anew,
they importuned him to tell them by what means he had made his fortune. And
once, when the alehouse-keeper of a neighboring village pressed him more
strongly than all the others, and directly taxed him with having stolen it, he
wisely resolved to mislead this man from his but too just and and alarming
idea, and to give him one less dangerous: "Neighbor," he said to him as they
parted, "in order to obviate your unjust suspicious, I will relate my whole
history to you, which I have not yet related to any one. You may perhaps at
some future time derive the greatest advantage from it, and will then own with
gratitude that I have rewarded you with good for evil. Come to me early
tomorrow morning, and then, to you confusion, you shall hear every thing."

The curious host came to Jacob the next morning; and first begging pardon for
his inconsiderate prattle the day before, then claimed the performance of his
promise. "I will keep to it as a man of honor," said Jacob, "if you will
previously agree to two conditions."

Host. "I will swear to whatever you require."


Jacob. "You must not repeat to any one what, for your sake, I shall now
discover to you."


Host. "I swear!"


Jacob. "As you will be satisfied by my narrative, of the injustice of your
slanderous suspicions, you must retract them today at the alehouse, and swear,
in the presence of all there, that you are now fully convinced that I acquired
my fortune in an honest upright manner."


Host. "I will! I will! now proceed."


Jacob then began the following history, which he had devised long before: and
which as my readers, after the above relation, will know at once was entirely
fabulous.

"Neighbor," he said, "you will recollect that people often come into our
country out of Italy, who deal in mouse-traps and hatchels, or sometimes bring
dancing marmots. You must know also that under this pretense these people steal
to our Fichtelberg, and having, from their superior knowledge, the means of
discovering the treasure concealed there, they return home laden with great
wealth, and laugh heartily at us stupid Germans."

Host. "That to be sure I know very well I have actually seen one of them
stealing about here. My father was alive at that time, and was with me when I
met him in the field; he told me then, that one of these Italian hatchel-men
had said once to his father, we were very stupid people that we did not make a
better use of the treasure which was laying about here every where. He had
often, he added, seen a herdsman throw a stone after a cow which was worth
twice the value of the cow itself. My grandfather entreated the stranger to
teach him the art of finding out these treasures. He appointed him therefore to
meet him the next day upon a rock; but as my grandfather came there, he was
terrified at the sight of a great black he-goat, and ran back to his house, and
could not recover himself for a long time."


Jacob. "It is very agreeable to me that you are already so well informed on
this subject, as I can for that reason go on with my history without
digression. When I kept the alehouse in the village; an Italian hatchelman came
to me one eevning complaining of a violent cholic, and begged for a lodging. --
I pitied him, and out of true Christian charity let him want for nothing. Six
weeks he lay ill at my house, and I took care of him all that time without any
recompense. As he recovered his health, he expressed the utmost gratitude to
me. 'I shall never forget what you have done for me,' he said, at parting;
'should any misfortune ever befall you in Germany, then come to Rome, and visit
the church of St. Peter. We shall certainly meet there, and it will be a
pleasure to me to receive and entertain you in this manner,' -- At the time I
laughed at this odd invitation; but when my creditors seized all my property,
and were afterward continually teazing me, then it came into my mind; and as I
had nothing more to lose here, I resolved to try how far I might confide in
this man's fair speeches.

"I begged my way to Rome, and visited St. Peter's Church every day, but never
met the Italian, and had at last quite forgotten his promise. I was asking alms
once in a broad street not far from thence, when a gentleman looked out of the
window of a great palace, made a signal to me, and immediately sent a servant
down to conduct me to him. I was carried through many stately rooms, the
splendor and beauty of which quite dazzled me, and came at last into a
cabinet, where a gentleman in a brocaded nightgown sat upon a sofa, and was
taking snuff out of a golden box. After commanding the servant first to reach
me a chair, and then to withdraw; 'Sit down,' he said to me; 'sit down, good
Jacob, you must be much tired with your long journey. How does your wife? how
is your child? -- I stood perfectly astonished at this speech, and could not
imagine how it could possibly be, that so fine a gentleman at Rome should know
me, my wife, and child.

He noticed my surprise, and asked me, laughing, if I then really did not know
him. 'No,' said I, trembling, 'I do not know your Excellency.' Without saying a
word more, he arose, and left the room. I had now an opportunity of examining
the cabinet, which was extremely magnificent, being ornamented with a profusion
of gold and silver vessels of various kinds; and I was tempted more than once,
to put one of them at least into my pocket.

"After about a quarter of an hour the door opened again, and the poor
hatchelman, whom I once lodged in my house, and had now sought for so long in
vain at Rome, came in. He was in the same clothes which he wore then, and had
hatchels and mouse-traps upon his back. 'Buy a hatchel! buy a mouse-trap!' he
cried, as he walked up and down the room. 'Well,' said he at last, as I stared
him in silence, 'do you not know me yet?' 'I know you well,' I answered; 'but
how you come here, how you dare venture into this room to walk about, and cry
your wares, is a question, that, with the help of all my understanding, I
cannot answer to myself.' -- 'But I will explain it to you in a moment,' he
replied.

"On saying this, he began to undress himself, by first throwing off some false
hair which he had upon his head; and then running out for a moment, he returned
in his brocaded nightgown. 'Now do you know me?' he said; 'now do you believe
that the mouse-trap dealer and I are the same person?' -- 'I believe it, I
answered, because my eyes convince me of it, though my understanding is still
inclined to contradict them.' 'It shall soon be demonstrated as clearly to
that, as to your eyes,' said he. 'Sit down by me, sit down; make no ceremony,
and listen to me patiently. The compassion which you so disinterestedly
exercised toward me deserves not only reward but confidence. In the same
proportion in which I now place confidence in you, shall also be your reward.'

'I am descended (he continued) from a poor, but very old and once respected
noble Italian family. My father, from necessity, served in an inferior office
under the Pope, and when he died, left me without money, without friends, and
consequently without any other prospect than that of starving. I am not ashamed
to own that, like you, I once asked alms in the streets of Rome; and was fed
for some years as a poor scholar, with the beggars' broth of the Capuchins. As
I was one evening fainting with hunger and thirst, begging at a very late hour,
I met a hoary old man with a knotty stick and a little lantern in his hand. He
held the light to my face, and examined it narrowly for a long time, and then
commanded me to follow him in a solemn manner. I should deviate too much from
the purpose of my narrative, if I related to you, circumstantially, how this
singular man, by degrees, won my affections. He provided me with all the
necessaries of life, instructed me in various sciences, and at last took me
into his house: He was in short quite a father to me, for to him I owe all my
knowledge, and all my riches.

'As he grew older and weaker, he taught me the rare, but in Italy not quite
forgotten art, of discovering treasures concealed in the earth; and of
discerning, in some of the most apparently common stones, precious stones of
infinite value. As he had always aspired to the knowledge of the highest
sciences, and still hoped to find out the secret of the balsam of eternal life,
he had but seldom, and only in cases of necessity, made use of this glorious
means of becoming rich with very little trouble. He died without having
attained his object, and left me his writings, his instruments, and a moderate
sum of money. With this I immediately resolved to travel about the world, and,
by means of my inestimable art, to collect a sufficient fortune to pass away my
life in independence and enjoyment.

'From the papers of my foster-father I clearly perceived, that the German
Fichtelberg was the spot where the greatest treasures lay concealed in the
bowels of the earth, and that this hill was also remarkable for a profusion of
precious stones. It appeared likewise, that by attending to the proper season
and, hour, it was extremely easy to get possession of a portion of these
riches. After the example, therefore, of many others who were in the secret,
and who, as it was related in these manuscripts, had already amassed fortunes
there, I went to the Fichtelberg as a hatchel and mouse-trap dealer. But at
your house I must have ended my life without having attained my purpose, if it
had not been for the kindness and attention of your good heart, for my disease
was extremely stubborn.

'I shall now recompense you for the disinterested compassion you exercised
toward me at that time. I would willingly have done it at parting, for I had
at that time great wealth in my power; but I feared to excite suspicions in
your neighborhood that might prejudice me and any others of my countrymen who
came after me, and thence prudently resolved to defer the reward till a more
seasonable opportunity. Without having occasion for more than common acuteness,
I plainly perceived that your husbandry went on miserably; that you were
plundered by your servants, and that your creditors would ultimately seize all
your property. On that account, when I bade you farewell, I invited you to Rome,
in hopes of being, able to reward you there without creating any jealousy
against you, or any suspicion against myself. My wish is now fulfilled; stay
with me, forget your ungrateful country, and be happy here; you shall never
more feel want, but have every thing in abundance.'


CHAP. XI.
THE generous Marquis faithfully performed his promise. I lived entirely with
him; he appointed me his Master of the Horse, and I soon became his principal
favorite. When any one wanted to solicit a favor from him, they applied to
me; and if I gave them my assistance, they were certain of success. You will
easily imagine that this kind of life was very agreeable to me; I had money
always as plenty as hay, and took many opportunities of turning it to a good
account. I must to my shame own to you, that in an eternal round of pleasure I
forgot my native land, and every thing that I had left behind me; and for years
never thought even of my wife and child. But at last I grew tired of this scene
of dissipation, and began to be very frugal and steady, and to think often of
my poor child and my forsaken wife. I became in short so uneasy, that
frequently I was not able to conceal my tears from my benefactor.

"Several times he enquired the cause of this dejection; and when I could no
longer withhold it from him, he promised to remove it immediately. 'I see,' he
said, 'that you are become home-sick; I cannot blame you for it, nor am I
surprised at it, for I have been in foreign countries myself, and well know
what it is to languish after one's native land. I love you, and would willingly
have you always with me; but as my first wish is to promote your happiness, I
will, without hesitation, sacrifice my inclination to yours. Come to me at the
same hour to-morrow-morning, and I will, in the meantime, take care to provide
you with a comfortable independence.' I left him, and no day in my life ever
appeared to me so long as this; I could neither eat nor sleep for joy, that I
should soon see my wife and child again.

"I was with the Marquis the next morning before the appointed hour, and found
him in earnest conversation with his eldest son. 'Are you here already,' he
cried, laughing, as he came to meet me. 'Your haste clearly proves that I was
not deceived in my yesterday's conjecture. Go in peace; and that you may never
experience any want in Germany, take this bag of gold with you; it contains
eight thousand sequins, which I hope will be sufficient to support you and your
wife and child decently.

"You may readily suppose, neighbor, how I was startled at so large a present.
I could not speak; I threw myself, weeping, at the feet of my benefactor, and
knew not how to express my gratitude. The good old man raised me up, kindly
assuring me once more that he would never cease to be my friend; and that I
might boldly return to him, if through any accident I was again reduced to
distressed circumstances. The young Marquis then putting in, said, 'Dear Jacob,
I have a reciprocal service to ask of you. My father has revealed to me today
that I must soon travel into Germany, and visit your native place. There is yet
much concealed treasure remaining there, which we stand in need of for the
further aggrandizement of our family. I shall also appear in the character of a
hatchel and mouse-trap dealer, and search for these treasures. Should any
misfortune befall me there, then, for the sake of my father's kindness, be you
my friend, and I will reward it to your children.'

'Dear, dear son of my great benefactor!' I cried out quite transported, 'as
soon as you come to our village, put up at my house. I will attend and take
care of you as the apple of my eye. I will accompany you every where, and
conduct you again in safety to the arms of your father.'

'Thanks! a thousand thanks for your good intentions,' said the Marquis, 'but
my son cannot take advantage of them. He must not, during his journey, go to
the house of any friend or acquaintance; for if he did, the aim of it would be
lost. You cannot do him any service yourself; but I expect from your gratitude,
that you will prepare some kind-hearted people of you neighborhood to be
courteous to him, and soften the hatred that most of your countrymen bear to us
Italians Endeavor to make them sensible, that a stranger may often be able to
reward the slightest service a thousand fold, and let them understand that we
are actually bound to do it. Your own experience must convince you of the truth
of what I say. You undoubtedly know some of your neighbors whose honest and
good hearts dispose them to be beneficent toward the poor; name them to my
son, that in a time of need he may seek shelter and protection with them; and
that I may thus enjoy the greatest pleasure in life, the receiving my son again
in my arms in health.'

"I promised to do what he required, and named to him all those on whose
hospitality I believed he might rely; and he wrote their names carefully in his
pocketbook. Amongst them I mentioned you, neighbor; you stand uppermost, and
should he find it necessary, he will come to you directly."

Host. "How! is it possible that you thought of me at that time? That you
wished to be the maker of my fortune? O dear, dear neighbor! God reward you!"


Jacob. "Do not speak till I have ended. Then I shall certainly expect that you
ask my pardon, and declare me an honest man."


Host. "I shall do both most sincerely."


Jacob. "I was obliged, finally, to promise the most rigid secrecy. I was made
to swear that I would not discover to any one the intended journey of the young
Marquis, because then there would be a number of interested persons, who would
show him beneficence merely from selfish views; and thus the riches which he
collected here would not be sufficient for the repayment of these obligations.
Judge now yourself, neighbor, what a struggle it have cost me, to become as it
were perjured, and betray my great benefactor. Had you not yesterday so openly
and expressly attacked my honor, and had I not apprehended that your slander
might bring me to justice, where I might perhaps have been constrained to make
every thing known the greatest treasure in the world would not have tempted me
to violate his confidence. Be grateful therefore now, and promise me strict
fidelity. Use this information to your advantage, but do not injure me, or my
benefactor, by inconsiderate blabbing."


Host. "May I grow crooked and lame, if one word of it ever comes from my lips!
And may I die a violent death, if I do not formally beg your pardon today at
the public house, and declare before every body there, that you have acquired
your fortune in a truly honest manner. But tell me now when the young Marquis
comes, and how I shall receive him?"


Jacob. "His arrival does not depend on himself, but on the stars. He must be
regulated by them, in order to accomplish his enterprise happily. Perhaps he
may be now on his journey; perhaps he may not come these two years."


Host. "But he certainly will come?


Jacob. "Undoubtedly! you may rely on it; and the better you receive him, the
more courtesy you show him, the greater will be your reward."


The inquisitive host appeared now quite contented and full of joy, and was
already building a thousand castles in the air. The cunning Jacob laughed
within himself, and was rejoiced that he had so completely deceived him, and
could now enjoy his plunder in peace.

The splendid prospects which the host was now incessantly dreaming of, made
him often musing and thoughtful; he no longer worked so diligently as he had
done, but loved best to sit in some corner, where he might, without being
disturbed, busy himself with the idea of his future fortune. His wife was
offended at this unusual behavior in her husband, and resolved to find out the
reason of it. Whoever knows any thing of women, will know very well how
continually they plague their husbands on such an occasion, and will already
have prophesied that she carried her point at last. In fact she was very soon
the joint possessor of the secret.

Nothing oppresses a weak mind like a secret, or gives it the fancied
importance it wishes for, like being able to reveal one. Thus Catherine, for
such was the name of our musing host's wife, was no sooner mistress of this,
than she combed her hair smooth, put on her Sunday gown, and hastened to the
castle of the Lord of the Manor. She had served there six years as cook, with
great diligence and honesty, and was for this reason always well received in
the family, and now hoped to acquire much greater consequence there from the
nature of her present errand. She went from the kitchen directly up to the
apartment of the mistress of the castle, and was conducted by her to her papa,
who was no other than the Baron von Tiefenthal. As he inferred from the
importance of her look that she had some weighty intelligence to communicate,
he spoke very courteously to her, and offered her a chair. This set Catherine's
tongue a going, and the Baron was minutely informed of the above mavelous
history. The Countess von M -- also learnt it a short time after, much in the
same manner, as she was buying some flax of Catherine, and won her confidence
by her affable behavior.

Host, Baron, and Countess, now all fabricated their particular plans how to
decoy the young Marquis, when he appeared, as a hatchel and mouse-trap dealer,
in their neighborhood; and to entitle themselves, by the most attentive
beneficence, to a part, or perhaps the whole, of his great treasures. By
Catherine's prudent management she persuaded her husband to reveal the secret,
that he knew already, to the Baron; and the Baron prevailed on the host to
promise, that he should have immediate information of the arrival of the young
Marquis.

The Baron von Tiefenthal was the economical son of a very extravagant father,
and it was with difficulty that he could support his situation with an
inheritance encumbered with the debts of the latter. He was very naturally
therefore extremely rejoiced that so fortunate an opportunity was likely to be
presented to him of disencumbering his estate. His daughter was now
marriageable, and who can blame the good father that he wished to bring about a
match between her and the rich Marquis? and the more certainly to accomplish
his purpose, he confided his whole plan to her beforehand.

The Countess von M -- was the lively widow of an old disagreeable husband,
who, to her great joy, died soon after their marriage, and left her the
unlimited possession of a large fortune. Being much inclined to show, luxury,
and dissipation, she had, within two years, nearly run through this fortune,
when she heard from the good natured hostess this lucky secret. It was
therefore equally natural that she should also devise every means to decoy the
expected Marquis to herself, and thus hope to secure an inexhaustible source of
riches.

In her early youth the Countess had tenderly loved, and been beloved by, a
handsome Lieutenant; and in consequence of this amor, at seventeen she became
the mother of a daughter, whose birth was so carefully concealed that the
Countess was never suspected, though she remained at her father's house. The
child was immediately committed to the care of a poor parson's widow.

When the Countess became a widow herself, she took her daughter and this old
woman to live near her; for notwithstanding the general giddiness of her
character, she loved the former with maternal affection. This child of love,
whose name was Emily, was extremely like her mother; but without making any
remarks on this striking resemblance, she was unanimously held, by the good
natured peasants, to be the daughter of the parson's widow; and in order to
avoid more critical observers, she lived with her in a retired cottage built
for them by the Countess in her park; to which, after the death of her husband,
she had added part of a neighboring wood.

The real mother of this child, who wished to establish her darling
respectably, thought the present a fine opportunity to endeavor to accomplish
her object; and by throwing her in his way, hoped that she might captivate the
inexperienced Marquis. With this view, Emily had been sent every day during the
whole summer, to the summit of the Fichtelberg, to await his coming, and, by
the instructions of her mother, she was to do all in her power to attract and
detain him.

Such was the situation of affairs when the innocent Wolfgang arrived in this
country. By all those who were interested in the coming of the expected
Marquis, he was taken for him, and for this reason was received by them with so
much honor.

It is now certain that no sorcerer deluded him when he thought he saw the
Countess von M --, sometimes as a fine lady, and sometimes as a peasant girl.
Nor was it more extraordinary, when he was in a park laid out after the English
fashion, that he should by various ways, constantly come again to the house
situated at the end of it and to which all these ways purposely led.

But then who was the old man whom Wolfgang so undesignedly murdered? Who the
poor forsaken female? Who were the horsemen who released him the first time?
And who the sorcerer who released him the second time out of captivity?

These questions I cannot possibly answer now. The time will come when my
readers will learn every thing; but the where and the when I must leave
undetermined; because the little Atalante has overtaken the panting Wolfgang,
notwithstanding his great advantage of her, and is holding him fast by the arm.
And it is proper now to listen to their discourse, or there would be a chasm in
the history.

Attend therefore, and I will go on.

CHAP. XII.
WOLFGANG (out of breath, heated, trembling, and looking with fear at his
Conqueress.) "I can go no farther! let what will happen, I can go no farther! I
have done every thing that the power of man could do; but I must yield, and it
is not my fault."


Maiden (also out of breath.) Thou rude ill-behaved man! at last I have caught
thee; I called to thee several times, but thou would not mind me; and what is
now come of it? We are both out of breath, and not able to talk with one
another."


Wolfgang (hiding his eyes.) Ah! I dare not look at you, lest I am quite lost.


Maiden. "Why, for what reason? do look at me! am I then so ugly?"


Wolfgang. "Oh that it was but nature! that it was no enchantment!"


Maiden. "How! do thou believe, dear Savoyard, that I paint myself like a
fine lady? that I (taking his hand, and rubbing her cheek with it softly)
convince thyself! look, my color is as natural as thine, is the consequence of
running so fast* only feel how I burn (putting his hand to her bosom) only feel
how my heart beats."


Wolfgang. "If you were the devil himself, I must kiss you."


In order to avoid the appearance of any thing unnatural and inconsistent in my
narrative, I consider myself as necessitated here to describe the situation of
poor Wolfgang, when he was led so unexpectedly from one extreme to another. In
running he had stumbled over a stick, and, though he had indeed endeavored to
perserve his balance, after tottering up and down for some time, like a
nine-pin when it is touched by the ball, the disproportion of gravity at last
drew him backwards to the ground: he fell amongst the elastic branches of some
young beeches, which rocked him up and down, and made it impossible for him to
rise, because every support which he caught at was too weak, and let him sink
again.

In this situation the pursuing damsel overtook him. She laid hold of his arm,
but prudently did not draw him from it, as he was now no longer able to fly,
but remained in her power. In running after him the bushes had often caught
her; one of them had half torn off her handerkerchief, another snatched it
quite away; but entirely occupied with the desire to overtake the flying youth,
she perceived nothing of this. But as Wolfgang uncovered his eyes, and from an
irresistible impulse drew her toward him, and boldly snatched a kiss, she
became at once sensible of her loss, and springing from his arms with all her
strength, in extreme confusion turned her back to him.

It would have been easy for him now to fly, but the tables were turned, and at
this moment, if the maiden had flown, Wolfgang would have followed her, as
assiduously as she had followed him before. Devils and sorcery were altogether
vanished from his remembrance, and he thought only of the heaven in the
damsel's arms. You must be mine! my wife! thought he at this moment, and drew
near to her again.

"Rude unmannerly man!" she said, "give me back my handkerchief, or I will
never look at you any more; give it me, or I will go away directly."

Wolfgang. "Dear, dear maiden! how should I give you what I do not possess?
probably you have lost it in running."


Maiden. "And who is in fault then? certainly thou; and now thou may help me
to look for it."


Emily, for it was her, went on before, and Wolfgang followed patiently after
her. He looked carefully at every bush, for he hoped, if he found the
handkerchief, at least to see the fair maiden's face again, and perhaps to earn
a reward for his zeal. Fortune favored him; he saw it hanging on a bush not
far off, and jumping forward, he cried out, as happy as a king who had
reconquered his lost kingdom, "I have it! I have it!"

Emily (looking after him) "Then throw it to me."


Wolfgang (^^lefully.) "Throw it to you! and you will not fetch it yourself,
nor give me a kiss as a reward?"


Emily. "No! give it to me now."


Wolfgang (throwing the handkerchief to her.) "There you have it then! But -- "

(Emily) putting it on hastily, and turning to him.) "Well, but -- what then?"
(with a kind look at him;) "perhaps thou will run away from me again."


Wolfgang (rather huffily.) Very possibly."


Emily. "Well, go, go! I certainly shall not run after thee any more. But if
thou go, then thou will never obtain in thy life -- Yet go, now go."


Wolfgang. "What shall I never obtain in my life? O speak out! what?"


Emily. "Thou would know it already. But go now; I certainly do not hinder
thee."


Wolfgang. "But if I do no^ ^o? if I follow you patiently wherever you lead me;
how then!"


Emily. "Then, indeed, I will forget every thing; then thou shall be rewarded."


She looked kindly at him; and Wolfgang, quite transported, took his reward.

Emily (putting her hand before his mouth) "Enough, enough! Will thou always
follow me? never more forsake me? I can love thee with all my heart. Thy
curling hair," (she strokes him softly on the forehead,) "pleases me; thy rosy
cheeks and thy black eyes are fine. Do I please thee also?"


Wolfgang. "Do you please me! he sunk on his knee -- "I adore you."


Wolfgang pressed Emily to his breast, and though they spoke not a word, their
hearts understood each other, and the inseparable bond of love was inwardly
sworn to by them both.

Emily (disengaging herself from him) "Dear, good! now let us go! My mother
will expect me; I cannot any longer deprive her of the joy of hearing that I
have found thee."


They walked on, and as Wolfgang began now to recover his recollection, the
terror that this lovely creature might be an illusion of enchantment took
possession of his mind, for he extremely dreaded the loss of her. In order to
become more certain on this point, he began to ask, "Who is your mother, dear
maiden?"

Emily. "We shall soon be with her; she lives at the end of the park in the
little white cottage, the roof of which thou see shining there."


At the words, white cottage, he started; and when he actually saw the top of
the roof, his steps tottered. The magnet by his side drew him forwards; fear of
the sorcerer and all his crew, held him back. But, as the most ancient of the
Poets have already evidently proved that love vanquishes every thing, my
readers will easily imagine that, notwithstanding his doubts and fears, he
resolved to follow the fair maiden, and could not possibly persuade himself
that Satan could assume a form of such purity and perfection. To obtain, if
possible, still farther light, he began again to ask questions.

Wolfgang. "Sweet maiden, do you know the Countess von M --?"


Emily. "Do I know my second mother! what a question? I am indebted to her for
all that I possess; -- the house to which we are going is her property; this
wood, and every thing that thou see belongs to her. No mother can love a
child more tenderly than she loves me."


Wolfgang. "You are extremely like her; so like her, that I should take you and
her for the same person, if your own account and your more youthful figure did
not convince me to the contrary, I have seen and conversed with the Countess
von M --."


Emily. "I know that, simpleton! She has told me every thing, and complained
bitterly that thou wast so abominably taken away from her lately, as she was
bringing thee to visit me."


Wolfgang was very glad, from this relation, to be more and more confirmed in
his conjecture, that his supposition about the devil and sorcery had been an
error. Certainly, he thought, as the Countess von M -- and this maiden are
different persons, the other sorcerer-like adventures may probably have arisen
from equally natural causes. Wishing to investigate this still more clearly, he
resolved to continue his questions; and hoped from the information of his
beloved maiden, to obtain satisfactory explanations on these heads. He was just
going to ask how it could possibly be, that from various, and apparently
contrary ways, he always returned to the same house, from which he believed
himself far distant, when all at once a great noise behind them caught his
attention. He turned about instantly, and saw two men in masks standing before
him. "We have you at last, my Lord Marquis!" they called out, jeeringly; and
before Wolfgang could recover himself, and make any answer, one of them stabbed
him twice in the body with a dagger, and then they both made their escape into
the thicket.

Wolfgang sunk, rattling in the throat, to the earth; his eyes closed, and the
afflicted despairing Emily soon saw no signs of life in him. She at last
recollected, that if it were possible for any assistance yet to be of service
to him, her mother, who had some skill in the use of certain herbs, was most
likely to render it efficaciously. She hastened therefore, to her, and soon
returned, weeping and out of breath, with the old woman. As they came to the
place where Wolfgang was attacked by the murderers, a profusion of blood
plainly pointed out where he had lain; but the body was gone. They perceived a
bloody track from this spot, which they followed, and it led them down through
the thicket, and brought them at no great distance to the edge of the shaft of
an old mine, where the track ceased; and convinced them, that during Emily's
absence the murderers had returned, carried off the bleeding corpse, and thrown
it into this shaft in order if possible, to elude all enquiry on the subject.

Emily and the old woman stood for some time quite disconsolate by the side of
this horrible grave. The former wept, though a new acquaintance, the object of
a strong and tender passion; the latter mourned over her disappointed hopes of
wealth, which had all vanished with the supposed Marquis. The fear that the
murderers might return once more and plunge them, as evidence of their guilt,
into the dreadful abyss, at length roused the old woman to think of returning;
and Emily, entirely absorbed in her sorrow, followed her in silence.

CHAP. XIII.
CAPTAIN Wildner became a soldier rather from necessity than inclination;
because his father, Colonel Wildner, though he left behind him a high
reputation for courage and integrity, scarcely left a pittance of fortune
sufficient to pay the expenses of his funeral. The son, who had always
maintained as distinguished a character for virtue and bravery as the father,
at forty years old had only risen to the rank of Captain. With the somewhat
more liberal income which he then enjoyed, he began to feel in its full force
the truth of the saying, "That it is not good for man to be alone." He sought
therefore for a helpmate amongst the daughters of the land, and soon found one
in the person of a parson's daughter, who was indeed poor in worldly wealth,
but rich in the qualities which most lastingly secure the happiness of the
marriage state.

Wildner began first to live in her society, and his wife and two children
became so dear to him, that he would not have exchanged his situation for the
possession of kingdoms. After a few years of enjoyment, a war, which desolated
his native land, tore him from the only blessing that the world had ever
afforded him, and which he resigned, on the call of duty, with infinite
reluctance.

When he returned home for the first time, after an absence of ten years, he
found his wife dead, and his two children, a boy and girl, under the care of a
near relation, whose extraordinary kindness to his forsaken wife and babes gave
some consolation to the afflicted husband. As these children were nearly grown
up, the father took his son with him, to join the army now ready to march, to
oppose an enemy which had just rekindled the flame of war against his country.
His daughter, an almost perfect model of consummate beauty, and with a mind of
the most untainted innocence, continued under the protection of her second
mother; and nothing but the hope that the welfare of his darling would be
secure under such protection, could have enabled the father to support this
separation with any fortitude.

The foster-mother of Clara had hitherto lived in the town; but longing for
quiet, a not unnatural consequence of age, she moved into a neighboring
village, and there, in the calm of solitude, devoted the remainder of her days
to God. Clara accompanied her thither, and from her gentle sentimental
character, soon found a thousand pleasures in the country, that she had never
felt in the town. It was a luxury to the native simplicity of her soul, to
leave her downy pillow early in the morning, and contemplate, from an adjoining
hill, the majestic rising of the sun. Her heart expanded, with the reviving
animation of nature, to the sublimest emotions of delight. She adored the
omnipotence of God in this glorious picture; she worshipped him in every blade
of grass, and in every drop of dew which shone like crystal upon its delicate
texture and vivid hue.

Nothing opens the heart, and awakens every dormant feeling in the human soul,
to a state so susceptible of impression, as the serene beauty of such a
morning. Every thing lives, every thing moves, every thing expresses, in its
own peculiar manner, its participation in the joys of this moment. The lowing
of the herds, the bleating of the sheep, the singing of the birds, the hum of
the insects, all fill the great chorus which hails the return of day. But it is
a scene only to be felt, not described. No poet, no painter, can do it justice;
it is too great, too sublime, to come within the limits of their powers.
Whoever really feels and enjoys it, will own with me, that at no other time he
ever finds his mind elevated toward the Sovereign of the Universe with such a
fervor of devotion. The heart overflows with an excess of feeling; one
stretches out one's arms, and longs to embrace the utmost bounds of creation;
the grasp is too mighty, and the full soul seeks a kindred mind to share these
overpowering emotions.

As Clara sat, in one of the finest mornings of the spring, under the shade of
a stately old oak, with all these sensations newly awakened in her bosom, she
was seen by the young Baron von Tiefenthal, who lived in a town not far
distant. He had been sent thither by his father for the purpose of pursuing his
studies; but instead of fulfilling this, devoted himself to all kinds of
dissipation. He was hunting in this romantic country, as he now saw, unnoticed
by her, the beautiful Clara. The power of her charms had an instantaneous
effect on him. In the course of his licentious amors, he had never seen the
bloom of such a cheek, the expression of such an eye, and still less any thing
like the innocent pleasure which was painted on her lovely face, evidently
arising from her enjoyment of the beauties of nature, as she contemplated the
surrounding country.

Tiefenthal, whose intemperate passions were already highly excited,
respectfully approaching the fair creature. "I am fortunate," he said, "to find
here a congenial soul, which can feel what I feel, and will therefore pardon my
breaking in on these feelings which my heart is full of, and so ardently wishes
to share with one of similar sentiments." -- Clara started up, alarmed, and
would have flown, if her heart had not felt this similarity too powerfully; or
if the youth who stood before her, had not been so handsome, and had not
supplicated so urgently for her longer stay. One word brought on another. The
dissembler knew so well how to play his part; talked so much of the beauties of
nature, of the pleasures they held out to the admirers of them, that the
unsuspecting female soon found his company agreeable, and was not displeased
when he promised to come there again the next morning, and share with her this
rational delight.

I should deviate from my purpose, and extend my history to many volumes, if I
should continue to relate thus circumstantially the whole account of the
seduction of the artless Clara. I will therefore be as concise as possible. She
saw the beautiful youth again the next and many following days. She found his
conversation extremely agreeable, and giving way to the impulse of nature, she
soon loved him with the greatest tenderness, without having any idea of his
villainy, and her own danger. But before two months were elapsed he had taken
advantage of her innocence, and she became his victim.

Clara felt her fall very deeply, and in the first bitter moments of regret,
determined never to see the youth again. But his persuasions, and the pleadings
of her own heart, for him, were so powerful, that notwithstanding her
resolution, she saw him again in the evening, and from that time received his
clandestine visits in a remote chamber in the house of her foster mother. The
natural consequence of this connection ensued; and as soon as Clara was
sensible of it, she claimed from her lover the fulfillment of his solemn
engagements, and entreated him with anguish to conceal her shame, and marry her
as soon as possible.

Tiefenthal renewed his promises, and then left her, in order, as he said, to
mention the subject to his father, and to obtain his consent to their marriage.
But this was only a pretense to deceive her, for he returned immediately to the
town; and while the anxious Clara was praying for the successful issue of his
errand, and his speedy return, he had forgotten her in the arms of
prostitution. One evening when he was drunk, a quarrel arose between him and
one of his companions, from whom he would forcibly have taken a favorite girl,
and he was stabbed by him in the scuffle, and died without having repented --
without having even confessed the crimes that he had committed here below. His
father was informed of his miserable end, and as he very naturally endeavored
to draw a veil over it, his being dead was but little known, and the manner of
his death still less.

While the corpse of Tiefenthal was mouldering in the grave* and his soul gone
to its dreadful account, Clara was impatiently expecting his return. Every day
increased her sorrow, and also made her situation more conspicuous, till at
last she was no longer able to conceal this, and much less her tears from the
watchful eye of her foster-mother. She owned to her the reason of her sorrow;
and the dreadful intelligence had such an effect on her, (...) it threw her
into a deadly sickness. Before she died she wrote to Captain Wildner, informing
him of Clara's unhappy situation, and or the probability of her own death.

On the very day in which the wretched Clara had buried her invaluable, and now
for ever lost friend, her father and brother returned, and entered her room in
a violent agitation. She fainted away at the sight of them, and was only
recovered, after some time, by the affectionate caresses of her father. He
soothed her anguish, and promised never to think harshly of her; and also to
pardon her seducer if he would repair the injury that he had been guilty of,
and reward her too tender love by making her his wife. As she still believed
that her lover was sincere, and now with his father, the Captain did not go to
the town, where, by minute enquiries, he would probably have learnt his
dreadful end; but he set out with her directly for the village in which was the
Baron von Tiefenthal's castle. His intention was, first to speak with the young
man, and if he found him faithful, then to talk with the old Baron on the
justice due to his daughter; but if he found young Tiefenthal a villain,
unmindful of his engagements, he then resolved to take fearful vengeance on the
traitor.

Before she could reach the village, poor Clara, overcome by fatigue and
anxiety, fell dangerously ill. In consequence of this they stopped at a
cottage, the owners of which received them with kindness, and entertained them
in the best manner they were able. After two days of severe suffering, Clara,
rather before her time, was delivered of a boy. Both mother and child were
almost dead; and unfortunately in this part of the country there was no medical
assistance to be obtained. The poor disconsolate old father often (...) for
hours by her bedside in silence and despair; but when now and then Clara
appeared to revive, and clasped her crying infant to her breast, he was
comforted again, and hoped that all might yet be well.

In conversation with his kind host, he learned that the old Baron von
Tiefenthal's Castle was only about nine miles from thence; that his son was a
profligate youth, the terror of all parents who had handsome daughters, and of
all husbands who had handsome wives; and that he was now the declared lover of
the beautiful Countess von M --. Whether he was at present with his father, or
roving about elsewhere, the old peasant, who seldom left his solitude, could
not tell.

This heart-rending description of the seducer of his child induced the Captain
to send his son to the village, which lay near the castle, to learn some
farther particulars respecting young Tiefenthal, and whether he was now in the
country. He went the same day on which the old Baron brought poor Wolfgang with
him to his house. Many of the inhabitants of the village, who in passing, took
him for his son, warned their daughters of him in the presence of young
Wildner; and when he made farther enquiries about him, he heard the same
account that had already been given to his father. "We supposed him," they
added, "dead; but weeds do not die, and now we must take care, or we shall live
to see new distresses brought amongst us by his debaucheries."

When the son returned with this lamentable account to his father, both,
glowing with indignation, vowed to revenge themselves on the traitor, if he
would not render full and complete satisfaction to the injured Clara. Young
Wildner went out again, and swore to his father not to return till he brought
the betrayer with him.

He met the Countess von M -- 's coach as she was carrying Wolfgang to her
castle; and being informed by a peasant that it was her, and that her companion
was no doubt the young Baron von Tiefenthal, he followed the carriage with
hasty steps, and overtook them walking in the grove. His impatience for revenge
did not permit him to ask for any explanation; he only peremptorily commanded
Wolfgang to follow him, who innocently complied with this demand.

The sequel of this melancholy story is already known to my readers, and it
would therefore be superfluous to relate it again.

CHAP. XIV.
ON the evening of the same day, in which poor Wolfgang was so barbarously
murdered, the innocent Emily, seated under the shade of a lime, wept sincerely
this unexpected misfortune. He was, in their short acquaintance, become very
dear to her, and was always present to her imagination, as he had knelt before
her, when they silently, but expressively pledged to each other mutual
fidelity. To have lost him in a moment after, and that without a hope of ever
seeing him again, were circumstances of such bewildering horror, that all
attempts to reconcile herself to them were vain. Not far from her sat her
foster-mother and the Countess von M --, with disappointment strongly depicted
on their countenances, in earnest conversation. All their plans and hopes were
defeated by Wolfgang's death, and the thoughtless Countess felt, for the first
time, a real anxiety how to disengage herself from her debts, and leave an
unencumbered estate to her daughter. They had just come to a resolution to have
the dead body drawn out of the shaft early the next morning, and to appropriate
to themselves whatever they might find in the pockets of the deceased, as a
lawful inheritance, as a young peasant ran by them in the utmost haste; anguish
and fear were painted on his brow, and his terrible groans made them notice and
stop him. "What has happened to you?" asked the Countess.

Young Peasant (breathless.) "I was gathering berries in the wood near the
shaft -- there is something alive in it -- it moaned -- I ran away! and now I
always think it is coming after me!"


"That is my poor Savoyard!" cries Emily, starting up; "Oh if he yet lives, how
happy I shall be!" "Yes, indeed, how happy we shall be!" cry the Countess and
the old woman. -- "I will go to him! I must see him and comfort him!" cries
Emily, and she was going forwards. The prudent old woman detained her, and
convinced her that to comfort him was impossible, till they had obtained
assistance to draw him from the shaft.

The inhabitants of the neighboring village were summoned; and, furnished with
co^^s, poles, and ladders, set out to accomplish this purpose. On the way it
first occurred to the Countess, that perhaps the depth of the shaft might
baffle all their endeavors; but an old peasant, who walked next to her,
assured her to the contrary, for that one of his calves had fallen in there the
year before, and that he had ventured down to rescue it, and did not find the
hole above forty feet deep, and the bottom of it was overgrown with soft moss.
He offered to go down now with a rope, and bind the unfortunate person who had
been thrown in there, when those on the outside could draw him up, and
afterward himself. This comfortable account drew them all on with increasing
haste, and they came to the mouth of the shaft in a very short time. Emily was
the first there, and bending over the edge, she called to her dear Savoyard,
and was answered by a deep moan.

The peasant went down, and soon called out, "Draw him up, I have fastened him
well. He is still alive, and speaks, but it is in a language that I do not
understand." Every one took hold of the ropes, and drew with united strength;
Emily herself was amongst them, and was anxiously careful that her Wolfgang
might not be wounded anew in this operation. At last the load came near, and
with one effort more it lay before them, when they all became speechless with
astonishment at seeing, not the hoped-for Savoyard, but a handsomely dressed
woman. She moaned lamentably, and kept her right hand upon her heart. Her
clothes were bloody, and when they examined her, they found a dagger plunged,
up to the hilt, in her left breast. As she endeavored, in vain, to draw this
out, a good-natured peasant rendered her this assistance, and a stream of blood
flowed after it. The unfortunate woman once opened her large blue eyes, and
then expired in the arms of the Countess.

Emily very earnestly entreated the peasant in the shaft, to search if there
was not still another body to be found. But he assured her, on his honor,
there were no more.

Deceived in their hopes, the whole company wandered back in a melancholy
disposition, fully convinced by this double proof, that there must be robbers
and murderers harbored in the wood. The Countess resolved, therefore, to have
it searched thoroughly the next day, and, in the meanwhile, for the greater
security of her darling, to take her, and her foster-mother, with her to the
castle. The corpse of the stranger was also brought there, and they examined
her clothes and her pockets, but found not the least clue to lead them even to
guess who she might be; they only discovered that this poor murdered woman was
very big with child. This dreadful sight excited new compassion in the heart of
the Countess; she wept very sincerely for her, and the next day had her buried
in her family vault.

Early the ensuing morning, the peasants from the village assembled again, and
went, with the servants of the Countess, to search the wood; and if they did
not take the murderers, at least to alarm them by this attention, and probably
remove them from thence. They returned, in the evening, without success; for,
notwithstanding their extreme diligence, they had neither found any traces of
Wolfgang, nor of the murderers. After this, Emily returned to the cottage with
the old woman, and the Countess resolved to go and reside, for some time, in
the neighboring town, partly to banish care, and partly to execute a plan
which she had formed, for the payment of her most urgent debts.

The day before that fixed on for her departure, a stranger arrived at the
castle, and enquired of the servants if the Countess von M -- lived there. On
being answered in the affirmative, he desired to see her, and, when he was
conducted to her, he presented her with a casket carefully sealed up, and
begged for a certificate that he had delivered it faithfully. The Countess
opened the casket directly, and found, to her great astonishment, that it
contained four thousand sequins, and a quantity of jewels which were apparently
of great value. She examined it with the greatest care, but found neither
letter nor any thing else, by which she could at all imagine from whom this
magnificent present came, or whether it was properly allotted to her. But the
address, to which she again referred, appeared to prove this clearly. She
enquired in vain of the bearer for farther satisfaction, for he was unable to
gratify her curiosity. -- "I am," he said, "a Notary and Magistrate of the
little town of W --, which lies four miles from hence. Yesterday afternoon a
carriage arrived there, and stopped at the Golden Sun, and a gentleman who had
been dangerously wounded, was lifted out of it by his servants. He desired that
a surgeon might be sent for directly; but as the only one who lives in our
town, was gone into the country, this request was of no avail. He then begged
to have a notary sent for, and I was summoned to him immediately. He spoke to
me at first in Italian, but as I did not understand him, he spoke to me in
German. His first enquiries were about the next town, and whether he should
meet with a skilful surgeon there. When I had given him information on these
particulars, he asked if I knew where your Excellency lived. On my assuring him
that I did, he ordered his valet to reach him this casket. With much difficulty
he wrote a very short note, and laid it in the casket, which he then sealed up
himself, and dictated the direction that is upon it to his valet. At last he
delivered it to me with the most urgent request to bring it over myself to your
Excellency without delay. This I faithfully promised; and he then gave me, as
he expressed himself, a purse of fifty ducats for my trouble, and ordered his
servants to carry him again to his carriage. Before I could set out, he drove
past my house; and what surprised me very much, went a quite contrary way than
the direction which I had given him to the capital."

Countess. "Very extraordinary indeed! and to me at least quite
incomprehensible. You mentioned a little note that the stranger put into the
casket, and which, notwithstanding my having looked with the greatest care, I
have not found."


Notary. "I give my word, as a person of honor, for the truth of my account;
the note must be there."


The Countess emptied the casket quite out, and examined every paper in which
any of the jewels were wrapped, but found nothing. At last she saw a paper
folded together lying upon the ground. She took it up, and found that it
contained the following words, written in a very illegible hand, in Italian,
which it cost the Countess much trouble to decipher: "I send the adjoining, as
the property of my dear, my adorable Emily. I entreat you to deliver it to her,
and to assure her that I am, in my last moments, her faithful

MARQUIS LANEGO."




Countess. "Though there is a great deal that I do not understand in this
affair, and perhaps never shall understand, this note certainly throws some
light on the subject* Was the person, who gave this casket to you, young? Had
he black eyes and black hair?


Notary. "He can scarcely be more than three or four and twenty, has large
black eyes and black hair."


Countess. "What clothes did he wear?"


Notary. "That I cannot say, because he was laid upon the bed, and had a long
mantle thrown over him. His shirt was stained with blood, and he complained of
having two dangerous wounds on the left side."


Countess. "Did he speak good German?"


Notary. "He spoke it fluently, but from weakness very slowly."


Countess. "Did he not relate to you by what accident he was wounded -- whether
by murderers, or in a duel?"


Notary. "No! I asked him about it more than once, but I never obtained a
direct answer; one time he said, if I had attended, I might have guessed by
what adventure it happened, but that I had not taken notice of it."


Countess. "It can be no other! I believe that I may now safely say, that I
know him very well, and was in company with him some days ago. It is true!
Carriage, horses, and servants! yet what is there impossible in this? It is he!
it is he!"


Before the Notary took leave of the Countess, she made him a handsome present,
and earnestly entreated him to enquire which way the Marquis was gone; and if
he learnt where he was, to let her know directly. The Notary promised to do
this, and the better to keep his word, left the castle immediately.

The Countess examined the present to Emily once again, and found that it was
more than sufficient for the payment of her most pressing debts; but as it
belonged entirely to her darling, she was too conscientious not to show it to
her, and ask her consent first, before she appropriated it to this purpose. She
sent for her; and first relating the incident which had just occurred, then
mentioned her wish to apply this treasure to the liquidation of her debts, to
which she assented without hesitation.

Emily, who was as firmly convinced as the Countess that no other than her dear
Savoyard could have sent her this magnificent present, wept and lamented him
sincerely. "He became dear to me," she said, "in the few moments of our
acquaintance, and will eternally continue so from this dying proof of his love
for me. Oh! could I but save him, could I but nurse and comfort him! I would
willingly pass my life with him, even if it was to be in poverty." The Countess
endeavored to console her, and attained her end completely, as she clearly
proved to her, that a man, endowed with such supernatural strength, would
certainly also have the means to heal his wounds. "If he could," she added,
"rescue himself out of the shaft without any assistance, if he could, in so
short a time, provide himself with a carriage, horses, and servants, he, no
doubt, possesses the power of restoring himself to health, by his superior
knowledge probably in the use of simples. In the meanwhile only wast patiently;
he will sooner or later return quite recovered, and make you the happiest of
women." Emily promised to be easy, and looked anxiously toward the day in
which she should again see the beloved of her heart.

Before two days were passed, the Countess had sold the jewels; and being now
possessed of sixty thousand florins, on the third day she satisfied the greater
part of her creditors. As she sat down to table in the evening, in company with
her Emily, much easier in her mind on being relieved from these encumbrances, a
messenger on horseback arrived at the castle. He brought her a letter from the
Notary, in which he informed her, that he had been fortunate enough to discover
the route which the Marquis had taken, and followed him to the next Saxon
frontier town, where, to his great grief, he found him in his coffin, and saw
him buried the same day. That to the surprise of every body, his servants had
vanished immediately after his death, and left no traces of which way they were
flown. That the magistrate of the town had been called in to take charge of
whatever he might have left; but that, excepting some few clothes, and a little
linen, there was not any thing found. It was therefore a well grounded
presumption, that his servants had taken possession of whatever papers and
money he might have had with him, as soon as their master was dead, and had
disappeared on that account.

CHAP. XV.
EMILY, on this fresh disappointment of her fondest hopes, felt all her sorrow
renewed with the greater keenness. She mourned in Wolfgang, a lover and
benefactor, who had, in her opinion, undeniably proved in the latter his
sincerity in the former character. Gratitude and love thus, combined to fill
her soul with a lively grief, that she did not attempt to dissemble. In vain
her noble mother sought to console her; she rejected all consolation, and
withdrew, unperceived from the company, in order to be able to weep without
interruption.

The evening was delightful; the full moon, with her melancholy light,
illuminated the whole region, and invited Emily to wander down the avenue of
the Castle, at the end of which she stood still, absorbed in her distressful
feelings. In this situation, without having heard any previous noise, she felt
herself all at once seized by somebody with very strong arms, who held her from
behind, while another stopped her mouth, and covered her head; and then lifting
her up, they carried her off with the utmost haste. After running for some
minutes, they put her into a carriage, but still covered up, and drove off
directly; and now as the rattling of the wheels would prevent her cries being
heard, they took the bandage from her mouth.

She wept and complained in vain, for they appeared not to mind her, as she
received no answer, though she perceived plainly that somebody sat on each side
of her. When they had driven for about an hour, the carriage stopped. Emily was
lifted out, and notwithstanding her earnest remonstrances, they undressed her
to her shift. In her efforts to resist them she pulled off the cloth that
covered her head, and saw to her great amazement, that she was in a wood; that
it was two men who were undressing her, and that two others stood by with
lighted torches. Believing herself to be, without doubt, in the hands of those
villains who had murdered her poor Wolfgang before her eyes, she fully expected
to share the same fate; and, overcome with apprehension, sunk into a swoon, out
of which the was first roused by the shaking of the carriage. To her great
astonishment she found herself quite dressed again; and this astonishment was
increased, as she perceived that she was dressed as a man. The day now began to
dawn, and she looked with surprise alternately at herself, at the fine
carriage, and at her conductors; an old gentleman sat on her left hand, and
opposite to her two domestics, who carefully observed all her motions; the
former held a smelling bottle in his hand, and addressed himself to Emily in a
language of which she understood not a word. Quite confounded by all the
inexplicable circumstances of her situation, she remained for some time silent;
but as she began to recover from this, and to feel with renewed force her cruel
separation from her mother, she was entirely overcome, and, beginning to weep
bitterly, fell at the feet of the old man. -- "Whoever thou art," she said,
"let me hope for compassion from thy age, and they venerable countenance! What
have I done that I am treated in this manner? Whither do thou carry me? Oh,
take me again to my disconsolate mother, or at least leave me at liberty!"

The old gentleman smiled rather contemptuously, and made a long serious
harangue in the same, to her unintelligible language, as he spoke before; and
notwithstanding her repeatedly assuring him that she did not understand him, he
went on with yet more seriousness, and at last pulled out a dagger and a
pistol, which he held to her breast with terrible threats; and Emily, trembling
and weeping, shrunk from him into the corner of the carriage.

A repetition of such scenes frequently took place between this poor captive
and the old gentleman, who she observed was treated by the others with great
reverence. They traveled very fast, only stopping occasionally for very short
intervals; and previously to these, bandages were always put over Emily's eyes
and mouth, and she was made to sit upon the floor of the coach, and obliged
often to remain some hours in this situation. She soon took notice that it was
only in uninhabited places that they allowed her the privileges of sight and
speech, or ever permitted her to get out of the carriage, at which times the
old gentleman always kept watch over her at a little distance, and never ceased
to threaten her terribly. All kinds of refreshments were offered to her, but
she stubbornly refused them, till the old man constrained her to eat by the
(...) pistol.

Emily, who had (...) before been separated for a day from (...) ^^ster mother,
was dreadfully harassed by a behavior to which she was so entirely
unaccustomed, and by a thousand painful apprehensions as to the fate to which
she might be destined. She was unable to sleep, and, but for her youth and
vigorous constitution, must have sunk under the fatigue and distress which she
suffered. The idea of making her escape was constantly present to her, and
particularly during the night, when her conductors were overpowered with sleep;
but she soon perceived that this would be impracticable, as two servants, who
sat upon the box all day, always rode by the side of the carriage at night, and
waked the guards within whenever they came to a place where they were to take
fresh horses.

Four days and five nights they went on in this manner, and poor Emily was
become extremely weak, when at the dawn of the fifth day they stopped at a
house, without her conductors having as usual put the bandages upon her eyes
and mouth. To her great astonishment and satisfaction the door of the carriage
was opened, and she was urged to get out, and (...) shown into a room. But her
joy was (...) when she heard that all the inhabi^^^^^ of the house spoke the
same language, with which she was daily tormented by her conductors; and she
was now convinced that she was in a country where this was the native language.
They brought her some coffee, which she swallowed with great eagerness, not
having had any thing of the kind during her journey; and the old gentleman took
more pains to entertain her than ever. On Emily's again assuring him that she
did not understand one word of what he said, he ended the conversation with
reproaches; and she plainly saw that he made complaints of her behavior to the
owner of the house, and showed him a letter which greatly excited his surprise;
but she was already so much used to riddles, that this appeared indifferent to
her, and, musing within herself, she did not pay them any farther attention.

They soon set out again on their journey, and traveled now more leisurely,
putting up regularly at the inns, where she was liberally provided with every
thing, and a particular table was always prepared for her. In the evening, as
the old gentleman conducted her to a separate bed chamber, he gave her a parcel
of women's apparel, at sight of which she once more felt real pleasure. Out of
gratitude she kissed the hand of the old man, who endeavored to prevent her
showing him this respect; and kissing here is in return, he then withdrew, and
left her to examine the clothes, which she found much handsomer than those she
had been accustomed to wear.

One of Emily's great concerns had been, the being obliged to be dressed like a
man; and her awkward comical manner in this dress had often excited the smiles
of her conductors, and as often made her blush. A long mantle, which they had
given her, was her only consolation, and she was never contented but when she
could cover herself in it entirely. Every female, who imagines herself for a
moment in Emily's situation, will not probably be surprised that she put on
this long wished-for dress directly, and throwing herself upon the bed, slept
softly after her excessive fatigue.

On the evening of the tenth day, after this metamorphosis, they traveled
later than usual. The old gentleman was this day more than commonly eloquent;
his manner was urgent, and often affecting, and Emily could understand plainly
that he was very solicitous for an answer from her. But however willingly she
would have gratified him, it was not in her power; she could only reply to him
by tears and gestures, and was obliged to bear patiently his thrusting her from
him, and the renewal of all his former threats. About midnight he became quiet,
and the carriage soon stopped at a large building, which stood in a wild
country, surrounded with wood.

Emily, who had hitherto been always projecting plans for her escape, which she
still hoped to accomplish, was in terrible consternation when she saw this
building, on account of its being so entirely different from all those to which
she had been habituated. An inward foreboding pointed it out to her as the
boundary of her journey; and though she hoped indeed now for some explanation
of this enigmatical affair, she also feared to experience new misfortunes.
After knocking a long time, and ringing a great bell, somebody came to one of
the windows; and after making many enquiries of those waiting without, the door
was at last opened. Two women, whose strange dress excited Emily's admiration,
came out with lamps in their hands, and received her as she was listed out of
the carriage; and likewise a letter, which was delivered to them by the old
gentleman. The door was shut again directly, and Emily's astonishment was
extreme, to find herself left by all her hitherto conductors, and only in the
company of the two women.

They carried her through a long passage, sparingly lighted by one lamp, till
they came to a little room which they forced her to enter. They talked to her
for some time, but she did not understand them, and they were as much at a loss
when she answered them in German. At length they left her alone, and her
distress and fear were much increased when she began to examine her room
narrowly. In one corner of it there was a straw bed, upon which lay an
indifferent woollen cover; next to this stood a little altar, and upon it there
were a crucifix and some other images: a small wooden table and a stool
completed the inventory of the furniture of this place. My readers will
immediately understand that Emily was in the cell of a convent; but this she
could not guess, as she was educated in the Protestant religion, and from her
youth had lived in a solitude, where she never even saw any Catholic clergy, or
could acquire any idea of a cloister. It was not at that time the custom of
writers to make romantic histories of Monks and Nuns, and consequently she
could not, through such mediums, become acquainted with the custom and
appearance of convents. It is easy to pardon her, therefore, if she feared and
believed, from this indifferent furniture, that she was in a prison, and gave
herself up to sorrow. She ran to the window, to breathe the free air, and
tranquillize her beating heart; but the close grate which surrounded it
frightened her back, and contributed to confirm her the more in her terrible
conjecture.

It was past midnight, and she was extremely tired with her long journey, but
yet sound no inclination to sleep. She started indeed with horror from the bed,
upon which, according to the suggestions of her ardent imagination, many
innocent victims had lain convulsed with agony. As she was dwelling on this
idea, she all on a sudden heard the sound of a dull bell, and soon after a
noise in the whole building, succeeded by a murmur of praying mournfully. This
she immediately concluded to be the carrying some poor sinner to the place of
execution, having often heard from her foster-mother accounts of this kind;
and, supposing herself to be now in danger of a similar fate, she sunk to the
ground in a swoon.

Early in the morning the Nuns found her in a lamentable situation; the fatigue
and terror that she had undergone had brought on a violent fever, attended with
delirium; she raved dreadfully, and fancied every Nun who came near her was one
of the servants of the executioner. These feeble creatures could with
difficulty get her into bed, and they were obliged to gird her down in order to
keep her there.

In this manner lay the poor lost Emily, slowly languishing out her existence;
for all the assistance which the Nuns attempted to administer to her, and that
of the spiritual and bodily physicians, who were called in to her directly, was
of no avail, for the fever continued to rage unabatedly, and the delirium
increased. On the twentieth day of her suffering she received general
absolution, and the extreme unction, without being at all sensible of what they
were doing to her; and on the evening of the same day, the Nuns announced to
the Abbess that the sick stranger was even then expiring.

CHAP. XVI.
THE slumbering powers of justice having been once more awakened in Italy
against the daring banditti, the former colleagues of Jacob, they continued,
after his departure, to experience so vigorous a prosecution, that, no longer
finding any prospect of safety in their native land, the majority of them
resolved to follow the example of their renowned companion, and retire till the
storm was laid; and in the meantime determined to pay him a visit in Germany.
"We may possibly," said they among themselves, "find something to do there; the
cold-blooded Germans will perhaps suffer us quietly to gain a livelihood on
their highways till we can return hither without danger."

Jacob was very much surprised one day at meeting two of his most intimate
comrades in one of the streets of the capital, and to learn from them that
there were twenty others besides themselves likewise in the neighborhood.
Their joy at this unexpected rencontre was much greater than his, because he
had at that time firmly resolved never to engage in robbery and murder again,
but to enjoy his lately acquired fortune in quiet. But in this company he was
soon induced to give up his resolution, and to unite in their scheme of highway
robbery. He carried them into a wood through which the road to Saxony lay; and
before the close of the first day, after they were lodged there, this banditti,
eager for prey, had robbed three carriages, and murdered as many men. These
unusual accounts frightened the whole country; every one talked of these
murders, and every one armed themselves against the murderers.

As one of the banditti Ventured once into a village to buy provisions, he was,
on some suspicious circumstances, arrested by the peasants, as one of the
perpetrators of these recent murders, and carried before the magistrate to be
examined. When the rest of the troop heard from their trusty Jacob, that their
comrade would be conveyed in the evening from the village Judge to the office
of the inquisition, they waited in the road for him; and while they believed
that they were rescuing their comrade, they set poor Wolfgang at liberty, who
was then carried as a prisoner the same way. His escape therefore was no more
supernatural than his being taken up for a thief on entering the ale house of
the village, wrapped in the very mantle which had been stolen from the host, or
than his being suspected as a murderer, after the description given of him by
Captain Wildner.

Wolfgang was at that time unknown to himself, carried to the castle of the
Countess von M --, because the village in which they arrested him lay within
her jurisdiction, and there, as my readers will recollect, he was confined in a
cave for want of a better prison. In this cave, according to the account of a
foreigner, a huntsman who had often sojourned there, a great treasure was
burried. The steward of the Countess, who had often, as he waited on her at
table, heard her talk of the great treasure which lay concealed in this
country, heard about this time from a peasant what was said by the huntsman, in
consequence of which, he sent for him directly. The huntsman not only
maintained the truth of his account, but assured the steward that this treasure
might easily be obtained; and he engaged to search for it, for him, if he would
give him a new coat and waistcoat, some linen, twelve new dollars, and six new
ducats for the spirit who guarded it.

The steward agreed to every thing, and promised to bring the present with him
to the place; and the cunning huntsman hoped to escape with it, and elude the
expected performance of his engagement. The simple steward was in his room,
preparing himself by praying and singing, for this undertaking, when Wolfgang
was brought prisoner to the castle, and without his knowledge confined in the
cave. When he came, equipped with his present, and whatever else was requisite
for their employment, to the door of this place, which was usually open, and
found it barred, the huntsman, who was eager for the prize, assured him that
this was the only night that the treasure could be raised without danger; and
advised that they should go down through the air-hole of the cave, which was
resolved on, and they enlarged it with their tools for this purpose.

The huntsman who had often practiced frauds of this kind, was dressed as a
sorcerer, in order to make more impression on the foolish steward. Wolfgang,
whose imagination was full of sorcerers, really took him for one, and,
terrified at the sight of him, uttered a violent ejaculation, which equally
terrifying them, they made their escape as fast as possible, leaving all their
things behind them, and thus pointed out to Wolfgang the means of effecting his
escape, and left him in possession of their bundle, which he took away with him.

The village host, whom Jacob imposed on with his well invented tale, and who,
by his loquacity had occasioned so much respect to be paid to, and so many
misfortunes to befall poor Wolfgang, met Jacob the morning after this
adventure. He told him that the young Marquis was actually arrived, in the
character of a mouse-trap and hatchel dealer, and had staid one night at his
house.

Jacob listened attentively to this account, and learnt, on further enquiry,
that, notwithstanding his promise, his neighbor had not kept his secret, but
had related the history that he entrusted him with, to others; and that the
Baron von Tiefenthal, and the Countess von M --, were now eagerly endeavoring
to decoy the supposed Marquis to their houses, that they might create to
themselves, by their attention, an ample claim to his remunerations. He
promised his neighbor, who was jealous of this, to take an opportunity of
informing the young Marquis of these designs, and then hastened forwards.

Sooner or later thought Jacob, as he went along, it will be discovered, that
the Marquis, whose coming I have foretold, is only a poor mouse-trap and
hatchel-dealer, and I shall then be known for a liar, and perhaps draw on
myself a judicial examination. It will be best, therefore, that I prevent this
discovery, by removing the object who would occasion it out of the way. He
consulted with his comrades on this, and went out, with one of them, to search
for the innocent creature who was to be their sacrifice. They went with this
view through the wood belonging the Countess von M --, and saw, from a little
distance, Wolfgang and Emily come down the hill together. They recognized their
victim directly, and stealing near, stabbed him twice with a dagger, and left
him, as they hoped, dead. They purposely spared Emily, that she might spread
the news of his death in the country, and likewise the belief that he was
really a person of eminence, because he was murdered without being robbed, by
two men in masks, who called him Marquis.

CHAP. XVII.
LOVE acknowledges no rank, no laws; it derides all threats, defies all
dangers, and overcomes all the impediments, which like a barrier, oppose
themselves against it. If any evidence were yet wanting of the truth of a
proposition already so clearly proved, it is still farther confirmed by the
history of the young Duchess R --, which I shall now relate to my readers.

The Duke of R --, her father, was a man of the first rank and fortune in
Italy. She was his only child, and the heiress to his great property; in
addition to which, she was universally allowed to be one of the most beautiful
women of her time. With these attractions, it was not surprising that a
multitude of lovers sacrificed to her charms the incense of flattery and
adoration; and that the most distinguished families in Italy courted her
alliance. But to his homage she was insensible; for she had long loved in
secret, with the tenderest affection, a young Marquis, who was indeed extremely
handsome, but so poor, that for want of any other means of living, he had for
some years served her father as his master of the horse. She, who had before
seldom rode out, now found her only pleasure in this exercise, which gave her
an opportunity of being in the company of this beloved object; a part of whose
service it was, to ride by the side of any of the family when they went out on
horseback. Often when they went through a solitary wood in this manner, she
would purposely by a quick gallop, leave the host of servants far behind them;
and when they were thus alone, her usual timidity gave way to an eloquent, but
yet perfectly modest expression in her fine countenance, of the inward
sentiments of her heart.

The happy master of the horse at last understood her, and these young
inexperienced children soon gave themselves up entirely to the guidance of
their tender passion. As they frequently lost themselves in the thickest parts
of the woods, and were some hours before they returned to their followers, the
most attentive of these probably conceived suspicions of them, and immediately
imparted their conjectures to the old Duke. Without giving any reason for it to
his daughter, he dismissed the master of the horse directly from his service,
and hoped, in this manner, to avoid making the affair public, and put an end at
once to what he thought a mere romance. But this precaution came too late; a
month sooner perhaps the young Duchess might have been able to forget her
lover, but now she was reminded of him every day, every hour, by the
consequences of their passion, which, together with the anguish occasioned her
by this separation, made the unfortunate Marquis a thousand times more dear to
her. She soon found an opportunity of writing to him, and in this letter
solemnly avowed not to expose herself to the dreaded wrath of her parents, but
to follow the impulse of her affections, and fly with him into the wide world.
Full of anxiety, she made preparations for this flight with the greatest
caution and expedition, and when she accomplished it, took with her all her
jewels, and a casket of her father's full of gold.

When the old Duke heard of the elopement of his only child, he was quite
raving, and swore to sacrifice all his fortune if he could but see her again,
and take his revenge on her, and the companion of her flight. He sent out
scouts after them to all countries, supplied them with large sums of money, and
made them take an oath not to return without the delinquents. But one after
another returned without having attained their object, till the house governor
of the Duke was the only one still remaining in pursuit of them. His letters
were the sole comfort, the forlorn hope of the distracted father; for this man
always wrote word that he was on the track of the fugitives, and expected yet
to overtake them.

This austere, but faithful servant, had chosen four men in Italy for his
companions, whose capacities for such a service he knew from experience; and
with the assistance of these excellent bloodhounds, he had always discovered
the route of the persecuted lovers, who perceiving that they were followed,
continued their flight without intermission. They had already wandered through
France, and the greater half of Germany, when they arrived at Leipsic; and
here, as they had not for a long time had any fresh alarm of being pursued,
they resolved to rest.

In the same hotel at which the Marquis and the Duchess put up, lodged the
Baroness von Z --, from Dresden. This Lady, attracted by the angelic
countenance, and the whole appearance of the Duchess, sought to become
acquainted with her, and she, happy to meet with such a person in a foreign
country, who appeared to take a cordial interest in her fate, encouraged this
acquaintance, which soon became a sincere friendship. As the Duchess was one
day about to open her whole heart to the Baroness, the Marquis came into the
room in great embarrassment, and in a few words made known to her, that her
father's old house-governor was that moment arrived at Leipsic, and had put up
at a neighboring hotel. "I passed by," added the terrified Marquis, "as he
stepped out of the carriage, and can hardly doubt but that he must have seen
and known me."

This account overwhelmed the Duchess with affliction; and as the amiable
Baroness enquired into the cause of her distress, they revealed their situation
to her, and entreated to have her advice and protection. "I will endeavor,"
said the Baroness, quite affected, "to procure you an asylum. You must fly, but
fly in such a manner that your followers shall not be able to discover you any
more. On the populous highways from one great town to another, you will always
be tracked, and never enjoy any rest. I have a friend in Bayreuth, who, like
you, has felt the power of love; and I will send you to her, where you will be
kindly received, and may live securely under her protection till this storm is
over, and the anger of your parents is softened." They thanked her most
cordially for this advice and assistance, and set out the same night. The
Baroness sent her gentleman with them, and gave them a letter to the Countess
von M --; for this was the friend to whose attention she recommended them.

This old servant, who knew all the bye-roads, conducted them happily over the
frontiers, and they almost believed themselves out of the reach of danger, as
they were now not above five miles from the Countess's castle, when they were
stopped in a wood by six men in masks. These were some of Jacob's comrades, who
were lurking here for booty, and hoped to obtain it from these travelers; but
this time their expectations were deceived. The Marquis's servants were well
armed, and resisting their attack, wounded them so severely, that they were
glad to seek their safety in flight, though unfortunately not till they had
wounded the Marquis, whose only solicitude had been to protect the Duchess from
their assaults.

Being apprehensive that this might be the party sent after them by the Duke,
and that they would return to the pursuit of them, the Marquis entreated the
servants to drive on again with the utmost speed. The blood was all this time
flowing fast from his wounds, and when they came to the end of the wood, they
ventured to make a pause, that they might endeavor to stop it. But he, more
anxious about his beloved Duchess than for himself, said earnestly, "Do not
mind me, but assist her, and save her if possible; for I fear much that this
alrrm may bring on her premature delivery, and make our farther progress
impossible."

The Baroness's gentleman was of the same opinion, and therefore advised the
hiring a carriage in the next village, "in which," he added, "I will carry the
Duchess to the Countess's, where she will find safety and consolation in the
arms of a friend, while you go on to the nearest town, and put yourself under
the care of a surgeon. I will come to you there, and if your wounds do not
prevent it; will conduct you unnoticed to the castle, and thus frustrate all
further pursuit."

The Marquis approved of this plan, and conjured the gentleman to put it into
execution without delay, as he found his wounds grow so extremely painful as
absolutely to require assistance. They were just setting off again, as a well
dressed farmer passed them in a light carriage. The gentleman called to him,
and asked if he would, for double the usual pay, carry a lady, who was taken
ill in consequence of a fright, to the Countess von M -- 's castle. The man
instantly agreed to it, and they all rejoiced that so favorable an opportunity
had occurred to forward their scheme. The still fainting Duchess was put into
the carriage directly, and the gentleman seated himself by her; and in their
hurry a little medicine chest, in the form of a chatulle, was all that they
took with them. The poor Marquis was thus parted from this beloved object
without being able to bid her farewell; but the hope of seeing her again soon
made him support this separation with tolerable fortitude.

It is with sorrow that I acquaint my readers of these hopes being
disappointed, from the unfortunate circumstance of the Dutchess's falling into
the hands of the formidable Jacob; for he was the man in whose-carriage she was
placed. It was in the morning of this day that he had murdered poor Wolfgang,
and he was now going to visit his comrades in the wood, to hear what they had
made of their day's work. The present opportunity of acquiring, in all
probability, a considerable booty, was too enticing for him to let it pass by
unemployed. He purposely carried (...) charge the wrong way; and stopping in a
remote part of the park, while the gentleman was busy in endeavoring to revive
the Duchess, he thrust daggers into the hearts of both of them. His first care,
after this deed, was to secure all the property of the deceased, and then to
conceal their bodies. He carried the murdered gentleman a considerable way to a
stream of water, which he knew to be of a great depth; but as this fatigued him
very much, and the fear of being discovered filled him with anxiety, he threw
the body of the Duchess into a neighboring shaft, which he thought deep enough
to conceal his villainy from all the world. He then hastened to his companions,
to whom he gave an account of this transaction; but being at the same time
alarmed lest the hand of Justice should be raised against them by the friends
of these victims, and that they should be surprised in their retreat, he warned
them of this, and advising them to retire for a few days, assisted himself in
carrying such of them as were wounded over the frontiers. Thence it came, that
the huntsmen and peasants, who searched the wood the next day, found no traces
of the robbers.

CHAP. XVIII.
THE wounded Marquis, not meeting with a surgeon in the next town, and
perceiving his debility increase, dispatched the Notary from thence, with all
the jewels which he had with him, besides a large sum of money, to the Countess
von M --, with whom he flattered himself the Duchess was then arrived in
safety, and whom he wished, in case of his death, to secure from all danger of
future want; and as her name was Emily, from thence arose the mistake of the
Countess, already known to my readers, in supposing this deposit was a present
to her daughter. He set out again directly, and took the road to a little Saxon
town, where, according to the account of his host, he would find a skilful
surgeon: but too much enfeebled by the loss of blood, he died after the first
dressing of his wounds. He had previously divided the remainder of his money
amongst his servants, and advised them to withdraw immediately after his death,
that they might elude the search of the Duke's emissaries, and thus escape his
vengeance. To one of them he confided a ring of great value, and a letter to
the Countess von M --, in which he informed her of his approaching fate, and
conjured her to be a mother to his Emily, and earnestly desired, that in her
present circumstances she might not be informed of his death.

This treacherous servant resolved to make his advantage of this trust; and
first destroying the letter, he went to Leipsic in order to sell the ring, and
then intended to return to his native country. As he was going through one of
the streets of this town, he was met by companions of the Duke's house
governor, who knowing him directly for an Italian, soon made an acquaintance
with him, and heard, over a glass of wine, the whole history of his unfortunate
master; and that the young Duchess, for he could not guess to the contrary,
was with the Countess von M --, and there expected the arrival of the Marquis.

Rejoiced at this discovery, they carried the traitor directly to the bed of
their sick chief, who was so enfeebled by the unusual fatigue, of their
harassing journey, that he had been confined to it for many days. His illness
had rather been a check to their enquiries after the fugitives, and he already
feared to have lost all traces of them, when he was unexpectedly delighted by
this account. He promised the betrayer a thousand fequins, if he would, by
craft, get the Duchess into their hand; and he immediately undertook this, and
the plan of carrying her off was projected the same night.

As the house-governor had no expectation of being able to travel at present,
and wished not to lose any time in the execution of this scheme, he confided
the prosecution of it to one of his comrades, who was once Captain to the
constable of Mantua, and who knew very well how to conduct an enterprise of
this kind. He had three companions with him, whose courage he had already
proved on similar occasions, but who all, like himself were unacquainted with
the person of the young Duchess. The house-governor promised to follow them as
soon as he was well enough; and if he should not overtake them on the road, he
ordered them to carry their prisoner to the Convent della Redemptione, to the
Abbess of which he gave them a letter. He also gave them letters to the Duke,
and furnished them with money in abundance for their journey. One of them went
forward, in order to bespeak (...) at the stage nearest to the Countess von M
-- 's castle; and their informer, who knew the road, was to he their coachman.
The (...) house-governor commanded them to use the greatest precaution in all
Protestant countries, because he had an idea that the young Duchess, who spoke
German fluently, would be immediately rescued and protected, if she called for
assistance, and offered to adopt that belief. He provided them with both men's
and woman's clothes for her; and charged them to dress her as a man till they
got into Italy. From the first stage, where the betrayer was to receive his
reward if they accomplished their project, he engaged to come back to Leipsic
with the horses, and acquaint the house-governor with their success.

They sat out on the third day, and arrived in the evening of the fifth, just
at twilight, at a little distance from the Countess von M -- 's castle.
According to their pre-concerted plan, the traitor was to go thither, and to
say in secret to the Duchess, that the Marquis, who was much better, had
dispatched him to warn her of the Countess, as he had certain proof that she
was in understanding with the emissaries of her father, and would shortly
deliver her to them. That he therefore conjured her to follow his messenger
privately to the carriage, in which he was waiting not far off, to receive her
with open arms. In this trap they all hoped the inexperienced Duchess would be
caught, because this faithless servant was confided in by the Marquis; and, on
account of his knowledge of the German language, had been very valuable to them.

He stole down the castle avenue with this view, as Emily was walking there
bewailing her Wolfgang. The shade of the trees, and the pale illusive light of
the moon, led him into the error of supposing her to be the young Duchess; and
he returned to his comrades to give them an account of this fortunate incident.
Quite delighted at this information, they went softly down the walk, and seized
Emily just as she was seating herself upon a bank of turf. That the error
respecting her was not immediately detected, arose from the circumstance which
I have already mentioned, of none of these men, excepting her own treacherous
servant, knowing the Duchess; and he had now remained with the carriage in
order to be ready in his office, as coachman, to set off the moment that they
had secured her.

As they undressed Emily in the wood; this traitor first perceived his mistake,
and was more than once half inclined to discover it to his comrades; but as he
considered that he should thereby lose his promised recompense, he resolved to
keep his own secret. Be the unkown who she will, he thought, she will at last
be known; and whatever she may have endured, will probably be made ample amends
for it. He let them go on therefore, and when they were happily arrived at the
destined stage, with some trepidation he asked for his reward; and when he had
obtained this, he promised indeed to carry the account of their proceedings to
the house-governor; but instead of doing it, he left the horses to run in the
next wood, and went directly to Tyrol, on his way to his native town.

His departure made it impossible for Emily and her conductors to come to any
explanation, as none of them understood a word of German, and she as little of
Italian. Notwithstanding this centainly doubtful circumstance, it never came
into the mind of the otherwise sensible Captain, that there was any mistake in
this affair; for he was firmly convinced that the Duchess was only acting a
part, because she saw herself amongst strangers, whom she thought she could
mislead by affecting a total ignorance of her native language. Emily's eyes,
her hair, her whole countenance, her size, answered so exactly to the
description of the fugitive, which he had often studied with great attention,
that to question this being her, seemed almost impossible; and if he ever had
any doubts of it, they were all at an end when he saw a diamond cross upon her
neck, exactly corresponding to that described as worn by the Duchess, and
which Emily had taken from amongst the jewels sent by the Marquis, resolving to
wear it as an everlasting remembrance of him. The impenetrable dissimulation of
his prisoner, therefore, added much to her offense in the eyes of her
conductor, and he often, for hours together, endeavored in vain to impress her
with this idea.

The joy of the old Duke was very great when he heard from the Captain of his
daughter's being found, and placed in the convent. In the violence of his
anger, on her first going off, he had threatened to murder her with his own
hand if he ever saw her again; but time, and the long-felt absence of this only
and beloved child had moderated this terrible resolution; and he was even
considering whether he should not forgive her, when a messenger arrived from
the convent with an account of her being dangerously ill, and not likely to
recover. This intelligence, and her disconsolate mother's mournful shriek, made
him tremble, and he directly resolved that they should set out together to
visit their sick child, and if their forgiveness could save her, to grant it
without reserve.

Just after the Nuns had informed the Abbess of Emily's death, the Duke and
Duchess arrived at the convent, languishing to embrace their daughter. The
Abbess received her exalted guests with a sorrowful countenance, and announced
to them the fatal news of her decease. The Duke, struck to the heart, remained
silent for some time; at last he cried out, "It is hard, very hard, to have
lost my only child so long, and now to find her dead!" He tottered to a chair,
and, without farther complaint, sat quite absorbed in his deep feelings. The
old Duchess, weeping and lamenting bitterly, hastened to the cell to visit the
deathbed of her daughter. "If I can no more," she cried, "press my living
child to my breast, nothing shall hinder me from kissing her corpse, and dying
with her!" She threw herself down by Emily, and kissed her pale face; but
started back, as she, with a deep sigh, raised herself up and stared at the
unknown Duchess. To describe the sensations of the latter is not possible. For
one moment, her joy at finding her child, whom she believed dead, still living,
was inexpressible; but terror and astonishment instantly supplanted her joy, as
she perceived that instead of being her, this was a person whom she had never
seen, before. The Nuns stood by in amazement, and neither party at all knew how
to account for this extraordinary circumstance.

Emily sunk back upon her bed directly; she felt herself better, but extremely
weak. Her death-like sleep had been the crisis of her fever, and the awakening
her would have been very dangerous, if she had not fallen into it again
immediately. She was fast asleep before the Duchess got breath to enquire of
those about her the particulars of her being brought thither; on hearing which,
she was convinced that the conductors of Emily were either deceived themselves
on this occasion, or had deceived them for the sake of the reward that they had
offered for this service.

As Emily was the only person from whom the Duchess could hope for an
explanation of this mystery, she recommended her earnestly to the care of the
Nuns, and returned to the Duke to acquaint him with the mistake she had
discovered. Without a moment's delay he sent off a messenger to the Captain who
had left Emily at the convent, to desire that he would come to him, and in the
meantime he continued there to await her recovery. He heard from the Nuns that
the stranger spoke only German; but as he was master of that language, this was
of no consequence to him, and he was very impatient to see her. On the fourth
day from her beginning to amend, she found herself much better, and was able to
converse; and, as according to the strict rules of the place, no man, the
physician and confessor excepted, was permitted to visit the cells of the Nuns,
she was brought into an outward room, where the Duke was expecting her.

Emily wept for joy at being once more addressed in her mother tongue, which
had a happier effect on her than all the medicines she had taken. She answered
all the Duke's enquiries; and it was with grief he found, that she could not
give him any account of his daughter.

These unhappy parents experienced another similar disappointment on the
arrival of the Captain, who heard of this mistake with astonishment. He owned
that he had at first almost doubted himself whether this could be the Duchess,
but was confirmed in her being so, on seeing the brilliant cross upon her
breast, which exactly answered the description of that (...) was said to wear.
Her refusing to speak Italian he therefore considered as mere dissimulation,
and had purposely concealed it from her father, left it should still more
inflame his anger against her.

The cross was now produced, and immediately recognized by the Duke and
Duchess as belonging to their daughter, and they pressed Emily to tell them
where, and from whom she had obtained it.

The innocent Emily related every thing that she really knew, and much more
that she believed she knew. She assured the Duke that she had received this
cross, together with many other jewels, and a large sum of money from her
lover, who was called the Marquis Lanego. He had been, she said, some time
about in their country, as a mouse-trap and hatchel dealer, and had collected a
great deal of the treasure which lay concealed in the Fichtelberg. That on the
day in which they had first become acquainted, he was mortally wounded in her
presence by two men in masks, and, as she supposed, killed upon the spot; but
that she heard of him afterward with a carriage, horses, and servants,
traveling to a neighboring town, from whence he had sent her the money and
jewels as a token of remembrance, and that he had died at another town upon the
frontiers of Saxony.

At first the Duke considered this account as the delirium of her fever; but as
she constantly repeated the same story, he knew not at last what to think or
believe. The master of the horse, who ran away with his daughter, was named
Lanego: he could only therefore suppose that this, in his estimation, great
villain, had shamefully forsaken her, and dissipated her fortune with another
woman. If this was the case, then his child, he reflected, might now be
languishing in the most extreme misery; and wretched at this idea, he thought
directly of going into Germany to seek for her, but previously he desired once
more to talk with Emily, and begged her to relate the whole story
circumstantially. She accordingly did so; and as she now found that the Duke
was in search of his daughter, whom the Marquis had carried off, it came at
once into her mind whether the lady they had drawn out of the shaft might not
be this daughter.

The Duke, on farther enquiry, was by degrees nearly convinced that this
murdered lady was his child; but, in order to obtain greater certainty on this
point, he resolved to go into Germany immediately. He concealed from the poor
mother the new fears that he entertained, and flattered her with hopes of
conducting his beloved daughter again to her arms. With this prospect the
Duchess suffered him to go quietly, and on the third day he set out with the
Captain and Emily. The joy of the latter was without bounds, when she heard
that she was to return to her native country, and see her mother and the
Countess again. This joy made her very talkative, and with the naivete of her
manner she often charmed the Duke from his reveries, and almost annihilated
every suspicion which he had secretly indulged against her. He began to believe
her account to be literally true, and that she, as well as his own daughter,
had been innocently deceived by the arts of the Marquis. She won the heart of
the Duke so much during their long journey, that he often swore in secret, if
he found his own child dead, and Emily really faultless, that she should supply
her place to him, and should be his heiress.

CHAP. XIX.
AFTER a journey of four weeks, the travelers arrived at the Countess von M --
's estate. Emily's heart overflowed with joy, as she discovered from a distance
the turrets of the castle, and the little white cottage in the wood. Her
unaffected expressions of delight drew tears from the Duke, and she confirmed
her interest in his heart as she tenderly wiped away those tears; and
repeatedly assured him, that she would do every thing in her power to comfort
him, if he did not find his child again.

As they drove into the court yard of the castle, and the servants discovered
Emily, every one of them broke out into a loud cry of joy, and ran into the
house, which soon resounded with the united shout of "Emily is here again!
Emily is here again!" The Countess von M -- flew impetuously to the window, and
fell back in a swoon as she saw her child, whom she believed to be dead. Emily
hurried up stairs, and found her in this situation; but her tears and her
kisses soon revived the fainting Countess; but she could not speak -- she could
only feel, and locked her child in her arms.

The old Duke stood there speechless, and beheld this meeting with tears in his
eyes. He was fully sensible of the delight it must be to embrace a child again
under these circumstances, from the eagerness with which he longed for it
himself.

When Emily was able to speak, she enquired after her foster-mother, and wished
to share her joy with her. On this the maternal heart of the Countess was no
more master of itself; she knew that Emily must take the old woman for her
mother, and she was envious of another's bearing away this tender appellation
from her. -- "Your old foster-mother," said the Countess, "has died during your
absence; but Heaven has preserved your true mother in me. You are my child, and
all the world shall know that you are so, and honor you as such."

The surprise of all the domestics present was very great; but the Countess
continued her discourse, and presented Emily to them all, as her child, and as
her heiress. She saw, she thought only of her; and was too much taken up for
some time to notice the Duke, who had no inclination to interrupt such a scene.
After she became a little more composed she perceived him, and Emily presented
him to her, her deliverer, her father.

"I am happy," said the Duke, almost overcome, "to have restored a lost child
to your arms; but I am very selfish, for I ask of you a like return. It were
cruel now to check your enjoyment; but when you can turn your attention to me,
pity an afflicted father, who has sought a lost child for a full year, and who
hopes to learn tidings of her from you. Is my daughter really dead? Was she the
stranger to whom you generously gave a decent grave? Yet I do not wish to hear
it to day; In the uncertainty of my fate, I will satisfy myself with partaking
your joy, and hoping that the same may yet be mine. But if my daughter really
lives, then no longer delay the blessed moment when I shall press her again to
my childless bosom." After a pause, the Duke added, "I know, I feel that it is
in contradiction to my request; but I can no longer subdue the emotions of my
heart, which impetuously demands intelligence of its darling."

The Countess, who was but just relieved from a similar situation, was deeply
affected by the Duke's distress, and found, with real sorrow, from his answers
to her enquiries, that she was under the cruel necessity of robbing him of all
hope. "Unfortunate old man," she said, "your daughter is too surely dead! It is
but too true that I fulfilled the last mournful duty to her, and that she lies
buried in the vault of my chapel."

The Duke gnashed his teeth, and murmured some unintelligible words. "Oh,
Madam!" he cried out at last, "the severest torments are nothing to what I
feel. To be childless in my old age, and not to have the satisfaction of
retaliating on the author of my miseries, what he has so cruelly inflicted on
me, my poor wife, and our only child, is too much. Mother or a child, pity me!
If he is yet alive, and you know it, and conceal him from me, then may the
curse fall on you, which my bleeding heart now teems with against him, but
which my tongue has not power to utter!"

Countess. "Your affliction is just, but the revenge you seek, if it were
possible, would not soften it. The Marquis is dead; he was, as well as your
daughter, murdered by a desperate banditti. He had, no doubt, injured you, but
he was faultless toward her. To the last hour of his life he loved her with
the utmost tenderness, and never would have separated himself from her, but
with the hope of its being for her security, and that it would be but for a
short time."


Duke. Hypocrite! liar! -- yet no! forgive me in this boundless grief if I
speak with too little constraint. You, perhaps, think not that your daughter
has discovered to me that the base wretch also feigned to love her; that he
sent a present to her, the jewels and the money which my daughter, out of love
to him, stole from me. And probably -- Oh not probably, too certainly, he
murdered my child, in order the more easily to betray yours. Oh Madam! if you,
on whom he would have drawn a like misfortune, can yet excuse him, then -- then
I have nothing more to say with you! then -- farewell! I will hence to my old
wife, and weep, and complain with her of a creature who thinks thus, and cannot
feel with me."


Countess. "Stay, dear good old man, stay with me! You will hardly find a heart
that can take a deeper interest in your affliction. I pardon all your injurious
expressions, and feel, that in your situation, I should have as little command
of myself. I will relate the whole story of this misfortune to you faithfully,
as it may prove a consolation to you to be set right in this error, which I was
once in myself, and to be convinced that the Marquis is innocent of the death
of your daughter, that he loved her to his last moment, and never even saw my
child."


Duke. "Oh! it will give me consolation! prove it! prove it to me, and I will
sincerely thank you!"


The Countess related to the old Duke the history of the unfortunate lovers, as
I have already related it to my readers. She had heard it from the Baroness von
Z --, who had visited her, in the expectation of finding them under her
protection. Instead of which she only heard the melancholy catastrophe, as she
did not doubt it would prove to be, of their fate; and the coffin of the
murdered lady being opened to ascertain this, she immediately knew her to be
the young Duchess. As it appeared from the Baroness, that Emily and Lanego
were the names of these lovers, the Countess was satisfied that the casket sent
by the Notary was destined for the deceased, not for her daughter; and that the
wounded Marquis who had sent it, was not, as she had supposed, the Savoyard who
had been lately in that neighborhood. There still remained a mysteriousness in
this affair, which the Countess and Baroness could not solve; but in forming
their conjecture on it, they were induced to believe, that it must have been
the emissaries of the irritated Duke who were the murderers of these untimely
victims, and they often execrated this unnatural revenge. But in another week
this riddle was quite unfolded.

The wounded banditti put themselves under the care of the same surgeon who had
dressed the wounds of the deceased Marquis; and being suspected by him, they
were, on his advice, arrested by the officers of justice, and they immediately
confessed their guilt. Soon afterward, the renowned Jacob was also taken as he
was attempting to fly, and committed to prison. He was subject to the Countess,
and consequently was brought before her justiciary, who, as was the custom with
those who would not voluntarily confess their crimes, put him to the rack, and
soon extorted his confession. He not only acknowledged his recent murders, but
also that he had deceived his neighbor, who had related it again to the Baron
von Tiefenthal and the Countess von M --, with a fabulous account of the means
by which he had acquired his fortune; and that these, trusting to his word, had
taken a poor Savoyard for a Marquis, and that he had, for his own security,
murdered the innocent creature.

This confession enabled the Countess to prove clearly to the Duke the
innocence of the Marquis, and the mistake of Emily; and this operated so
powerfully on him, that his ardent desire of revenge was extinguished, and
succeeded by a deep sorrow. The idea of the persecuted lovers flying from one
place to another, and being compassionated by strangers, who had endeavored to
protect them from his anger, affected him very sensibly. He wept bitterly; and
though the tears flowed principally for his daughter, they fell also for the
Marquis, whom he would now willingly have accepted for his son-in-law. He
begged pardon of the Countess for his injurious expressions toward her, and
thanked her sincerely for the interment of his child. "Tomorrow," he said," I
will visit her sad remains, and mourn over her coffin, which I will take with
me; and if my old wife asks me whether I do not bring back her daughter, I will
give it to her. That moment will certainly be her last! but of what use are
childless parents in the world? They are like an arid tree, which if it is not
thrown into the fire, only stands mouldering to decay."

The Countess endeavored in vain to sooth the old Duke; but the soothings of
Emily, who was already dear to him, and who became still dearer, on being quite
cleared from his suspicions, were of much more effect. "Be you," he cried out,
transported, as she fell weeping upon his neck, "be you my second Emily. Fate
has not brought you to my arms in vain. I feel that only your society can
console me."

The Duke indeed spoke truly; for though he wept frequently, he always became
calm when Emily wiped away his tears, and called him father. As the Countess
was very eager to learn how her daughter came into Italy, and met with him, he
gave her the history of her adventure, and she then regretted that she had
never made such enquiries after her, as might have led to the discovery of this
circumstance. But as she was in her own mind fully convinced that she also was
murdered, nothing else had in her despair occured to her, but to beg of the
Justiciary to use every possible means of making the banditti own where they
had concealed the body, that she might at least have the satisfaction of giving
it honorable burial. But all the efforts of the Justiciary to this effect were
of course of no avail; and the Countess was denied her wished-for consolation,
of visiting the grave of her child.

In recounting over this series of events, it did not escape the recollection
of the Countess, that she was accountable to the Duke for the money and jewels
which she had received from the Marquis, as being the property of his daughter.
"That I acknowledge myself your debtor," she said, "and fully intend to repay
what fell thus accidentally into my hands, will sufficiently appear, from a
letter which I wrote to you a month ago, mentioning this business, and the
unhappy fate of the Duchess. At that time, as I supposed, my child was dead,
and every thing on earth was become indifferent to me, I offered to repay the
value of this deposit immediately, by the sale of my estate; but now that I
have her again, I wish to leave her my estate, and hope, from your generosity,
to obtain time to restore, by prudent management, what saved me from ruin."

The Duke assured the Countess, that he never should desire, nor accept of any
restitution; and as the Countess refused this, he turned to Emily, and conjured
her to grant this first request of her new father. Unable to withstand his
earnest entreaties, she gratefully accepted his munificent present, and put an
end to this generous contention.

CHAP. XX.
ALL the inhabitants of the castle now shared a general joy, excepting the old
Duke; for the loss of his child was too recent and too deeply felt, for him to
take a part in it. As they were about to sit down to supper, the Countess asked
Emily, if she thought no more of her Wolfgang. "It is not handsome," she said,
"thus soon to have forgotten so tender a lover."

Emily's cheeks were suffused with a deep blush at this question. "Forgotten!"
she answered; "I shall never forget him! He was very dear to me before, and his
death and his innocence make his memory yet dearer to me. I should forget all
my past misfortunes, if he was but still alive!"

Countess. "It is possible that he may yet live. I believed you dead, and yet
now enjoy the delight of having you again in my presence."


Emily. "But I was eye witness of his death!"


Countess, "Only of his wounding, dear Emily. How if he really yet lives?"


Emily. "Yet! yet! Oh it is not possible!"


Countess. "But if it were?"


Emily. "Then, ah then! indeed, I should weep for joy!"


Countess. "That joy shall be yours; he will sup with us this evening, and if
you will give him leave, sit by your side."


Emily. "Ah, no! it is not -- Oh you harass me to no purpose -- it is not
possible!"


Countess. "Incredulous girl! then look round and be convinced to the contrary."


At this moment Wolfgang came into the room, simply, but very genteely dressed.
He had heard long before of Emily's arrival, and hurried to see her as she came
up stairs, and thus thought himself prepared for this interview; but all his
resolution vanished as he approached to kiss her hand, and congratulate her on
her happy return. He trembled, he looked earnestly at Emily; tears of joy
started into his eyes, and he could only sigh.

Emily was in a similar, or even more confused situation. This unexpected
meeting with a man whom she loved, and lamented as dead, was almost too much
for her. She involuntarily gave him one hand, and catching his with the other,
sunk sobbing into his arms.

The Countess witnessed this mutual overflow of tenderness with much emotion.
"Signor Tartini," she said to Wolfgang, "you are right; the bond of pure love
is eternal!" -- "Yes indeed, eternal!" he cried out, quite transported. --
"Eternal! eternal!" stammered Emily after him. -- As she recovered a little
from her astonishment, she began to ask how it was possible that he yet lived;
that he who was so dreadfully wounded, now stood before her quite well?

As the like question will no doubt be asked by my readers, I will relate his
history in the most concise manner possible, to them and the enquiring Emily at
the same time.

Wolfgang had indeed received two stabs with a dagger from the wicked Jacob;
but one of them had only bent a rib, and the other, from his giving a sudden
turn, had only cut the flesh without injuring any vital part; but overcome by
pain and terror, he fell apparently lifeless to the ground, Jacob, in general
unerring in his blow, believing him dead, escaped with his colleague; and Emily
went to fetch the old woman.

Wolfgang revived shortly after, and his imagination picturing to him these
murderers, as in league with the sorcerers, he exerted all his strength, and
fled. Notwithstanding he endeavored to tie up his wounds, they bled very much,
and at the end of the wood he sunk down quite exhausted. There he was found by
a shepherd, who took him to his cottage, and tended him carefully. As persons
of this description have commonly some practical knowledge in physic, he
applied the juice of certain herbs to his wounds, and nature operating yet more
powerfully than the medicine, in four weeks he was able to leave his straw bed.

About this time his benefactor, who lived in a solitary place, heard from a
huntsman who passed by his flock, the history of the banditti, with all the
particulars before related. The circumstance of this discovery being made, by
means of some wounded men belonging to this troop, excited suspicions in the
mind of the shepherd. Perhaps, he thought, my guest is one of these wretches;
and the certainty of his being an Italian confirming this conjecture, in order
to purify himself from all imputation of guilt for having harbored him, he
left the flock to his son's care, and went to the Justiciary of the Countess,
to whom he revealed what he suspected. He, very naturally from this account,
immediately arrested Wolfgang, and threw him into prison.

His examination, by leading to the knowledge of who he was, entirely
exculpated him from these suspicions, and gave the Countess the satisfaction of
finding that her Savoyard yet lived. He was directly released from confinement,
and as his wounds had grown worse in prison, she took him into her house to be
taken care of till he was perfectly recovered. She was, by Jacob's confession,
apprized of her error of his being a rich Marquis, and having the knowledge of
concealed treasures; but as her heart was peculiarly open to compassion by the
loss of her child, and as he had suffered so much from her mistake about him;
and had become dear to her daughter, inclination, as well as justice, led her
to pay him this attention.

The Countess often visited Wolfgang during this time; and besides her
discovering many good qualities in him, he gained on her affections by the
cordial share he took in her affliction for the lost Emily, whom he lamented
with so much unfeigned tenderness, that she wept in return with him, and was
often obliged, in the midst of her own sorrow, to give him consolation.

As soon as Wolfgang's health was re-established, the Countess gave him the
appellation of her Secretary, clothed him properly, and let him eat at her
table. He felt these beneficences deeply, studied with great diligence, and was
not ashamed at the age he then was, to learn to write, in order to become
worthy of the title which his benefactress had at first bestowed upon him so
undeservedly. His continued application, his sincere gratitude, and his
unceasing regret for Emily, so won the heart of the Countess, that she soon
loved him as her son. It was in short with her as with the old Duke, that she
felt a chasm in her heart, and wished to fill it up; thus she hoped that
Wolfgang would lessen, if not supply, the loss of Emily to her, when Emily
herself appeared.

I will not be prolix on the conclusion to which my history now tends, as I
hope my readers guess it already.

At the end of three months, Wolfgang and Emily were, with the consent of the
noble mother, man and wife. If any of my readers wonder that a lady of rank
could so readily marry her only child to a poor young Savoyard peasant, I must
courteously entreat them to remember, that she was an illegitimate child, and
having no pedigree of high decent, could never expect that a LEGITIMATE NOBLE
would marry her.

The old Duke, who became daily more attached to these young people, was
present at their nuptials. His first intention had been, to leave the castle
immediately after the full conviction of his misfortune, with the body of his
dead child; but before he could set out, he received advice by a courier of the
death of his wife, who was unable to support the certain loss of her daughter,
which she had learned from the Countess's letter, soon after his departure. He
now therefore stood more in need of consolation, and was easily prevailed on to
stay and receive it from Emily, who made it her study to soften his affliction.

By the advice of the Duke, the Countess von M -- soon sold her estate, and
went with him and her children into Italy. He there endowed our young Savoyard
with considerable possessions, and by his influence got him raised to nobility;
and the family of Wolfgang still flourishes there in great affluence and
respectability.

The Duke married the Countess von M --, and lived with her and his adopted
children, during the remainder of his life, in perfect happiness.

FINIS
SUBSCRIBERS' NAMES.
A.
ABBOTT WILLIAM Antrim Mary Anderson Andrew Ash Henry Apple Eliza L. Anthony
Jacob, jun. Alberti Hannah Price Alberti Maria A. A.B. Armstrong Mrs. Adams
John Anderson Jacob S. Anderson Eleanor Arden William
B.
Bullock Miss, Germantown Bell Jeremiah Bammes Margaret Boggs Mrs. Baker Mary
Beu^^ghove Jacob, jun. B^^ Thomas (...) Waltere (...) James (...) Jonathan
(...) Joseph (...) John (...) (...) John (...) (...) Maria (...) Elizabeth
(...) Mary Byrne Terence Baker Henry ^. Burrows Mrs. Brown Ann Mrs. Bark
Elizabeth Brown Mary Brown S. B. Biddle Mary Barber Charles Brown Elizabeth
Brown William, jun. Brooks David Buffington Thomas Bartell Margaret Burns Mary
Burrows P. Mrs. Burke Michael Barnard John Barrington Thomas Boyd John Bleyler
Ann Brown Valentine Brown Frederick and co. copper plate printers Baker Sarah
Bruce George B^^ttin Elizabeth B^etterman Henry Bell Jane Beckley Mary Burnside
William (...) Mary Miss Budd Elizabeth Beatty Dempster Beaird William Burns
Archibold Bennett Abigail Bradford William Brown Christian Brook William Bell
Joseph
C
Carr Robert Christison James Campbell Thomas Cooper Sarah H. Cloud Abner
Carbrey William Clopp Mary Cook William Crawford Sarah Crawford William
Cassidy William Carpenter John Conarroe Margaretta Cline Joseph Clotworthy John
Cook Elizabeth Clinton Mary Corkrin James Chapman John Cranston Maria N.
Collins and Halloway Clark Oliver Carr John Cliffton Deborah Clawges John, jun.
Christian Peter Carpenter John Christie David Dr. Carpenter Teresa Copper J. C.
Campbell James Culin John Carpenter John Coulton William Cowley Margaret Clark
John Carteret Esther Carteret Elizabeth Cole Elizabeth Conyers John Chetwood
Philip Cohen Abraham Connelly Patrick Coyles John Cannon James
D
Devoll Elijah Davis William Dolby Catherine Dingee Daniel Devereux Mary Denman
Samuel, (2 copies) Donnett Sarah Dobson Sarah Duplessis P. L. B. Jun. Davidson
N. Dangel Maria Dougherty R. Dunlap Eleanor Damoutet Jane Miss Descuret Sarah
Mrs. Debril Mary De la Grange Jos. E. G. M. Duplessis P. Le Barbier Diehl N.
Dalzell William Dorsey Mrs. Davison Richard Dunton Jacob Davis John Dube^^eurd
Thomas Donaldson James Deitz John Dunham Nancy Durnell Ruth Dubre Eleanor
Dickinson Elice Dillingham Ann Dalton Edward Duval Kitty Mrs. Douglass Charles
Dominick Charles Davidson Eliza Duffy Andrew Deshong Mary Ann Douglass Robert
Dunn Philip T. Deney Daniel
E
Eckendorst Martin Evins Margaretta Eminghaus Adolph Evans Robert, jun. English
Joseph Everly Adam Erwine Robert Eastwick William Easton Margaret Evans Ellin
Evans George Elder Crawford Engeard Mrs. Ethvein Dorothy
F
Foster Peter Fulton Margaret Fleming Stern Foulke Charles Fricke Mrs. Fridge
Alexander Fitzpatrick Leticia Ford Hannah Forten James French Abraham Fletcher
Samuel Fox George Fritz Kitty Frost Mary Farrow Fanny
G
Guin Aaron Goff Jane George Mary Griffith Mary Golden Rachel Mrs. Graff
Catharine Gross Jacob Gross George Grobs Hance H. Gravenstine George Geyer
John, jun. Garrett John, Darby Guyger Gasper Graff Frederick Gebler Godfrey,
jun. Geyer Andrew Graff George Green Mrs.
H
Harpur Nicholas Hamilton Arthur Hamilton William Hutchinson Charles Hood
George Hatrick Joshua Hurly Ann Holt Margaret Hood M'Clellan John Humphreys
Thomas R. Hirst Thomas Henderson Mary Higgins John Haughey William Harford
Charles Hastings John Holmes George Harkins William Helm George W. Holland
Nathaniel Hunter James Harper Eliza Mrs. Hedderley Mrs. Hofner Lucy Hall
Margaret Hanse Conrad Hamilton George Hite Margaret Hiney Sarah Hili John
Hendin Edward Hanson Samuel Huckel William Hamilton Sarah Hill Rebecca Hannold
George Hofner Sophia Holliday John Hood John Hughes Daniel Heartley Jane Hill
Mintey Hamilton John Huggins Benjamin Capt. Helmbold George Henckell Mary
Hazlet William Henchman Adam Henderson Eliza Hockley Eleanor Higgins Margaretta
Hammett William Hopkins Samuel Henderson John
I
Jones Rebecca Irwin Ann Mrs. Irvine Nancy Ivorey Matthew Inglis Maria
J
Jones Israel Jones Richard C. Jones Sarah Jones Samuel Jackson David, jun.
Jones William Jones Susanna Jester Mary Johnston James Capt. Jones Martha
Johnson Joseph
K
Kelly Hagh King Asa (...) Susannah Knox William, jun. Keatting Lamb. Knox Mrs.
Kisselman Susanna Mrs. Keyser Jacob Kale Jacob Knowles Thomas Kollock Jane Mrs.
King Daniel, jun. Keffer John Keging Mrs. King Ann Kisselman Frederic
L
Lee Susannah Little Elizabeth Lion Elizabeth Loid Mary Leonard Margaret
Langmeyer Frederick Leonard Elizabeth Lort Isaac Latta William La Comb Dr.
Lawson Mary Lindsay Eliza Lippincott John Lucas Fielding Larkey John Lehman
Catherine Lang Isabella Lasher Jacob Le Clear Eliza Mrs. L^ughery Esther Test
Thomas Lacy James Loper John Lesh Mary Lewis Henry Littlewood William Lynch
James Lasorgue Bridget Lambert Martin Laner George P. Latimer William E. (2
copies) Lesh Zachariah, jun.
M
M'Donald William M'Kean James M'Lean John M'Neran Mary M'Cleran Marcy
M'Connomy Michael M'Cullough James M'Leughlin James M'Gill James M'Xinzie Caleb
M'Lean William M'Kever William M'Cormick Mrs. M'Collay Elizabeth M'Culley
William M'Farlane M. M'Clintick William H. M'Knight Matthew M'Kailane Sarah
M'Keever Neal M'Kenzie John M'Conomey Mrs. M'Lean Hector Miller Jane Mearns
James Mackey William Massey Richard Massey James Marty Charles Moore Hugh Moore
George S. Maxwell Margaret Meldrum Robert Martin Jacob Moon David Moore Thomas
Middleton William Matthews Patty Mann Jacob Mason Tanton Means John Mann
William Martin Rebecca Mulford Sally Mecke John Murray James Meade James Mudey
Peter F. Maxwell Anthony Morris Martha Moore Samuel Mathey Louis Maris Richard
Miller James Moore Alexander Mullin John Manning William Morris Benjamin Miller
H. A. Miller Elizabeth Mebane N. Mrs. Mitchill James Maher Ferce
N
Nield Charles Noble Mary Mrs. Niblo Patrick Norris Elizabeth Nielson Sarah
North Joseph Newton Anney North John C. Napier John Nilson Lucindia Neilson
Noble C.
O
O'Ellers Henry O'Neil Daniel O'Connor Martin Old Elizabeth Mrs. Ord George,
jun. Oliver Elizabeth Ott John Ouram Henry Oat Jesse
P
Park Thomas M. Potter Washington Pittman Ephraim Penrose Sarah Miss
Plankinhorn Elizabeth Pitcher Jonathan Price Hannah Poultney John, jun. Park
Samuel Patton Abraham Page Thomas Phillips Zalegman Palmer John J. Parncu^^
Charles Peale Mary Mrs. Priest Rebecca Piffer Eliza Pettit Sarah Petors Rachel
Polhemus Ann Parsons Mary Pemble Catherine Parent Thomas Prichett Kintzing
Pintard Henry Proctor Sarah Peers Frances Pedrick William
Q
Quinn Ann
R
Rudolph Benjamin Robertson James M. Ray Eliza Richards Richard Rogers Benjamin
Rafield John Ralston Rebecca Robinson A. W. Rogers Allen Rakestraw Rebecca
Rogers Mahlon Rink Sebastian Reess Valentine Rush Deborah Mrs. Rappoon
Christopher Russels John Richards William Rink John Richardson George Ri^e
Joseph Rhoads Hannah Reese Adam Richason Daniel Richards Samuel Reass Margaret
Rice George Ray John
S
Sheaff George Stever George W. Smith Willet Smith James Smith John, jun. Smith
William W. Seckel Lawrence Savige Elizabeth Scot Harriet Seeger David Smith
Mary Stran James Sloan Sarah Seguin Elizabeth Mrs. Smith Catherine Sullinder
Thomas Stewart Robert Shankland Joseph Smyth William Smith John C. Stewart
Alexander Snyder Charlotte Smith John Simmons Catherine S. Scott John W. Sparks
Mrs. Sheppard John Stites Mrs. Smith Jacob Sharp John Schrack Abraham Smith
William Seaborn Robert Smith Joseph Scheivee Christian Steel George Steever
Nancy Shearer Sarah Strong Rebecca Shaw Alexander Snell James Capt. Slesman
John Sinclair James Scott David Stam John R. Seidel Sarah Smith John Smith
Jamima Scott Agness Smith Maria Sherre^d John Shirkey Patrick Smith James
Shuster Jacob S^ow Edward Smith William Shuster Andrew Sigmund Michael
Seyferbelt Lydia Sawyer William Swain Eliza Mrs.
T
Tailor Catherine Thornton Nancy Travis Hannah Tillinghast Hannah Tree Rebecca
Toby Mrs. Thompson Jane Thompson George Twaddell James Thompson Mary Tallman
Thomas W. Tailor A. Trump John Thomond Michael Thomas R. Tribute Sally Tatem
Mary Taft Eleanor Tatem Samuel Thomas Robert Thomas Ann Tailor Amos Tryon
George Thomson John T.
V
Vanderslice George Vanhorn David Voigt Sebastian Voigt Henry Vogdes Jacob
W
Williams Mary Wakeford Onslow Wh^len Mary Winnard James White George Watson
Mary Welsh John Web Mrs. Watkins Abraham Williamson Sidney Wheland William
Ware Benjamin Waterman Isaac S. Wray William and co. Whalley William Willis
John Walker Samuel Wall George Waddle Aaron Whitby Edward Williams R.
Williamson Eliza Wetherill Mordecal Wimer Mary Woodland Isaac W. Work Samuel
Wildey Richard Wright Joseph Wilkinson John Waters John West Charlotte Wall
Richard Weisman Mary Williams Hetty Williamson William A. Wiedersum John
Willson Robert Walker Stephen Surchevlor Watcher John Williams Henrietta Watson
Christiana West Benjamin Whelen Israel, jun. Webb Rebecca Walington Catherine
Whiteford Jane
Y
Young Mary Young James
Z
Zimerman Sebastian.
THE FOLLOWING VALUABLE BOOKS Are for Sale by W. W. WOODWARD, at Franklin's
Head, No. 17, Chestnut Street.
DR. WITHERSPOON's works in 3 Volumes, price 6 dols. 75 cents. -- Brown's
Dictionary of the Bible 5 dolls. -- Burkitts Commentary on the New Testament 8
dols. 25 cents. -- Davies' Sermons 3 Volumes, 5 dols. 25 cents. do. in 2
Volumes, 4 dols. -- Morse's Geography and Gazetteer. do. abridged. -- Cook's
Voyages 4 volumes plates 8 dols. do. 2 Volumes, plates 2 dols. 50 cents --
Newton on Prophecies 2 dols. 25 cents -- Witsius on the Covenant, 5 dols. 25
cents -- Life of Watts and Doddridge 1 dol. 25 cents. -- Watt's Love of God,
and its influence on the Passions, 75 cents. -- do. on the Mind 1 dol. -- do.
Logic 1 dol. -- do Beauties 75 cents. -- do. on Prayer 62 2/1 cents. -- do.
Psalms and Hymns. -- Religious Rpository, 1 dol. 50 cents -- A Friendly Visit
to the House of mourning 25 cents -- Token to Mourners 37 cents. -- Whitefields
Life 75 cents. -- do. Sermons 1 dol. -- Life of Christ folio, 5 dol. -- do
octavo 3 dols. 50 cents.

Likewise just received, and for sale the following entertaining Books. -- The
Rash Vow 2 Volumes 2 dols. -- Children of the Abbey 2 dols. -- Alexis or the
Cottage in the Woods, 87 cents. -- The Boarding School 1 dol. -- George
Barnwell 1 dol. -- Constant Lover 1 dol. -- Lendrum's American Revolution 2
dol. -- Ambrose and Eleanor 87 cents -- Blossoms of Morality 75 cents -- Plain
Sense 1 dol. 75 cents -- Innocent Sufferer 39 cents. -- Edward a Novel in two
Volume 1 dol. 50 cents -- The Hermit or the unrivalled sufferings and
adventures of Phillip Quarl, an Englishman discovered upon an uninhabited
Island in the South Seas where he lived upwards of 50 years without human
assistance 75 cents. -- Soliman and Almena 68 cents -- Siamese Tales 66 cents
-- A History of Genesis Washington 25 cents -- Evelina or a young Woman's entrance
into the World 1 dol. 50 cents. -- History of Charles Grandison abridged, 75.
-- Witty exploits George Buchanan 12 cents -- With a variety of Song Books and
entertaining Histories and Novels too tedious to mention.

Books and Stationary on the most reasonable terms sold as above, and the
Printing Business in all its branches attended to with expedition.


