Dr. Stillman's Sermon.

A Sermon, OCCASIONED BY THE DEATH OF GEORGE WASHINGTON, LATE COMMANDER IN
CHIEF OF THE ARMIES OF THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, WHO DIED DECEMBER 14,
1799, AGED 68.

BY SAMUEL STILLMAN, D. D. Minister of the First Baptist Church in BOSTON.

BOSTON: PRINTED BY MANNING and LORING, SPRING-LANE.

JANUARY 12, 1800.
AT a Meeting of the First Baptist Society in Boston, Voted, That Messrs.
WILLIAM PORTER, JONATHAN HARRIS, and Deacon DANIEL WILD be a Committee, to wait
on the Rev. Dr. STILLMAN, and request a copy of his Sermon on the Death of
General WASHINGTON, delivered on the 29th of December, 1799, for the press.

Sermon.
2 CHRONICLES. xxxii. 33. AND HEZEKIAH SLEPT WITH HIS FATHERS, AND THEY BURIED HIM
IN THE CHIEFEST OF THE SEPULCHERS OF THE SONS OF DAVID; AND ALL JUDAH AND THE
INHABITANTS OF JERUSALEM DID HIM HONOR AT HIS DEATH.
THIS short account of Hezekiah's death and funeral, clearly proves the
excellence of his character, and that the people loved him; and will open a way
for a variety of reflections suitable to the present solemn, and affecting
occasion.

He was the son of Ahaz, who was addicted to idolatry, and, at his death, left
the people in a very corrupt and melancholy condition. Hezekiah, on the decease
of his father, ascended the throne, and at once began the work of national
reformation. In the first month of the first year of his reign, he opened the
doors of the temple, had them repaired, and ordered the priests and the Levites
to cleanse and purify it, and thus to prepare it for religious worship. He
attended to its dedication with uncommon solemnity, and kept the passover with
great devotion.

He broke down the idols in his dominions, and even destroyed the brazen
serpent which Moses set up, because the people were led by it to idolatry.

He was not only a man of religion, but a good prince; and the kingdom
flourished during his reign. He subdued the Philistines, and freed the nation
from the yoke of the Assyrians. His chief object was to make the people happy.

He also had great trials. Sennacherib invaded his country, and threatened to
destroy the city Jerusalem, unless he complied with his extravagant demand. In
order to obtain peace, and cause him to leave his dominions, he paid him three
hundred talents of silver, and thirty talents of gold. As soon as he had
received the money, he violated the agreement, and demanded an immediate
surrender of the city. Hezekiah, having made every proper preparation for
defense, encouraged the people to trust in the Lord, saying, "There be more
with us than with them: with them is an arm of flesh; but with us is the Lord
our God to help us, and to fight our battles." The result was, that the angel
of the Lord destroyed in one night, one hundred and eighty-five thousand of the
Assyrian army. Thus their deliverance was accomplished, by a miraculous
interposition of Heaven. Surrounding nations looked up to Hezekiah with
astonishment, and courted the savor of the prince whom God thus delighted to
honor.

When he was pressed with difficulties, he sought the Lord; and having obtained
deliverance, he gave him glory.

That Hezekiah should have been so good a man, and so excellent a prince, is
matter of surprise when we consider, that he came to the throne about the age
of twenty-five; when the passions are in all their vigor, and temptations to
vice numerous and powerful. But he was God's chosen instrument to deliver the
people, and to make them happy. He therefore fitted him for the service, and
preserved him till it was finished. His talents, his virtue, and his
unspeakable importance to the nation, could not secure him from the arrest of
death. "And Hezekiah slept with his fathers, and they buried him in the
chiefest of the sepulchers of the sons of David; and all Judah and the
inhabitants of Jerusalem did him honor at his death."

The text naturally leads us to observe, I. That men the most accomplished,
beloved, and useful to society, must die. And, II. That a grateful and
affectionate people will do them honor at their death.


I. Men the most accomplished, beloved, and useful to society, must die.

There are some men whom we are ready to wish, might live forever, because we
cannot see how their place will be supplied. But we forget that God has all
gifts in his possession; that the universe is his kingdom, which he governs
with infinite wisdom, and has made ample provision for a succession of proper
characters in all its various departments.

When Moses had completed his scene of service, he fell on sleep, but was
succeeded by a cloud of worthies, whom it is not necessary to mention. And thus
it will be in all future ages of the world. "Instead of the fathers shall be
thy children," said David, "whom I will make princes in the earth." Such is the
divine arrangement, such the all-perfect plan of Providence -- "Alleluia, for
the Lord God omnipotent reigns." This important truth is the source of our
consolation in the day of affliction, but by no means supersedes generous and
deep-felt sorrow, when great and good men fall.

Our late excellent Governor SUMNER lives in the affections of his
fellow-citizens. To his tomb we lately followed his remains with every mark of
high esteem, and deep affliction; and daily lament his early exit. He sleeps
with his fathers, and lies covered with the clods of the valley. And before the
days of our mourning for him are ended, a new source of universal sorrow opens
upon us. What mean these ensigns of mortality? -- Why is every countenance sad?
-- Why weep all the people? -- Because our beloved WASHINGTON is dead! He now
lies confined in a small and dreary apartment, on the banks of the Potowmack.
Thither will many of his fellow-citizens in future time resort, to see the
place that contains his precious dust, and bedew it with their tears; saying,
"Here lies WASHINGTON -- My father, my father, the chariots of Israel and the
horsemen thereof -- How is the mighty fallen." Death suddenly seized him as his
richest prey, and has thereby taught us this awful lesson, that "there is no
discharge in this war."

Though dead, my brethren, he speaks to us by his private, and his public
life.

But what shall I say when so much is to be said? Or what leave unsaid without
being unjust to WASHINGTON? The uncommon excellencies of his character, check
my feeble effort; much rather would I "in expressive silence muse his praise."
But duty calls me to attempt the unequal task, persuaded that your candor and
warm affection for our departed friend, will cover every fault.

General WASHINGTON was born the 11th of February, 1732. "His education was
such as favored the production of a solid mind and a vigorous body. Mountain
air, abundant exercise in the open country, the wholesome toils of the chase,
and the delightful scenes of rural life, expanded his limbs to an unusual, but
graceful and well-proportioned size. His youth was spent in the acquisition of
useful knowledge, and in pursuits tending to the improvement of his fortune, or
the benefit of his country."

The uniform account we have had of his private life, is, that he was fond of
rural retirement, affectionate to his connexions, kind to his servants,
condescending to his neighbors, and liberal to the poor. The most unequivocal
proof that he was amiable and beloved in his private character, we have in the
early public honors that were conferred on him by his country; which commenced
when he was about twenty years of age, and continued till his death. There is
one evidence of his private character, which I am unwilling to pass by; and
which I am persuaded will please you in the recital.

When he was about to leave Mount Vernon, and again engage in public life,
being chosen to the presidency of the United States, the Mayor of Alexandria,
in the name of the people, addressed him in the following affectionate manner
-- "Again your country commands your care. Obedient to its wishes, unmindful of
your ease, we see you again relinquishing the bliss of retirement; and this too
at a period of life when nature itself seems to authorize a preference of
repose.

"Not to extol you as a soldier; not to pour forth our gratitude for past
services; not to acknowledge the justice of the unexampled honor which has
been conferred upon you, by the spontaneous and unanimous suffrages of three
millions of freemen, in your election to the Chief Magistracy; nor to admire
the patriotism which directs your conduct, do your neighbors and friends now
address you; themes less splendid but more endearing impress our minds. The
first and best of citizens must leave us; our aged must lose their ornament;
our youth their model; our agriculture its improver; our commerce its friend;
our infant academy its protector; our poor their benefactor; and the interior
navigation of the Potowmack (an event replete with the most extensive utility,
already, by your unremitted exertions, brought into partial use) its institutor
and promoter.

"Farewell! go! and make a grateful people happy; a people who will be doubly
grateful when they contemplate this recent sacrifice for their interest.

"To that Being who makes and unmaketh at his will we commend you; and after
the accomplishment of the arduous business to which you are called, may he
restore to us again, the best of men, and the most beloved fellow-citizen."

His religious character will be established in the view of every candid mind
by the tenor of his life; provided the tree is to be known by the fruit.

He was a member of the Episcopal Church, consequently a believer in
Christianity.

In his public acts we have repeated evidence of his reverence for Deity, and
dependence on his Providence. After the conclusion of the war, and the
establishment of peace, he resigned his commission to Congress; and says, among
other excellent things, "The successful termination of the war has verified the
most sanguine expectations, and my gratitude for the interposition of
Providence, and the assistance I have received from my countrymen, increases
with every review of the momentous subject. I consider it as an indispensable
duty to close this last solemn act of my official life, by commending the
interests of my dearest country to the protection of Almighty God, and those
who have the superintendence of them to his holy keeping." Thus prays our great
military Chief; may soldiers of every description go and do likewise!

We have another pleasing instance of his reverence for Almighty God, in his
address to the Senate and House of Representatives, on his acceptance of his
election to the presidency of the United States. Having expressed his feelings
on this renewed evidence of the approbation of his countrymen, he says, "Such
being the impressions under which I have, in obedience to the public summons,
repaired to the present station; it would be peculiarly improper to omit, in
this first official act, my fervent supplications to that Almighty Being, who
rules over the universe -- who presides in the councils of nations -- and whose
providential aids can supply every human defect -- that his benediction may
consecrate to the liberties and happiness of the United States, a government
instituted by themselves for these essential purposes; and may enable every
instrument employed in its administration, to execute with success, the
functions allotted to his charge. In tendering this homage to the great Author
of every public and private good, I assure myself, that it expresses your
sentiments not less than my own; nor those of my fellow-citizens at large less
than either."

As every thing that was said by WASHINGTON is delightful to an American
audience, I will not hesitate to make one more copious extract, that will both
enrich the discourse, and prove him to be the warm friend of religion. This you
will find in his last address to the people of the United States; which
deserves to be written in letters of gold; and will undoubtedly be handed down
from generation to generation, till time shall be no more.

"Of all the dispositions and habits which lead to political prosperity,
religion and morality are indispensable supports. In vain would that man claim
the tribute of patriotism, who would labor to subvert these great pillars of
human happiness, these firmest props of the duty of men and citizens. The mere
politician, equally with the pious man, ought to respect and cherish them. A
volume could not trace all their connexions with public and private felicity.
Let us simply ask, Where is the security for property, for reputation, for
life, if the sense of religious obligation desert the oaths, which are the
instruments of investigation in courts of justice? Let us with caution indulge
the supposition, that morality can be maintained without religion. Whatever may
be conceded of the influence of refined education on minds of peculiar
structure; reason and experience both forbid us to expect, that national
morality can prevail in exclusion of religious principle."

I add, that we have been often informed, that he was a devout observer of the
Lord's Day and the institutions of religion.

It would require a volume to do justice to his character as a soldier. He
early discovered that he possessed great military talents. In 1755, being then
but twenty-three years of age, he bore a Colonel's commission, and was with the
unfortunate Genesis Braddock when he was defeated; which sad event might in all
probability have been prevented, had the wish of our young hero been complied
with, of preceding the main army, and scouring the woods with his rangers.
After their defeat, he was of unspeakable service to them, in securing their
retreat.

He was not influenced by a spirit of ambition or revenge -- He fought not for
fame, but freedom. When he saw the liberties of his country in danger, at the
call of his fellow-citizens, he stepped forth to defend them. He was the friend
and the protector of mankind. Cool, brave and persevering; and when surrounded
with difficulties, always found a resource in his own great mind. Witness his
forlorn condition in 1776, when he fled before the British army through the
Jerseys, with only a handful of men, in want of almost every thing, discouraged
and worn down. In this critical situation, when all that is dear to America
depended, under God, on the exertion of the moment, behold our beloved
WASHINGTON -- He plans with judgment, and, supported by his few brave troops,
executes with boldness and promptitude a most dangerous but successful
enterprise; by which he raised the spirits of his dejected countrymen, and
rescued a great part of New Jersey from their enemies. The circumstances of
this brilliant part of his history you will at once recollect.

"As night to stars, woe luster gives to man."
I shall take leave of his military character for the present, by reminding
you, that when the great objects of the American war were obtained, he resigned
his commission to Congress, and retired to the private walks of life. It is
really surprising, because uncommon, that a man who had been for several years
in the habit of commanding armies, could with such ease exchange the soldier
for the citizen. In this, as in every other part of his conduct, he discovered
the greatness of his mind, and the benevolence of his heart.

But this part of his history will come with more propriety from the historian
than the preacher.

After a short period of retirement from the anxiety and fatigues of military
life, his country call on him to assist in the formation of a Constitution of
Government for the United States. Sensible of the importance of an energetic
government, he accepted their choice; not consulting his own inclination, but
the voice of his fellow citizens and the public good. When the delegates from
the several States had met, they chose him President of the Convention; on
which occasion he presided with his usual dignity and spirit of conciliation.
And when that excellent instrument was finished, which bears his name in front
of the names of his worthy compatriots; which has been the means of raising
our country to its present condition of respectability and opulence, he again
retired to Mount Vernon. But now all eyes are fixed on him as the most proper
person to preside over the Union. The united voice of three millions of
citizens he could not withstand. His sentiments and feelings on this occasion,
are excellently expressed in the following answer to the address of the mayor
and people of Alexandria, when he was about to repair to the seat of government.

GENTLEMEN,

"ALTHOUGH I ought not to conceal, yet I cannot describe the painful emotions
which I felt in being called upon to determine whether I would accept or refuse
the presidency of the United States. The unanimity in the choice, the opinion
of my friends, communicated from different parts of Europe, as well as from
America, the apparent wish of those who were not entirely satisfied with the
constitution in its present form; and an ardent desire on my part to be
instrumental in connecting the good will of my countrymen toward each other;
have induced an acceptance. Those who know me best (and you, my
fellow-citizens, are from your situation, in that number) know better than any
others, my love of retirement is so great, that no earthly consideration, short
of a conviction of duty, could have prevailed upon me to depart from my
resolution, never more to take any share in transactions of a public nature.
For at my age and in my circumstances, what prospects or advantages could I
propose to myself, for embarking again on the tempestuous and uncertain ocean
of public life?"

This repeated sacrifice of his domestic ease and happiness to the voice of the
people, drew from them new and ardent expressions of gratitude and love to him.
Various parts of the country through which he passed to the seat of government,
were crowded with citizens of every description, who discovered such a desire
to see the Man, to whom they owed so much, as greatly affected him, and caused
him to weep.

His first interview with Congress on his arrival at New York, was solemn and
interesting. To the history of that day I refer you, because no abridgment of
its transactions can be admitted without injury.

Eight years he filled that exalted and arduous station, with honor to himself
and great advantage to his country; constantly pursuing her best interests.

When the time drew near that a choice was to be made of President of the
United States, he declined being considered as a candidate. This determination
deeply affected his countrymen. But considering his time of life, and that he
had devoted forty-five years of it already to their service, they could not
urge him to relinquish it.

On this occasion, I can only say, that it was WASHINGTON: a name, which in all
future ages ought to be considered as a general term, including every thing
great and excellent in the human character. Behold this man, admired by a
world; of his own accord descending from his high station of THE PRESIDENT OF
THE UNITED STATES, to become the farmer of Mount Vernon -- the private citizen:
which introduces the last solemn scene.

On Friday the 13th inst, he appeared to have taken a cold, which principally
affected his throat; of which he made but little complaint. About three o'clock
on Saturday morning his disease became alarming: physicians were sent for, but
they came too late. Heaven's great decree had passed, that WASHINGTON should
die. "This last scene corresponded with the whole tenor of his life. Not a
groan nor a complaint escaped him, though in extreme distress. With perfect
resignation, and a full possession of his reason, he closed his well spent
life." Mr. Lear's Letter.
Death to him was an enemy disarmed.

We sincerely sympathize with the disconsolate widow, and wish her every divine
consolation under her irreparable loss. But she sorrows not as they who have no
hope. The immortal spirit of that excellent man, the partner of her life, who
has left a nation in tears, has, we trust, ascended to an infinitely better
world, to receive the rewards of a good and faithful servant;

II. While an affectionate and grateful people do him honor at his death.

The moment the melancholy news arrived, that our beloved Chief was dead, every
countenance was sad -- business was suspended -- and tears flowed from eyes not
used to weep. -- All the people felt alike. These artless effusions of the
heart are far more honorable than the sculptured monument, or most elegant
panegyric. But as succeeding generations will not feel as we do, who know the
man, let us perpetuate his memory by every proper method. Let us impress on the
minds of our children and youth a sense of the virtues and talents of
WASHINGTON, and urge them to go and do likewise. Let the faithful historian
transmit to generations yet unborn, his private and his public character. Let
men who occupy the highest offices of government not only applaud, but imitate
his virtues. For even kings may learn from him what mode of conduct to pursue
to make the people happy, and live in their affections.

But I leave this matter to my afflicted fellow-citizens, who will, with one
soul, devise the best method of doing lasting honor to his memory.

The subject suggests a variety of useful reflections.

1. If the man whose death we now deplore, possessed so many excellencies, as
the united voice of his countrymen and of foreigners asscribe to him, I ask,
Whence were they derived? Certainly from the Father of lights, from whom comes
down every good and every perfect gift. If then such are the streams, what must
the fountain be? If the personal excellencies of a man can attract the
admiration of a nation, how ought we to be swallowed up in love and adoration
of that God, in whom dwells essentially every possible perfection!

Permit me also to inquire, how it happens, that a people feelingly alive to
excellence of character, should so generally forget our Lord Jesus Christ, who
is the brightness of the Father's glory, and express image of his person: in
whom dwells all the fullness of the Godhead bodily. Who has left us in his life
a most perfect example of every thing amiable and praiseworthy; and by his one
offering has perfected for ever all them who are sanctified. He is infinite in
excellence, and abundant in grace and goodness: yet to crowds he appears
without form or comeliness. This awful evidence of human depravity we bewail.

2. That solemn instance of death which now arrests our attention, is a loud
call to all, especially to the rulers of the people, to be always ready,
because they know not the day nor the hour when the Son of Man will come. They
hence learn that they are to die like men, and fall like one of the princes.
Death will soon level all distinctions, and after death the judgment; when
Jehovah will render to every man according to his works. It becomes us all to
entertain a lively sense of that awful period, when God will judge the secrets
of men by Jesus Christ; and to be prepared for it, that we may give up our
account with joy, and not with grief.

In fine -- We are under every obligation to mingle thanksgivings to God, with
the sorrows of the occasion, because a life so important to our country has
been spared so long. A kind Providence lent us a WASHINGTON -- fitted him for
the various and arduous services in which he was employed -- covered his head
in the day of battle -- preserved him amidst innumerable dangers, till the
great affairs of our country, civil and military, were happily arranged. Till
this period, he was immortal. However much we feel our loss, we bless the Lord
that he did not fall before. His work was done; and he has come to his grave
in a full age, like as a shock of corn comes in, in his season. He has passed
through life and descended to his grave with unsought, unsullied honors.

There are some men who are always in eager pursuit of fame, from whom she
keeps a cautious distance: not so WASHINGTON. With full spread pinions she
pursued him all his life, solicitous to bestow on him those distinguished
rewards which were due to his uncommon merit, which he received with that
modesty and diffidence in himself, that were peculiar to a mind like his. And
at this moment, while silent in the tomb, a nation is engaged to do him honor.
-- Surprising man! --

But we leave for a moment the tomb of our much loved friend, to offer praise
to Almighty God, for the many promising and useful characters that rise before
us: especially that ADAMS yet lives to serve his country. May the Lord long
preserve and bless him, and think on him for good, according to all that he
has done for this people.

FINIS

