Mr. STRONG's SERMON, ON THE DEATH OF General WASHINGTON.

A SERMON, PREACHED AT NORWICH, ON HEARING OF THE DEATH OF General George
Washington, Who died December 14th, 1799, AE^at, 68.

BY JOSEPH STRONG, PASTOR OF THE FIRST CHURCH IN NORWICH.

NORWICH: PRINTED BY JOHN TRUMBULL.

1800.

To the Committee, who have requested a copy of the following Sermon for
publication.
Gentlemen,
You are not ignorant of my aversion, to intrude upon the public through the
channel of the press. I shall notwithstanding, in the present instance, fulfill
your wishes with pleasure. Two reasons, especially prompt, me to do it; the
satisfaction of obliging a circle of highly esteemed friends; and a feeling of
self-congratulation, that I may be indulged in the attempt, to add a drop to
that ocean of well-earned applause, which shall wast the name of a Washington,
to the most distant ages.

J. STRONG.

II SAMUEL, i. 27. HOW ARE THE MIGHTY FALLEN, AND THE WEAPONS OF WAR PERISHED!
FROM a very ancient date in the history of human affairs, mankind have been in
the practice of celebrating by words or more substantial monuments, the virtues
and heroic exploits of the dead. In republican governments especially, the
funeral oration has been rarely omitted, in the case of the more conspicuous,
deserving citizen. The Grecian states, early commenced the usage: Rome followed
their example, not only through the period of her greater glory, but down
nearly to that of her lowest decline; -- the more recent revival of letters and
social improvement, having by no means discontinued the whole of the kind.
Doing justice to the memory of departed worth, has much to be said in its
favor. A rich source of pleasing emotion to the feeling grateful heart it
cannot fail to operate powerfully upon survivers, to study the careful
imitation of what they so much delight to extol.

BUT with the public celebration of deceased merit, thus strongly recommended
(...) different grounds; it admits and no doubt often experiences gross abuse.
The high wrought encomium of our text and its immediate connection, is perhaps
not so perfectly deserved as could be wished. Saul and his son Jonathan were
its subjects, scarcely any thing being to be said to the advantage of the
former, but that he was "the Lord's anointed" and the latter a mere youth, of
whom, the most that we know is, that he was personally brave and the possessor
of an unusually friendly heart. Over these two persons it was, that David gave
utterance to his grief, in that beautiful lamentation, of which the Text is a
part. It is a lamentation, which does honor, both to the talents and feelings
of its author. It has deservedly immortalized him, as a man who knew how to
forgive injuries, and whose attachment to his friend, was without duplicity and
persevering.

"And David lamented with this lamentation over Saul, and over Jonathan his
son. The beauty of Israel is slain upon thy high places; how are the mighty
fallen! Tell it not in Gath, publish it not in the streets of Askelon: left the
daughters of the Philistines rejoice, left the daughters of the uncircumcised
triumph. Ye mountains of Gilboa, let there be no dew, neither let there be rain
upon you, nor fields of offerings: for there the shield of the mighty is vilely
cast away, the shield of Saul, as though he had not been anointed with oil.
From the blood of the slain, from the fat of the mighty, the bow of Jonathan
turned not back, and the sword of Saul returned not empty. Saul and Jonathan,
were lovely and pleasant in their lives, and in their death they they were not
divided; they were swifter than eagles, they were stronger than lions. Ye
daughters of Israel, weep over Saul, who clothed you in scarlet, with other
delights, who put on ornaments of gold upon your apparel. How are the mighty
fallen in the midst of the battle! O Jonathan, thou wast slain in thine high
places. I am distressed for thee, my brother Jonathan: very pleasant have thou
been unto me; thy love to me was wonderful, passing the love of women -- How
are the mighty fallen, and the weapons of war perished!"

WITHOUT farther discussing the question, whether this high eulogy was a matter
of strict desert, in view of those who were originally its subjects; of this I
am confident, that it has been deserved in the case of others. It shall
accordingly be the twofold object of the remaining part of the present
discourse; to delineate the character, which abundantly authorizes those
strains of commendation which the text expresses, and afterward improve what
may be thus offered, in a few practical in^erences.

IN delineating the character worthy of high commendation, and of course to be
universally and deeply lamented, at his death: -- I shall begin with mentioning
the one, who has deserved well, in military office. It being the disastrous
fate of the warrior, which dictated the passage we are now reviewing, naturally
gives the lead to the present remark. In thus holding to view military skill
and exertion as ranking among the virtues of life, far be it from me to stand
forth an approver, of a very large proportion of those, who have shone and and
acquired eminence of ^ame, in such a department. Ambitious murderers -- expert
assassins -- unfeeling incendiaries -- are rather opprobrious names, which by
no means do justice to their real guilt and infamy. A scourge to the world,
humanity execrates and divine justic^ will assuredly punish them. It is not to
meliorate the circumstances of life, but to punish and reclaim from sin, that
God permits them upon earth.

BUT with the warrior thus an object o^ deserved execration; -- he may be and
frequently is, one of heavens richest blessings to ^^nkind. Hence the address
of God, to Cyrus, a man deservedly celebrated, both in sacred and profane
history. "Thus says the Lord to his anointed, to Cyrus, whose right hand I
have holden, to subdue nations before him; and I will loose the loins of kings
to open before him the two-leaved gates, and the gates shall not be shut. I
will go before thee, and make the crooked places straight; I will brake in
pieces the gates of brass, and cut in sunder the bars of iron. For Jacob my
servants sake and Israel mine elect, I have even called thee by thy name: I
have surnamed thee, though thou have not known me. I am the Lord, and there is
none else, there is no God beside me; I girded thee, though thou have not known
me: That they may know from the rising of the s^n, and from the west, that
there is none beside me, I am the Lord, and there is none else" -- So long as
that spirit of national injustice and aggression continues in the world, of
which no past period has been wholly free, defensive war will be necessary and
altogether justifiable; -- of course those skilful to wield the sword, are
deservedly to be held in high esteem, by their brethren. Without them the
inherent rights of human nature are instantly prostrate, property devastated or
wholly taken away, the family sanctuary made a place of lawless intrusion, and
even the sanctuary of the great Jehovah, with all its religious institutions
and solemnities, trampled under foot; thus verifying, what David long since
complained of; -- and indeed, which various parts of our own country, not many
years past, exemplified. "They have cast fire into thy sanctuary, they have
defiled by casting down the dwelling place of thy name to the ground. They said
in their hearts, let us destroy them together. We see not our signs, there is
no more any prophet, neither is there among us any that knows how long. O
God, how long shall the adversary reproach? shall the enemy blaspheme thy name
for ever?" As must be a matter universally conceded, the man of war, who under
God, is made the instrument of alleviating and ultimately redressing such a
truly unwelcome state of things, deserves at his death undissembled and
universal lamentation.

AGAIN, we are abundantly authorized to lament the man, who has shone as a
disinterested statesman. -- To be great in war and to be great in peace,
require very different attributes of character, seldom united. Of the two* it
is much less difficult to defend a country against hostile attacks from abroad,
than to regulate its internal civil concerns with propriety, amid the jarring
feelings and opposite inerests of millions. Of all departments of
administration, that of the republican chief magistrate, is far the most
critical and arduous. To be the successful and approved helmsman of a nation,
requires a vast combination of foresight, energy, and perseverance, rarely the
lot of mortals. The fatigue and anxiety of such an office, must be
incalculable. -- To keep in order the complicated wheels of national
government, is a laborious undertaking; though a far greater one, to put them
first in motion. It is beyond the reach of wealth, to compensate adequately
such a task; -- how truly noble then to do it without the smallest pecuniary
reward, as the result, of pure love of country. Certainly the able statesman,
uncompensated unless by a consciousness of doing good, fully merits the rich
tribute, of being held in the grateful remembrance, of his surviving
cotemporaries and posterity.

How worthy also, to be lamented is the man who has unvaryingly displayed,
unshaken attachment to the constitution and laws of his country. -- Convinced
of the true construction to be put, upon the great palladium of national
existence and liberty, in this or the other of its articles; nothing is able to
make him depart from it, in the smallest degree. Amid the risk of popularity,
the collision of parties, the solicitations of the crafty, and the invectives
of disapointed ambition; he remains immovable -- tenaciously fixed on what he
conceives to be right. Truly difficult as it many times is, for the supreme
head of a nation, to avoid the imputation of obstinacy, while pursuing the-line
of rational manly firmness; still it is a line, for which he will never fail,
most industriously to aim. Feeling the justice of the inspired remark "that in
a multitude of counselors, there is safety" he listens to the whole which can
be said; tho not without afterwads, both thinking and acting for himself. Far
greater confidence may be safely reposed in such a man, than in one, who while
he endeavors to please all, is very certain of having his administration but
too exactly answer to an apostles pointed description "for he that wavereth is
like a wave of the sea, driven of the wind and tossed -- for let not that man
think that he shall receive any thing of the Lord."

FURTHER, how deserving of lamentation at his death is the one, who while
engaged in public life, showed himself superior to the vanity of adulation, and
the seducements of ambition. -- The conquest of self in such respects, is far
the greatest conquest, which human nature is able to achieve. To continue the
humble man amid the unqualified applauses of millions, and that not barely for
a day but for years, shows self-command -- displays greatness of soul, next to
divine. Thus made conscious of acting a noble part and deserving well; the
pleasure thence resulting, does not stand confined to the narrow limits of a
selfish heart, but diffuses itself abroad -- ex^lts in the idea of national
peace and improvement, aggrandizement and felicity. -- The person whose
feelings and views are of the supposed benevolent cast, with entire
cheerfulness, quits the pinnacle of high elevation, the first moment
circumstances will allow. It was not to be made great, but to do great good,
that he consented to rise; of course it being the first object of his wishes,
again to enjoy a peaceful and dignified retirement. How truly fortunate would
it be for the world, did the investiture with extensive authority, in all
instances, do so little to deprave the heart -- that in the place of retaining
power, for the purpose of enslaving and making miserable; it was relinquished
with equal or greater satisfaction, than what it was originally received.

ONCE more, worthy indeed to be lamented is the man, whose private life has
been a continued series of beneficence, unstained by vice, and who witnessed a
sacred regard to the truth and power of religion. How comparatively
contemptible are the most brilliant personal qualities, with all the
adventitious celebrity which an elevated department for action, can give to
them, unaccompanied by a moral conversation and the true fear of God. With
virtuous principles and practices, the essence of real dignity in the obscure
citizen; they are inconceivably more commanding and useful, when the attribute
of high life. The great man, who manifests reverence for religion and its
institutions, demonstrates his full conviction of their reality and importance.
He shows himself superior to the splendid temptations of a seducing world, and
proclaims aloud to his fellow worms "that there is one thing needful; a good
part which shall not be taken away."

I have now detailed, with designed brevity, a few leading features of
character which more than authorize -- which peremptorily enjoin, the most
feeling lamentation. They are features of character, which authorize and enjoin
lamentation when found singly; how much more when combined, and forming one
vast mass, of human excellence and worth.

As I am sure is needless to inform you, my Brethren, the past remarks are by
no means those, of the mere speculatist. -- They are not the produce of
imagination, but have been penned from actual life.

O WASHINGTON! thou great and good -- thou friend of God and man, I can
suppress thy beloved name, no longer. Rich in years -- rich in desert -- rich
in every virtue -- rich in the esteem of thy country and the world, thou art
now shrouded in the tomb; -- and thy place shall know thee no more."

"How are the mighty fallen, and the weapons of war perished."

A few inferences, may now close the present attempt.

IN view of what has been offered, how clearly are we taught -- how forceably
have we urged upon us, the idea of a future immortal existence. It cannot be,
that so much innate worth -- such complicated desert of character -- and
unfeigned fear of the great Jehovah, as marked the man we this day lament,
should perish in the grave. No, my Brethren, the most glorious triumph of our
departed Hero and Father, is yet to arrive. "So when this corruption shall have
put on incorruption, and this mortal shall have put on immortality, then shall
be brought to pass the saying that is written, Death is swallowed up in
victory."

OUR subject also, impressively urges upon us, to cultivate a spirit of humble
submission to God's holy unerring providence. The cup of national judgment put
into our hands to drink, is indeed very bitter; though let it not be forgotten,
that it possesses an intermixture of sweetness. Our tears ought to a degree, to
be those of gratitude -- gratitude that kind heaven saw fit to raise up so
great a Worthy, that he has been so eminently guided by divine counsel, and
allowed to live and be useful, to a good old age.

THE reflections we have been indulging, likewise, strongly recommend
attachment to the constitution and varied interests of our country. A deep
blush ought to cover the face of those, who pretend to mourn for our departed
Washington, and yet make it their daily effort to under mine that noble edifice
of liberty and government, which has been the idol of his wishes, the work of
his life, and no doubt the subject of his frequent and most servent prayers.
The urn of so great and good a patriot, is too sacred to be wet with the tears,
of foul hypocrisy. It is impossible that real gratitude to the father of his
country and the feelings of the parricide, should ever unite in the same heart.

THE address of the past discourse is also, most pointed and forcible, in favor
of the virtuous exemplary life. -- If it is not to be expected or wished, that
we should all be heroes or statesmen; we ought universally to be sanctified in
heart and virtuous in conversation. The one talent claims the same improvement
and ensures a proportionate reward, as the ten. The more humble virtues "of the
greatest man who ever lived" formed out, by no means the least estimable part
of his character.

To conclude, let the solemn providence which has been the burden of our
remarks at this time, deeply impress every mind, in view of the inconceivably
interesting article of death. Would the armed destroyer of our race, not pass
by "heavens favorite son," he certainly will not pass by us. Are there none
sohigh, neither are there any so low, as to be remotely authorized in the
calculation, that they shall never die." The small and great are there, and the
servant is free from his master, "the object which ought to be that of chief
solicitude with us all, being so to live the life of the righteous, "that our
last end be like his."

AMEN.

