AN Eulogy ON THE MEMORY OF GENERAL GEORGE WASHINGTON, Who died December 14,
1799, aged 68.

PRONOUNCED AT THE REQUEST OF THE CITIZENS OF LYNN, JAN. 13, 1800, AND
PUBLISHED BY THE DESIRE OF THE COMMITTEE OF ARRANGEMENTS.

BY THOMAS CUSHING THACHER, A. M.

Ergo WASHINGTON perpetuus sopor
Urget? Cui pudor, et justitiae soror
Incorrupta fides, nudaque veritas,
QUANDO ULLUM INVENIENT PAREM?
BOSTON: PRINTED BY MANNING and LORING, SPRING-LANE.

Eulogy.
HOW great are the trophies of inexorable Death! How honorable the tears of
this great assembly! How expressive the symbols of public sorrow, which every
where attract the eye! ILLUSTRIOUS SHADE, could thou descend from the high
seats of glory, thou would listen with complacence to the sighs of a
mourning EMPIRE.

PIOUS gratitude, my FELLOW CITIZENS, has this day assembled us in the TEMPLE
OF THE LORD OF HOSTS. As men, we ought to retrace the history of our
obligations; and as Christians, it is our duty to imprint it on the tablet of
memory. We have met to cultivate the best sensibilities of the soul; to indulge
the luxury of sympathy; to muse on the recollection of greatness no more; and
to embalm with our tears the URN OF THE VENERABLE WASHINGTON.

THIS example we were taught by ancient REPUBLICS. At the public funeral of
those ATHENIANS, who were first slain in the war of PELOPONNESUS, an Eulogy to
their memory was pronounced by Pericles. It was to animate the living to
imitate the virtues of the dead. Thus likewise, when the great soul of the
first BRUTUS winged its flight to the enjoyment of celestial liberty, the
Councils of ROME ordained the most public testimonials of sorrow; and female
beauty, in grief for the loss of its noble avenger, shrouded its charms in
sackcloth.

GEORGE WASHINGTON was born Feb. 11, 1732, O. S. His early youth gave proofs
that he possessed no common mind. At the age of fifteen* he received a naval
commission; but parental affection, or rather the destinies of Heaven, reserved
him for a nobler fate. The ILLUSTRIOUS HERO, whom we this day celebrate,
commenced his public career by a commission to Canada, then under the dominion
of FRANCE. He discharged this trust with industry, intelligence, and address.
His military talents were first displayed in the field where fell the
unfortunate Braddock: and here the tried courage of veterans confessed its
inferiority to his youth. In 1759, disease threatened his precious life; but
Virtue watched over her son, and he lived, that he might die with the blessings
of millions. He progressed in life honorably and honored. As an instructor in
arms, a representative of Freemen, and a guardian of justice, he shone
conspicuous. Fortune, virtue, and domestic joys, He married Mrs. Custis, who is
still living.
were his friends, and all united to make him happy.

ROUSED from these peaceful scenes by the voice of his country's wrongs, and
placed by CONGRESS at the head of an army, scarcely in being, without arms,
undisciplined, and strong only in the goodness of its cause, he accepted the
trust with that modesty, which is the companion of true greatness. When the
important commission was presented him by the President of Congress, on the
success of which, in the view of an ill-judging world, depended his glory or
his infamy, "Sir," said he, "though I am truly sensible of the high honor done
me in this appointment, yet I feel great distress, from a consciousness that my
abilities and military experience may not be equal to the extensive and
important trust. And lest some unlucky event should happen, unfavorable to my
reputation, I beg it may be remembered by every gentleman in the room, that I
this day declare, with the utmost sincerity, that I do not think myself equal
to the command I am honored with."

IN the prosecution of our great and glorious revolutionary war, what a field
of triumph opens on the mind! I might show our HERO struggling with
difficulties, which, to minds less than his, would have been insuperable; I
might point to him, great in victory, but greater in misfortune. With the
fortitude of CAESAR, the prudence of FABIUS, and the unyielding virtue of OLD
REGULUS, he sternly buffetted the adverse waves of war. And ye, his companions,
ye noble defenders of our country's rights; while we weep over the tomb of your
IMMORTAL CHIEF, your services are deeply engraved on our hearts, and your honor
will ever be dear to fame.

AT the close of the AMERICAN REVOLUTION, a circumstance occurred, in which
General WASHINGTON displayed a moderation, fortitude, and patriotism,
unrivalled in the most virtuous period of antiquity. Deep discontent had
pervaded the ranks of the army. This spirit threatened to destroy the TREE OF
INDEPENDENCE, just transplanted into our soil, before we had tasted its fruit.
Had not OUR HERO loved his country, more than the most splendid title of
dignity; had he possessed a soul like that of CAESAR; he would have seized this
happy moment, and assumed the Imperial Authority. He might then have been
numbered among the successful conquerors of others; but his glory aspired to
the more difficult, and far nobler conquest of himself. He assembled around him
his veteran brothers; a tear, such as angels shed at spectacles of human
weakness, dropped on his venerable cheek; he spoke to them of the intrigues of
emissaries, of the honor of soldiers, and of the duty of citizens. He spoke to
the reason, but awoke every passion. He retired -- it was the voice of their
father, which they had been accustomed to obey; and they instantly Resolved,
THAT THE ARMY CONTINUED TO HAVE AN UNSHAKEN CONFIDENCE IN THE JUSTICE OF
CONGRESS AND THEIR COUNTRY.

THIS great EXEMPLAR of precept had now only to crown his military, by a
brilliant display of civic virtues. VERNON'S EDEN received the AMERICAN
CINCINNATUS; but its peaceful shades served only to increase the luster of his
laurels. It was the roof of hospitality, the delightful residence of sentiment
and virtue. Thither resorted the Philosopher and Traveller; for WASHINGTON was
the Star, which attracted the "wise men" of the world. Even KINGS and
POTENTATES paid homage to his virtues, reflecting by this some share of glory
on themselves.

WERE I here to finish the portrait, I should do injustice to the character of
one, whom all the world admires. If as a SOLDIER he excelled, as a SENATOR he
astonished; if as a WARRIOR he was magnanimous, as a STATESMAN he was profound.
His activity and bravery in the field rendered him an HOST, and his sagacity in
the cabinet raised him superior to all political delusion. His wisdom regulated
the decisions of jarring councils; his goodness charmed the affections of the
people, and his ARM crushed their enemies. Faithful to his GOD, could he be
unfaithful to his COUNTRY? Not malignity, not calumny, nor envy, which loves to
prey on goodness, can charge him with one habitual vice.

AS PRESIDENT of the CONVENTION, which formed our NATIONAL CONSTITUTION, he
gave it his entire approbation; and perhaps it is not too much to say, that to
this circumstance it owed its establishment. AMERICANS, this is the great
palladium of your honor and felicity; it connects liberty with honor, the
happiness with the rights of Citizens. It is an experiment on the question,
whether mankind can bear to be free. Let me tell you, if you suffer foreign or
domestic intrigues to wrest this invaluable inheritance from your hands, you
will richly deserve to be Slaves.

AMONG the many illustrious characters, who had distinguished themselves in our
glorious struggle for Independence, WASHINGTON was so pre-eminent, that all
eyes were turned to him as a common center; and twice, by the unanimous
suffrages of the nation, he was declared the RULER OF THE FREE.

AS PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES, how important were his services! I trust
while gratitude is a virtue, we shall not forget them. In this, were it
possible, rather than in his military character, he is justly esteemed the
INSTRUMENTAL SAVIOR OF HIS COUNTRY.

AS a FRIEND OF VIRTUE, he firmly opposed the Atheistical opinions of the day;
as a PATRIOT, he presented his breast to the dangers, which threatened his
country's peace. To him, the voice of the people was always an interesting
consideration; but though few among the great can resist the charms of popular
applause, though none ever enjoyed more popularity than WASHINGTON, yet HE ever
preferred the dictates of his own incorruptible mind, to the violence of the
inconstant multitude. At a moment, when foreign intrigue succeeded, when the
popular passions were raised into a ferment, he was requested not to do
Sanction the British Treaty by his signature.
what his sound judgment dictated: he firmly replied, I have determined on the
duty before me. The President's Answer to various Addresses.


IN the Address to the people of these States, declining again their suffrages,
he seemed to concentrate all his great qualities. It has justly been esteemed
the LEGACY OF A FATHER. It has been preserved in the archives of our country;
let it be deeply engraved on our minds; for the heart which conceived it ceases
to beat, and the hand which wrote it will rise no more. He retired again. -- I
ask you, my fellow-citizens, did not our prayers go with him? did we not all
say, 'Peace to the HERO'S rest? May guardian spirits watch his declining years,
and may his gray heirs, without sorrow, come to the grave!' But before he was
to be called to the communion of CELESTIAL SPIRITS, his war-worn sinews were
again to renew their youthful vigor, and again he rose with the Fabii and Decii
to avenge his country's wrongs.

IN his Letter to PRESIDENT ADAMS, in which he accepts the command of the
American armies, he displays that same unappalled courage, that strength of
intellect, and that zeal for his country's honor, which had formerly been
exerted with success against the power of GREAT BRITAIN. "The conduct," says
he, "of the DIRECTORY OF FRANCE toward our country; their insidious hostility
to its government; their various practices to withdraw the affections of the
people from it; the evident tendency of their acts, and those of their agents,
to countenance and invigorate opposition; their disregard of solemn treaties,
and the law of nations; their war upon our defenseless commerce; their
treatment of our ministers of peace; and their demands amounting to tribute,
could not fail to excite in my mind, corresponding sentiments with those my
countrymen have so generally expressed, in their affectionate addresses to you.
Believe me, Sir, no one can more cordially approve of the wise and prudent
measures of your administration. Satisfied that you have sincerely wished for
peace, and endeavored to avert war, and exhausted to the last drop the cup of
reconciliation, we can with pure hearts appeal to Heaven for the justice of our
cause." With what spirit did this appointment animate every class of citizens;
America seemed to possess one soul. The young men assumed the soldier's
character, and even the enfeebled veteran grasped his arms, which he had fondly
hoped would rust in quiet.

AND why do I hear the solemn knell of death? Why am I surrounded with these
habiliments of the grave? Why that gloom on your countenances? Why that
involuntary tear, which I see start from your eyes? I hear the sad response,
OUR FATHER IS NO MORE.

HIS FRIENDS and COMPANIONS IN ARMS encircle his grave. You have seen him, like
some superior form, leading you to glory and victory. You have heard him in the
embattled ranks, animating you to contest by motives of duty and patriotism;
and you have seen him weep over the soldier's wounds. "How have the mighty
fallen!" That countenance which beamed benevolence, and that stature which
inspired confidence, lie shrouded in death. VERNON, from the PARADISE, is
converted into the MAUSOLEUM of AMERICA. Its trophies are now the trophies of
death. But we will not forget thee. The tomb of WASHINGTON shall be the ALTAR
of LIBERTY. When ages on ages have revolved, when we and our children are
numbered with the silent dead, thither will resort the friends of freedom; and
while his happy spirit beholds with complacency the affecting scene, they will
appeal to Heaven, that they will save their country.

MY FELLOW-CITIZENS, by whose appointment I stand in this place, will accept my
sincere condolence on this solemn and affecting occasion. It is the last
tribute of respect, which we can pay to the memory of a MAN, who still lives
enthroned in all our hearts. It is respectful to the revered deceased, and is
it not honorable to our nature? Yes, our tears are honorable to ourselves!
Could our WASHINGTON once more address us from the BRIGHT ARMIES of the SKY,
what would he say? 'Weep not for me, my children. Your individual and political
happiness depends on your reverence to GOD, and your devotion to your country.
Cherish the virtues, and obey the laws. Watch, as with an eagle's eye, against
the intrigues of demagogues; and let it be written on your hearts, as with "the
point of a diamond," that foreign influence is the destroying angel of
Republics.'

THE YOUNGER CITIZENS demand our sympathy and attention. Respect for the
character, gratitude for the services, and grief for the death of your
POLITICAL PARENT, has covered you with mourning. When yet in infancy, before
time had brought into exercise the reflective faculties, or reason in any
degree had matured judgment; HE was in the field, fighting your cause, and
defending your rights. If ever your sensibilities were awakened, it must be on
this occasion; for you have cause to weep. Study, my young friends, the HERO'S
LEGACY; it will show you the true interest of your country, and make you
politically wife. Let the impressive solemnities of this day be fixed on your
minds. And as the most sacred of all duties, as you regard the dearest
interests of yourselves and country, preserve your minds uncontaminated by the
religious and political heresies of the day, which will inevitably lead to the
destruction of all government, of all social order, and of public happiness.

WE pass to the closing scene. The AMERICAN FABIUS died as he lived, calm and
resigned. As though common mortality must not approach departing glory, his own
firm hands performed to himself the last sad office of humanity!

SHADES of WARREN, MERCER, GREEN, and MONTGOMERY! a KINDRED SOUL arrives! it
is your CHIEF! it is WASHINGTON! Rest, GREAT SPIRIT, in thy native skies; sleep
sweet, till the ARCHANGEL sound: -- But thy name we will remember; thy deeds,
thy greatness, thy virtues, we will affectionately cherish, and "tell them to
our children's children."

FINIS.

