AN EULOGY ON George Washington, FIRST PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES, AND LATE
COMMANDER IN CHIEF OF THE AMERICAN ARMY, WHO DIED DECEMBER 14, 1799.

DELIVERED AT DEDHAM, FEBRUARY 22, 1800, AT THE REQUEST OF THE INHABITANTS OF
SAID TOWN.

BY THOMAS THACHER, A. M.

NULLIUS TANTUM EST FLUMEN INGENII, NULL^ DICENDI, AUT SCRIBENDI TANTA VIS,
TANTAQUE CO^IA, QUAE NON DICAM EXORNARE, SED ENARRARE, RES TUAS GESTAS POSSIT.

Cicero, pro M. Marcello. OMNIBUS, QUI PATRIAM CONSERVARINT, ADJUVERINT,
AUXERINT, CERTUM ESSE IN CAELO DEFINITUM LOCUM, UBI BEATI AEVO SEMPITERNO
FRUANTUR.

-- Somnium Scipionis. NEC VERO ILLE IN LUCE MODO, ATQUE IN CIVIUM MAGNUS ^ SED
INTUS DOMIQUE PRAESTANTIOR.

-- De Senectute. Dedham: PRINTED BY H. MANN. 1800.

AN EULOGY.
HAD we assembled this day, my fellow-citizens, for the purpose of private
mourning, that we might sympathize with a distressed family deprived of a
parent, or weep over the ruins of youth and beauty when conveyed to the tomb,
our conduct would deserve approbation and respect. We are MEN, and therefore, I
trust, never insensible of the calls of humanity. An event far more important
arrests our notice, and has given birth to the solemnities of the day. The
common triumphs of the last enemy of man, though severe and terrible; yet are
short in their effects. When one generation passes away another rises in its
place. When wise and good men of local eminence retire from the world, others
are raised up by Providence to fill their stations. If the flowers are
destroyed by the severity of winter frosts, still the spring will repair their
ravages. Though the sun goes down in the western hemisphere he will again
arise, he will shine on new forms of beauty in the natural world -- and on a
new succession of rational beings, who in turn must pay the like tribute to
mortality. But when will the beams of that glorious luminary again be reflected
on such an object as we now lament; when in any future period will they behold
one, who like him, so perfectly united in himself the amiable citizen, the
incorrupt patriot, and the invincible hero; one whom we know not whether more
to love for the excellent qualities of his heart, or admire for his peerless
greatness and splendid appearance on the human drama? Our civil Fathers have
pronounced him "First in War, First in peace, and First in the affections of
the people." The re-echoing groans and sighs of millions of our nation, have
demonstrated their warm approbation of the sentiment.

THIS day, devoted to funeral honors, which before had been dedicated to joy
and innocent amusements, as the nativity of the political savior of his
country: this day, witnesses our keen sensibilities for his death, and our
unaffected gratitude to his memory.

IN paying due honors and the last offices of respect, in our power, to the
highest grade of human virtue, we copy after the best and fairest examples of
antiquity, both sacred and profane. Even in the pure and simple ages of the
world we find the patriarch Jacob followed to the grave by all his countrymen
and kindred, as well as by the Egyptian Court. The children of Israel mourned
thirty days for Moses their illustrious leader, who delivered them from
slavery, and conducted them to Canaan. The princes and patriots of the same
nation, were honored after their exit by all the signals of public mourning --
and the monument of David existed for more than a thousand years.

THE Athenians, renowned through the world for their great wisdom and
acquirements, though so jealous of their liberties that they banished from
their country citizens, whose power, or even virtues, gave them too great an
ascendancy; yet granted to the same, as well as to other great men, who were
their benefactors, funeral honors which equalled in pomp and magnificence
their religious solemnities. In other nations of Greece, as well as among the
Romans, the inventors of Arts and Sciences; the authors of free governments,
and the destroyers of tyranny; those who had fought and died for their country,
have been held in the highest veneration. They were admitted even to divine
honors, their deeds of glory have been recorded by the historian, have been
embellished by the orator, and sounded by the poet. The arts of painting and of
statuary have lent their aid -- that after ages might not only be favored with
the display of their minds, but gratified in beholding -- the very image of
their persons. Criminal and ungrateful should we be, my fellow townsmen, if we
suffered our illustrious Friend to depart from life without mingling our tears
with the rest of our countrymen. Is it not the duty of America to exhibit such
an example of wisdom and virtue -- such courage, public spirit, and usefulness
to mankind, as a model for posterity? Our hearts give a sufficient reply -- he
is worthy of our love and admiration -- and he shall ever retain them. "On such
sacrifices (to use a bold figure of antiquity) the Gods themselves strew
incense."

UNDER patience of this respectable audience, we shall proceed to a review of
the more important passages of his life. Though your organ confesses himself
unequal to the sublimity of the subject; yet impressed with the highest sense
of gratitude to the Father of his country -- and the moral obligation on every
citizen of the United States to reverence his memory and suitably contemplate
this melancholy event -- he hopes his best efforts to comply with your wishes
may compensate for his want of abilities or eloquence.

GEORGE WASHINGTON was born the eleventh of February 1732, of an ancient and
honorable family in the Commonwealth of Virginia. In one edition of Dr.
MORSE's Geography, in a short biographical account of General WASHINGTON, it is
said -- "That his ancestors were Royalists and emigrated to Virginia, after the
death of Charles I. when England became a Republic." The following extract from
Oldmixon's history of England, published A. D. 1730, affords a corroborating
proof of that assertion.

"In 1643. Prince Rupert, with an army of 20,000 horse and foot, coming before
Bristol, and the summons being refused, laid siege to it, and the next day gave
a fierce assault, but was beaten off. He continued his attacks with great
resolution, and was as resolutely resisted, till Col. WASHINGTON gained the out
works, and made a breach in the wall."


Strong powers of mind, a good private education, and a robust constitution
fitted him very early to appear in public life -- and to render important
services to his country, as well as to give strong presages of his future
greatness; even at an age when young gentlemen of fortune are too apt to be
rioting in luxury and dissipation. For before he arrived at the age which the
laws of his country consider as manhood, he was delegated by his native Colony
to remonstrate against the encroachments of the French and Indians on their
western frontiers. War succeeding, he was appointed to the command of a
provincial regiment in that army, of which BRADDOCK was General. There he
discovered the force of his genius in warlike affairs, by uniting the ardour
and courage of a young man with the penetration and skill of a veteran soldier.
He remonstrated with his commander against the arrangments of the battle; and
when he could not convince that obstinate man, who fell a deserved sacrifice to
his presumption and ignorance, the great WASHINGTON, at twenty-two years of
age, covered and protected the retreating army. Such were the hopes excited by
his abilities and virtue, that even then he was designated in prophetic
language to be the future savior of America. These were exploits sufficient
for the morning of a brilliant life, and enough to have procured him an
honorable name on the historick page. Yet they are lost by the contemplation
of the numerous and more important events which succeeded. -- As these are more
interesting, let us follow him in his career.

HAVING gone through the several grades of Legislator and Magistrate in his
native province, he was appointed in 1774, a Delegate to the General Congress.
He sincerely joined with that honorable band of Patriots, in every effort to
restore the violated rights of his country, without a civil war. But their
attempts were fruitless. The more humbly they petitioned, the more haughtily
they were rejected by the Government of Great Britain. At length, when all
other resources failed, an appeal was made to Heaven, to be decided by the
sword. At that time, America was without arms, ammunition, money, or public
credit. No inconsiderable proportion of her citizens became her avowed enemies.
These, from the influence of the royal governors, were, many of them, possessed
of public offices, and had great consequence and consideration in society.
Though the people at large were united, yet numerous contingences might have
destroyed an alliance produced by common danger.

THE nation, with whom we contended, commanded an extensive revenue and an
unlimited credit; abounding in military resources. The recent triumphs of her
arms in Europe and America, had been heard by all, and witnessed by no
inconsiderable proportion of the world. She sent over generals to command her
armies, who had been flushed with conquest; and a navy -- the terror of all
maritime powers. She directed her instruments of vengeance and death to destroy
property and life, as far as each might be necessary to reduce us to
unqualified submission. In this state of universal anxiety and dismay, the
attention and remaining hopes of Congress were directed to our departed FATHER;
by their unanimous suffrages, he was chosen CAPTAIN GENERAL of the armies of
the United States. It was then in the day of your calamity, that he abandoned
every domestic comfort -- left the enjoyment of an opulent fortune, and
exposed his precious and valuable life, that he might defend your cause and
establish your independence. With industry, he disciplined your armies; with
prudence, he concealed your weakness, not only from your enemies, but from
yourselves. With equal skill and fortitude (under the smiles of Heaven) he
drove the British forces from yonder city.

SHALL we retrospect this illustrious MAN in his retreat through the Jersies,
like another Eneas, carrying with him the hopes and fortunes of his country?
Great and venerable in adversity, he was himself an host. Though by sickness
and ill success, our army was nearly annihilated; yet while WASHINGTON lived,
it was accounted criminal to despair of the Commonwealth. -- Ye war-worn
veterans, whose aged heads are covered with the "blossoms of the grave," speak,
for you can tell! You, who have so often followed and attended this wonderful
MAN through the vicisitudes of the late revolution, and to whose cooperating
valor we are indebted for our Liberty and Independence. How dauntless and
unappalled in the midst of surrounding dangers! How often has he wasted the
midnight lamp in planning for your and our safety! As you have seen his
fortitude under the severest shocks of fortune; so have you known his humanity
after success. The vanquished found in him, not an implacable victor, but a
generous and sympathizing friend. What attention and kindness did he not
display to the brave companions of his danger? He bled for your wounds; and,
like the Emperor Trajan, was ready to tear his garments, that he might bind
them up. Was there one of your number, who was not willing to die fighting
under his banner? or who would not have coveted the sacrifice of his own life
to protect that of his General? In a word, who did not submit to his commands
from motives of affection, rather than fear?

AT the close of the late war, when murmurs for unrewarded services and cruelly
neglected merits had pervaded the camps, and nearly introduced a civil war, the
powerful influence of this invariable FRIEND to his country, like the fabled
visage and ascensions of the Monarch of the Ocean, calmed the storm, quenched
the torch of discord, and said to the impetuous passions "peace be still."

BY the gracious interposition of Almighty God, the war with Britain was
brought to a favorable issue, and the national sovereignty of America was
acknowledged by her enemies. This great man did then retire to domestic
occupation -- like the famous Dictator Cincinnatus. He sought in the shades of
private life the blessings for which he had contended with success, taking at
the same time a farewell of all public honors and employments.

BUT had he not now done enough for his country? Was he not crowned with
unwithering laurels? Was not the orb of his glory full? Enough it may be
answered for any other hero or statesman. But yet from our illustrious PARENT
immortal services were to be performed in a mortal life. It was not only
necessary that he should lay the foundations, but that he should complete the
superstructure of LIBERTY in these American regions. -- In the year 1787, he
was sent as a delegate to a Convention, convoked under the authority of the
several states in the union, to form a general constitution. That body of sages
chose him to preside in their assembly. When this system was adopted, the
universal wishes and suffrages of the people created him their supreme
political head. To any other man but GEORGE WASHINGTON, this exalted station
would have been the highest object of ambition. But when it is considered that
he had already acquired the universal good will of his country, and a
reputation which could scarcely be increased, obedience to the voice of his
fellow-citizens, was a sacrifice, -- yea, a sacrifice which added to the number
of our obligations to his memory, for it demonstrated that he was not only
willing to expose his life, but even hazard his fame, when the sacred calls of
duty and the public necessity demanded it at his hands.

HOW wisely he assisted in organizing this government, in reconciling
contending parties, in guarding against foreign influence, in preserving our
neutrality, and finally in performing the difficult and arduous duties of his
exalted station, I shall leave to be recorded by some future historian, and
properly transmitted to the important tribunal of posterity. -- Thus much it is
proper to observe, that though very different apprehensions were formed of the
events of that day; yet all great and good men who differed from our President
in his political administration, reverenced the purity of his motives, and
rectitude of his heart.

WHEN eight years of his valuable and important life had been devoted to the
interests of his native land -- when different parties were in some measure
composed, and the government strengthened by time and habit, and the accession
of all the states, he quitted his high and exalted station, with more pleasure
than it would have been received by the most sanguine votary of ambition and
power.

NO long interval existed from his resignation of the Presidency, before he was
once more called into public life. The violent revolutions in Europe,
threatening America with the danger of a war -- he accepted the command of our
army, in a rank inferior to what he had possessed before. This elevation of
soul, superior to all common notions of grandeur, reminds us of the old
venerable Roman, who when he had gone through all the public grades of office,
fought as a private under his own son when Consul.

THUS honorable, thus truly useful and eminently great, was our beloved PARENT
in his public character. -- Thus gloriously did he discharge every duty in
peace and war, which his country assigned him. We should do criminal injustice
not only to his memory, but to society, were we here to close, and omit to
declare his private virtues, as an example for the world. This part of the
picture is by no means unimportant; for his amiable qualities when properly
exhibited, may be as much more useful than those of an obscure citizen,
possessing the same measures of moral and social virtue, as his name and
influence is more extensive.

THOUGH possessed of a splendid fortune, he did not feel himself raised above
the duties of industry, and the common calls of private life. He observed such
method and order in the management of his affairs, that notwithstanding his
repeated liberal donations, and princely hospitality, he greatly increased his
paternal estate. As a husband, he was such an example of constancy and tender
affections, as proved that the amiable may be united with the sublime, in the
moral character. As a master, he united dignity and authority with such
mildness of temper, as procured prompt obedience and warm attachment. And it is
worthy of remark, that in all the important scenes he has passed through, and
the high trusts he was obliged to repose on the fidelity of his attendants,
that there never has appeared an instance of treachery in any member of his
family. While this demonstrates his penetration and insight of human nature --
it evidences the excellency of his heart and manners, in thus commanding the
good affections and esteem of all degrees of men. Far from considering the
brilliancy of his public character as a mantle for his private vices, he was
uniformly correct. His manners were affable, but dignified. In a word, such was
his attention to decorum and propriety, that no man dared to profane his
feelings by vicious or indecent conversation.

IN this age of infidelity and licentiousness, he was not ashamed to avow and
honor the system of Christianity. He frequently attended its public
institutions, and in his last address has warmly recommended religion to the
notice of his fellow-citizens.

THE last authenticated act of his life was worthy of himself. In his last will
and testament, besides having bestowed large sums for the encouragement of
literature and public utility, he has liberated all the Africans who belonged
to his estate. He was obliged to postpone his noble and generous design during
his life, on account of the situation of the southern states. Yet he took care
to furnish those men with such instructions, as would qualify them for freedom,
and has made provision for the support of the old and infirm, as a
compensation for their past labors. Thus uniform in all his conduct, was this
FRIEND of the Rights of Mankind -- thus consistent, were his Republican
Principles.

A SUMMARY review of the character of this great MAN, will afford sufficient
reasons for the applauses which his country has bestowed on his actions, and
the uncommon honors which have been paid to his memory.

HAD any one, skilled in military affairs, beheld him forming and disciplining
his army -- performing the most arduous enterprises, executing all the duties
of a consummate general, subduing the proud and expressing humanity to the
vanquished, he would have concluded that WASHINGTON must have been born in a
camp, and warlike glory had been his only pursuit. Was our illustrious CHIEF to
have been viewed as a statesman, a lawgiver and president -- the inference
would have been that his highest ambition was to be a sage and patriot -- and
that his whole employment was political studies.

HAD a philosopher viewed the undeviating purity of his morals -- and the
elevation and magnanimity of his mind in receiving the highest honors and
plaudits ever given to mere man, without the least token of insolence or
vanity; would he not have transported himself in idea to Athens -- and imagined
that WASHINGTON, in the Grove of Plato, had learned to subdue all passions,
rise above all sublunary grandeur, and to place his whole happiness in
intellectual pleasures and the cultivation of his soul!

THOUGH we doubt not, other Generals have been equally brave in the field,
conducted equally difficult enterprises, and made more splendid conquests;
other Patriots and Sages have had an equal affection for their country, and
have been ready to devote their talents to preserve, or die to defend its
liberties; and other private citizens have equalled him in moral and social
duties: yet, where is the man (the inspired characters recorded in the holy
scriptures excepted) who has united in himself such measures of military,
political and moral excellence? We should do injustice by comparing him with
any one exalted name which has been celebrated through the world. As a
balanced comparison to his character, we must call up to memory a constellation
of the brightest luminaries of all antiquity, or all the "sons of glory," in
modern times.

MIGHT not our beloved FATHER have made the same declaration in his last
moments with Pericles, the Athenian, "That no American had shed a tear by his
means"? or like the Emperor Augustus have demanded your applause for a long
life spent and devoted to your happiness? But this great man was as void of
ostentation at the hour of his death, as he was of fear. He closed his own
eyes; and, in the first instance, exhibited himself a mortal.

"LIKE a beam of light he has ascended." He is now joined to the illustrious
assembly of patriots and heroes whose fame "flows through all ages, enlarging
as it flows." And his Candidus insuetum miratur limen Olympi
Sub pedibusque videt nubes et sidera Daphnis.
VIRGIL -- ECLO^UE 5 -- 56.
beatified spirit -- is doubtless reaping the rewards of piety toward God --
and the highest benevolence toward the human race.

We shall see his face no more, yet let us not weep for him, but ourselves. It
would be presumption to expect another benefactor and parent like him we have
lost, who will protect us in war, and direct our councils in peace. But let our
tears be accompanied with earnest supplications to the Almighty, for his
esteemed SUCCESSOR, for all branches of the general and state governments, that
as we see the mighty fall, and their high places knew them no more; that other
good and great men may be raised up as our patrons and supports -- that the
liberty and happiness of America, may have no other termination than time and
nature herself.

AS to WASHINGTON, he has raised a monument, which no revolutions or
commotions in the natural or moral world can overturn. I do not mean the cold
marble which covers his insensible, but loved and ever precious remains; nor
the sculptured brass and animated canvas, which will describe the lineaments of
his godlike countenance; -- but the record of his immortal actions, and the
Temple of liberty in this western world. Cities, hereafter erected in the now
pathless desert, the den of the wild beasts -- the habitation of the savage,
shall have their walls, their columns, and their senate houses, inscribed with
his name; his deeds of glory shall adorn the page of an American Tacitus, or
string the harp of a future Virgil. Even should our country (which God forbid)
share the fate of all former free Republics, either from domestic usurpation
or foreign conquest; yet while there are Arts and Sciences, or any degree of
civilization or refinement, the name of WASHINGTON will be regarded with
eternal honor, and himself pronounced the first and best of mankind.

"Nations thy fame, our minds lay up thy love,
Letters thy learning, thy loss, years to come,
In worthy hearts sorrow has made thy tomb,
Thy soul and spright enrich the heavens above.
Thy liberal heart embalmed in grateful tears,
Young sighs, sweet sighs, sage sighs, bewail thy fall;
Envy her sting, and spite has left her gall,
Malice herself, a mourning garment wears."
Finis.

