A DISCOURSE, DELIVERED AT COLRAIN FEBRUARY 22, ^800.

BEING THE DAY RECOMMENDED BY CONGRESS, AND THE LEGISLATURE OF MASSACHUSETTS,
FOR THE PUBLIC TESTIFYING OF OUR RESPECT TO THE MEMORY OF THAT LATE ILLUSTRIOUS
STATESMAN, AND SINGULAR BENEFACTOR TO HIS COUNTRY, GENERAL GEORGE WASHINGTON,
WHO DIED, DECEMBER 14, 1799.

BY THE REV. SAMUEL TAGGART, A. M.

PRINTED AT GREENFIELD, BY THOMAS DICKMAN.

1800.

A DISCOURSE.
II CHRON. XXXII. 33. And Hezekiah slept with his fathers, and they buried him
in the Chiefest of the sepulchers of the sons of David; and all Judah, and the
inhabitants of Jerusalem did him honor at his death: And Manasseh his son
reigned in his stead.
HEZEKIAH was a most virtuous and pious king of Judah, of whom this testimony
is given by inspiration, that he sought the Lord with all his heart. In him we
see a striking instance of what the energy of a single character, aided and
supported by a kind Providence, could do, toward retrieving the depressed and
deranged state of a kingdom or nation. He came to the throne at a time when
both the religious and political state of his kingdom were in the greatest
disorder, and deepest depression; occasioned by the wicked and impolitic
conduct of his predecessor.

Ahaz, his father, was a monster of folly and impiety, and his affairs were
proportionably unprosperous. The Jewish religion was so interwoven with their
civil constitution, that any attempt to change it, either by prince or people,
was treason against the commonwealth, as well as impiety toward God. Ahaz
attempted to abolish the established worship, and actually introduced and
patronized the idolatrous rites of the heathen nations by whom Judah was
surrounded. Hereby he lost the hearts of his best subjects, and forfeited the
protection of heaven. The Syrians of Damascus smote him, and carried many of
his people captive; as did likewise the king of Israel, who slew them in a rage
that reached up to heaven, even one hundred and twenty thousand in one day. And
although he lavished both his own treasures, the treasures of the house of the
Lord, and the treasures of the princes, upon Tilgath-pilneser, king of Assyria,
(then the most powerful monarch in the world,) he only distressed him, but
helped him not. In the time of his afflictions his impiety increased; he
trespassed the more against the Lord. This is recorded by inspiration with a
note of infamy. "This is that king Ahaz." And, proportionably, as he became
impious and unprosperous, he became contemptible in the eyes of his subjects.

When the kingdom was in this state of religious and political disorder and
debility, Hezekiah, a most worthy son of a wretched father, mounted the throne.
He immediately set himself, in earnest, to remedy the evils occasioned by the
weakness and wickedness of his predecessor. One of the first works of his reign
was to open, purify, and repair the house of God, which had been defaced,
deserted, and shut up, during the impious reign of Ahaz; as well as to destroy
idolatry, and restore the true worship of God in every part of his dominions.
But, though his heart was much engaged in the reformation of religion, he was
by no means inattentive either to the political interests of his kingdom, or to
the means of increasing and drawing forth the internal resources thereof, for
the purposes of defense. He repaired the fenced cities of Judah, and put arms
and garrisons in them; and after he had, in a good measure, strengthened his
Kingdom, he threw off the inglorious Assyrian yoke, to which Ahaz his father
had submitted: And, although he was unsuccessful in some encounters with the
Assyrians, when they first invaded the land, and several of the fenced cities
of Judah fell into the enemy's hands, yet, in the issue, (through a very signal
interposition of providence in his favor,) he was completely victorious. And
before his death, the kingdom of Judah was advanced to a very high pitch of
prosperity. His many private virtues, as well as his righteous and successful
administration of the affairs of the kingdom, endeared him very much to the
nation in his life, and at his death his people were disposed to confer every
honor upon his memory, to which a man, who had deserved eminently well of his
country, could be entitled. Such was the man to whom all Judah, and the
inhabitants of Jerusalem, did honor at his death; having, doubtless,
previously honored him in his life.

I shall not, in this discourse, confine myself to the usual formality of a
sermon. This passage of sacred history, however, furnishes us with an
observation, which I shall keep in view in what follows: viz.

That when men of extraordinary gifts, talents, and usefulness, particularly,
rulers who have been in the most eminent stations in a nation, have filled them
with dignity, and have been eminent blessings to their country, come to die,
the bestowing extraordinary honors upon, as well as making more than usual
lamentation for them, is a custom which has, more or less, obtained among all
nations; and, when kept within due bounds, is opposed by no principle either of
reason or revelation.

However the custom may be liable to abuses, and, doubtless, has in many
instances been abused, yet, when duly regulated, it is not only lawful, but
laudable, and the more extensive a person's sphere of usefulness has been, the
more widely extended will be the honors done him at his death.

Instead of, at this time, attempting to range the wide field of profane
history for illustration, I shall barely select two or three instances from the
pages of inspiration.

When the patriarch Jacob died in Egypt, and was carried, for interment, into
the land of Canaan, great lamentation was made for him, and he was honored
with a sumptuous and expensive funeral. When Moses, who had delivered the
children of Israel out of Egypt, and led them, forty years, through the
wilderness toward Canaan, died on the mount, all Israel mourned for him thirty
days. When Samuel the prophet died, who had been such a singular blessing in
his day, all Israel lamented him, and buried him. When Asa, a virtuous king of
Judah, died, they laid him in a bed which was filled with sweet odours, and
diverse kinds of spices, prepared by the apothecaries art; and they made a very
great burning for him. In like manner good Hezekiah was honored. And when
godly Josiah was untimeously slain at Megiddo, all Judah and Jerusalem mourned
for Josiah. And all the singing men, and singing women, spoke of Josiah in
their lamentations unto this day, and they made them an ordinance in Israel;
and behold they are written in the book of the lamentations. Many of those
inimitably beautiful, and pathetic strains of sorrow, recorded in the book of
the lamentations, have, without doubt, a reference to the death of that pious
and excellent prince.

Now there is no mark of disapprobation put upon the extraordinary respect
shown, either to Hezekiah, or others at their death. But, on the other hand,
the want of a decent, or even honorable attention at death, is threatened as a
calamity, and a curse, particularly upon Jehoiakim, the son of Josiah. -- JER.
XXII. 18, 19.
Therefore, thus says the Lord concerning Jehoiakim the son of Josiah, they
shall not lament for him saying, Ah my brother, or, Ah my sister. They shall
not lament for him saying, Ah Lord, or, Ah his glory. He shall be buried with
the burial of an ass, drawn, and cast forth beyond the gates of Jerusalem.

In our present situation, the question will now be, If we suppose it
necessary, or even allowable for all the inhabitants of a country, to do honor
to the memory of a great and signal benefactor at his death, how is it to be
done?

I shall, for a very few moments, detain you on this question, and then proceed
to such observations as are more immediately suggested by the occasion upon
which, not only this large assembly, but many others throughout the United
States, are collected together.

And reason, as well as custom and experience teaches us, that peculiarly
eminent and useful men, are to be honored at their death, by a funeral more
sumptuous, and even more expensive than usual. Though this can be no advantage
to the dead, it is but a proper testimony of the respect which the living bear
to their memory. Thus Joseph spared no expense at his father's funeral, but
engaged physicians to embalm the aged patriarch.

It is reasonable also to honor great and eminent men, by making a more than
ordinary public lamentation for them. As the loss which a country sustains,
when such eminent characters are taken away, is truly great, and must be
extensively felt, it is but reasonable that a sensibility of it should be
proportionably expressed.

We are moreover to honor great and useful men at their death, by taking
suitable notice of the great things they have done, and by giving even such a
particular detail of their eminent services, as would be inconvenient during
their lives. When Tabitha, otherwise called Dorcas, died, all the widows, and
such as had been relieved by her beneficence, stood by her weeping, and showing
the coats and garments Dorcas made while she was with them. So, when any very
dear friend is absent, more especially, if he is gone to that bourne from
whence no traveller returns, it is natural for surviv^^^ to dwell with
pleasure, even upon every minute circumstance which has a tendency to endear
his memory. With much greater reason ought a grateful people to recount the
signal services done by one who has been an eminent benefactor, and even a
father to his country; and has led them by the hand through the storms of a
revolution, to the haven of peace and political security; when he himself is
now no more. Truth is to be our guide, and we are not to ascribe to men,
qualifications they did not posses, but just commendations are not to be
withheld, whether it be in set orations, or at other times when their names are
mentioned.

Nor, in honoring signally great and useful men at their deaths, is that
Providence which has raised them up, and made them what they were, to be
overlooked. Man can never be more honored, than when he is considered as a
distinguished instrument for carrying on some important purpose of Providence,
for the welfare and happiness of mankind. That God does raise up, and qualify
men for eminent stations, is a point to which revelation gives testimony. PROVE.
VIII. 15, 16.
By me kings reign, and princes decree judgment. By me princes rule, and
nobles; even all the judges of the earth. PSALM. LXXV. 6, 7.
Promotion comes neither from the east, nor from the west, but God is the judge
himself, he raises up one, and puts down another. Providence furnishes
such instruments with qualifications, suited to the stations in which they are
placed. David ascribes his skill in war to this source. Thou art he who
teaches my hands to war, and my fingers to fight. A bow of steel is broken by
mine arms. He furnishes judges for the bench, generals for the field, and
princes to sway the scepter. He is a spirit of judgment to those who sit in
judgment, and strength to those who turn the battle to the gates. Thus Moses
was raised up for a deliverer, to rescue the children of Israel out of their
Egyptian bondage, as well as for a lawgiver, and leader to guide them through
the wilderness; Joshua was raised up as a general, to conduct them into the
promised land; and the judges and prophets were raised up and qualified for the
particular services assigned them. David was also, by a wonderful train of
providence, taken from the sheepfold and raised up, step by step, until he
became the captain of the Lord's people. I shall only select one instance more
from the sacred records; and that not of one who was a professor of the true
religion. I mean Cyrus, king of Persia, who, besides being otherwise concerned
in bringing about the general plan of Providence, was an instrument in God's
hand, in Israel's return out of the Babylonish captivity. Of him, honorable
mention is made by the prophet long before he was born. (...). XLIV, 26.
That says of Cyrus he is my shepherd, and shall do all my pleasure, saying to
Jerusalem thou shall be built, and to the temple, thy foundation shall be laid.
Chap. XLV, 1
Thus says the Lord to his anointed, to Cyrus, whose right hand I have holden,
to subdue nations before him. Ver. 4.
I have even called thee by thy name, and surnamed thee, tho thou have not known
me. The same Providence is ever watchful still, of which instances might easily
be multiplied; taken both from more ancient and more modern times. But passing
others: Was not the interposition of Providence exceedingly visible, in raising
up our lately beloved, but now sincerely regretted, and lamented WASHINGTON,
and in qualifying him, in a remarkable manner, for his work, as well as in
assisting, and prospering him in it, so as to cause it to be eventually crowned
with success? No greater respect therefore, can be paid to his memory, no
greater honor can be done him at his death, than by ascribing the glory of all
he was and did, to that Providence by which he was raised up.

Great and wise Statesmen and Patriots are to be honored at their death, by
continuing to imitate their example, and to copy after, and practice the wise
maxims of their administration. There is no part of the honor which is justly
due to deceased worthies, who have deserved well of their country, that is so
seldom rendered, and the performance of which is attended with so much
difficulty as this. We may shed many tears, we may form funeral processions, we
may bury their remains with Masonic, with Military, with Christian, and even
with princely honors, or with every honor short of that which is divine; we
may compose funeral dirges, and extol their praises to the clouds in set
orations; we may ascribe to them every human, heroic, patriotic, and princely
virtue, and even such virtues as are above the reach of humanity. But if, at
the same time, their wise political maxims are disregarded, and our councils
yielded up to the influence of party spirit, domestic faction, or foreign
intrigue, we shall contradict our professions, and essentially fail of doing
them honor at their deaths: In such a conduct we will resemble the Scribes and
Pharisees, whom our Lord stigmatizes as hypocrites, because, while they
professed the greatest respect for the dead prophets, by building and
garnishing their sepulchers, they persecuted the living ones. This was a way,
in which the inhabitants of Judah and Jerusalem, soon betrayed the want of a
due regard to the memory of the excellent Hezekiah. The wise, pious, and
patriotic maxims of his excellent reign, were all quickly set aside by an
impious and profligate Manasseh; and the wise counselors, who had stood before
the father, were quickly discarded by the son.

But it is time to proceed to the application of th^se observations, to the
memory of that illustrious personage, that truly great man, who has lately
fallen in our Israel, whose death has made an impression heretofore unknown,
upon the minds of citizens of all ranks and characters in America. Probably, in
some instances, the public demonstrations of sorrow may have been attended with
useless parade, and some of little discernment, may have been more taken up
with the show, than affected with the loss our country has sustained, in being
deprived of one of its most illustrious ornaments: Yet our loss is truly great,
and to make a suitable improvement of it, is the only way to prevent its being
long felt.

Were I fond of panegyric, I probably have no great talents for the subject.
And if I have little ability, I have as little inclination to give flattering
titles unto men. I have frequently turned from funeral eulogies and panegyrics,
with disgust; as being too often, like dedications, composed of a particular
set of praises, which are indiscriminately lavished upon all characters: and
encomiums upon persons of substantial worth are, many times, carried too high.
But on the present occasion, it will naturally be expected that something be
said, and in whatever point of view we contemplate the personage before us, the
subject is copious. I shall not attempt to draw the character of our beloved
WASHINGTON at large. Had I sufficient materials for the task, I must fatigue
both myself and the audience in the delivery, as it must comprise in it a
detail of all his great actions, and must even descend into many of the minute
circumstances of his life. Let this, therefore, be the business of the
professed Biographer. What I shall say upon the present occasion, shall
probably, be no more, nor even so much as has been already, a thousand times,
repeated.

Here, let it be observed, that, as a man and a citizen, in the more private
walks of life, his character has universally been represented as amiable, by
those who were favored with a personal knowledge of him. But it was in his
public character that we, who are so remote from the sphere of his
acquaintance, knew him; as it was this, that formed the endearing connection
between him and his countrymen, and rendered him so universally known, beloved
and esteemed by his fellow citizens of all ranks, and now renders his death so
sincerely regretted and lamented; a very few strictures hereupon is all that I
shall attempt.

And, comparing what he was and did, with the observations made in the
preceding part of our discourse, is it not evident that a distinguishing
Providence raised him up, qualified him, and pointed him out in a peculiar
manner, as an instrument of signal good, as a very singular blessing to his
country, and to mankind. His great and capacious mind possessed talents which,
in early life, began to unfold themselves to public observation. And they were
so far from being of that shewy unsubstantial kind, which promise much, but
commonly disappoint the expectation, that they appear to be always equal to the
occasion which called for their exertion. A quickness of apprehension, a
penetrating judgment, an aptness to foresee, and a prudence to ward off danger
and difficulty, a firmness and decision of character, equal to the execution of
resolutions, judiciously and deliberately taken, and a heart unappalled by
opposing dangers and difficulties; connected with an unshaken regard to the
interests of his country, marked his character in the various steps both of his
civil and military career; and pointed him out as one of the few men, who are
equally great in the cabinet and the field.

The future hero of America was early seen by some discerning minds, in the
gallant youth, who in such a masterly manner, with so much judgment, courage,
and conduct, led the shattered remains of Braddock's broken and defeated army,
from the field of battle. So noticable was his conduct in this and some other
instances, in early life, that the late President Davies, a character well
known to the world by his piety, and valuable writings, after noticing in a
sermon, the manner in which eminent men are trained up by Providence, for
stations of signal usefulness in the defense of their country, adds, by way of
a note -- Sermon preached at Hanover, August 17, 1755, soon after Braddock's
defeat, when the Col. was aged 23.
As a remarkable instance of this, I may point out to the public that heroic
youth Col. WASHINGTON, whom I cannot but hope, Providence has hitherto
preserved in so signal a manner, for some important service to his country.

Had the good man lived to have seen his heroic youth, placed at the head of
the armies of his country, in their virtuous struggle for independence, had he
seen him leading them to victory, and in the issue seen that prophecy literally
fulfilled where it is said, A nation shall be born in a day; had he seen the
conspicuous part he took, in procuring our independence, and beheld the fabric
of our confederated republic, reared up to such a good degree of maturity,
beneath his fostering hand, he would have seen his prediction completely
verified.

In these youthful displays of military courage and skill, our WASHINGTON
resembled the great Gustavus Adolphus of Sweden; an illustrious patriot and
warrior of the last century, who, at the premature age of little more than
eighteen, headed an army, and con-contended with some of the most experienced
generals in Europe, with all the prudence, courage and perseverance, of the
most veteran commander.

But we are to view our WASHINGTON in a still more extensive sphere of activity
and usefulness; when the unanimous voice of his country placed him at the head
of her armies, while she was engaged in that arduous struggle, which terminated
in America's taking a rank among the nations of the world.

To follow him through the various campaigns in which he was engaged, to notice
the numerous, and complicated difficulties with which he had to encounter, in
forming an undisciplined multitude into an army of regular soldiers, in
struggling with a superior force, composed of troops in the highest stage of
discipline, and headed by commanders of the greatest military skill and
experience, while his own, comparatively, feeble band, was frequently in want
of military stores, and disheartened for the lack of pay and clothing, and,
many times, kept together by little else than the respect they had for their
general; I say to enter into a particular detail of these things, and to note
the prudence, and persevering firmness, with which he surmounted the greatest
difficulties, is the business of the historian; and an attempt to comprise it
in the bounds of a single discourse, would be both vain and fruitless. But, so
brightly did our WASHINGTON'S character shine, in the midst of these
difficulties and dangers, as to extort this comprehensive commendation, from
one of the greatest generals and statesmen this century has produced, and one
who from his well known despotic principles, could not be supposed to be
prejudiced in favor of the cause in which he was engaged: I mean the
illustrious Frederick of Prussia. WASHINGTON, says he, is a brave general, his
hand is an army, and his head a council of state.

One instance, in particular, in which, during his military career, this single
man was, under Providence the instrument of saving his country, must not be
passed in silence. I mean his maneuver on the memorable 26th of December 1776.
Many of my hearers remember this, as a period in which the affairs of our
country were in the lowest state of depression. Our armies dispersed, and
almost annihilated, and the shattered remains flying in every direction; every
arm was unnerved, and every heart appalled with fear. Then, with a presence of
mind which never forsook him in times of the greatest danger, he rallied a few
veterans; and, in a stormy and tempestuous night, crossed the Delaware, beat up
the enemies quarters at Trenton, and by afterward following the blow at
Princeton, a new turn was given to our affairs, and a new spirit was infused
into his drooping, and desponding countrymen. These events compared with others
which took place during the war, may seem unimportant, yet, connected as they
are with their consequences, they gave a new turn to our affairs, and, in the
issue, were the means of saving our country.

But we are to contemplate his character in another point of view. We have seen
him at the head of our armies, we are also to view him as the first magistrate
of a free people. When the old confederation, framed in the time of war, was
found by experience to be a bond too feeble to collect the strength of the
several independent states, for national purposes, now no longer held together
by a source of common danger, and a new constitution, better calculated to
concentrate the strength of the whole, was formed under his auspices; he was
called by the unanimous voice of his country, to fill the chair of first
magistrate. Here, contrary to his own feelings and wishes, he again obeyed his
country's call, and launched forth anew into public life. It is not my business
to attempt a detail of the ability and fidelity with which he filled that
important post. The memory of his services will, I trust, be long fresh upon
the minds of his grateful countrymen. And that state of national respectability
to which, as a people, we are risen, under that constitution, cannot fail to
endear the memory of an able, faithful, and successful pilot to the hearts of
his countrymen. I have only to notice that in this important office he was,
once more, the happy instrument of saving his country.

When the flames of revolution began to spread in France, and Americans,
ignorant of the principles and motives of French leaders, and charmed with the
sound of liberty, were, almost to a man, wishing them to be free from the
galling yoke of arbitrary power, and the intrigues of Genet operated like an
electric fluid, upon all corners of the land, and many who seemed to be pillars
were shaken, WASHINGTON'S prudent foresight determined upon a neutral station,
and his firmness was a principal mean of preventing our making a common cause
with France, and launching forth into all the wild career of disorganizing
madness, and of preserving our neutrality, in spite of all open attempts, and
secret intrigues to violate it. Had he, in his official capacity, thrown his
influence into the opposite scale, or, had he been a man of less firmness, and
less weight of character, less able to check the growth of foreign influence,
or the budding of domestic faction, we would, most probably, have been involved
in the horrible vortex of European politics, and, before this day, been in the
degraded, impoverished, and wretched situation of Holland, Switzerland, or
Geneva. But, by a firmness, joined with a spirit of discernment to descry
danger, and a prudent caution in avoiding it, our skillful pilot, under Divine
Providence, has steered the political bark safe, amidst the rocks, shoals, and
quicksands that assailed it.

One or two traits in his character, which appeared conspicuous throughout the
whole of his career, civil and military, deserve still farther notice: And,
among these a disinterested regard to the welfare of his country, a disposition
to sacrifice his own ease and interest for the public welfare, claims the first
place. He fought our battles unpaid, and at the close of the war he retired,
like another Cincinnatus, unpensioned. And, at a time when he might have easily
abandoned a post full of danger, in a manner greatly to his own emolument, and
have risen to eminence upon the spoils of his country, he, like Moses, chose
rather to suffer affliction with his own people, than to secure to himself all
the honors and emoluments, in the gift of the British King. Such was the man
of whom it was, long since, said, that neither British arms could subdue him,
British artifice inveigle him, nor British Gold corrupt him.

A singular manifestation of his disregard to his own emolument, and inviolable
attachment to the interests of his country appeared at the close of the war in
1783; a time when the spoils of his country lay at his feet. It is true, the
United States never made him a formal tender of their liberties, nor an offer
to invest him with sovereign power. But, from the peculiar circumstances which
attended the close of the war; the army discontented for want of pay, and, many
of them, ripe for any enterprise, and, at the same time, having an almost
unbounded attachment to, and placing an unlimited confidence in their general;
had our WASHINGTON been fired with the ambition of a Caesar or a Cromwell, with
the encouragement set before him, which, it is said amounted to an indirect
invitation to make the attempt, he might easily have assumed the title of
Protector, Dictator, or whatever else he chose, with all the insignia of
sovereign authority.

It has been frequently observed that there is nothing of which mankind are so
tenacious, as power; nothing which they will make so great sacrifices to
acquire, and nothing which they will relinquish with so great reluctance. And,
to confirm the remark, almost innumerable are the instances in which successful
commanders have made use of their success, and the influence they had obtained
over the minds of their fellow soldiers, to climb to sovereign authority. But
though our WASHINGTON might have acted without control, he chose rather to live
in the hearts of his fellow citizens, and to resign up his gallant army of
hardy veterans, to the justice, and generosity of his country, which has
afforded them, at least a very tardy recompense for all their toils and
sufferings, than to keep a commission with which he had been entrusted, after
the object for which he received it, had been obtained.

It is true, his conduct in this instance was not altogether singular. A few
are recorded in history who, with a peculiar greatness of mind, sacrificed the
dazzling prospect of advantages, to their country's good. With a noble
disinterestedness did the gallant and successful Gideon reject the offer of
sovereignty in Israel, and was afterward, in his posterity, basely requited by
his ungrateful countrymen. JUDGES VIII. 23, 24.
Then the men of Israel said unto Gideon, rule thou over us, both thou and thy
son, and thy sons son also, for thou have delivered us out of the hand of
Midian. And Gideon said unto them, I will not rule over you, neither shall my
son rule over you, the Lord shall rule over you. And we have an Andrew Dorra in
more modern times, one of the greatest sea Captains of the sixteenth century,
who with a similar greatness of soul, rejected the sovereignty of his native
country Genoa, after delivering it by his arms from the usurped dominion of
France: and who grew old as a private citizen, beloved and respected by his
countrymen, and honored with the title of father of his country, though he
would not be its master. Happy for America that our WASHINGTON resembled these,
and some other worthies of the same stamp, and not the more numerous class, who
are continually grasping after power, and never part with it but with
reluctance.

I have only to add that the same disinterested regard to the welfare of his
country, marked his acceptance of the presidency, which, considering his love
of retirement, and his abundant employment in it, was a manifest sacrifice of
inclination, to duty. And, under a still additional load of declining years,
his accepting, at his country's call, a station subordinate to one he had
formerly held, furnished a fresh evidence of his prefering the public welfare
to his own ease or advantage. And although in his late commission of general,
there was no particular occasion for active services in the field, yet the
readiness with which he obeyed his country's call, and embarked in her cause,
undertaking to face danger at a time when nature needs repose, afforded a fresh
evidence of his disinterested attachment. And as he lived, so he died in the
service of his country.

Another trait in the character of our WASHINGTON, and one which ought to
endear his memory to his country, was his love of peace, and his unremitting
endeavors, during his administration, to procure, and preserve it. This is a
trait of character which is far from being as common as it ought, among great
military personages. But a WASHINGTON never drew his sword only in the defense
of his country, and its dearest rights. And whenever the object for which he
took up arms was obtained, with what heartfelt satisfaction did he sheathe it,
and return to the peaceful duties of a private citizen? The Alexanders, the
Caesar's, and other heroes of antiquity, with their successors and imitators in
more modern times, appeared to delight in blood and carnage. Many heroes,
generals and conquerors, have been reputed great, in proportion as they turned
the world into a desert, and have brought ruin, misery and slavery upon
mankind. Their motives were lawless ambition, and an undue lust after dominion,
to which they could lay no other claim but force. A hero or a conqueror has,
for this reason, been justly accounted a term synonymous with a scourge, and a
curse to mankind. But our WASHINGTON prized the peace and happiness of his
country. The favorite maxim of his administration was, to seek peace and
pursue it, though he would not shrink from a necessary war. This trait in his
character disposed him so assiduously to maintain our neutrality during the
present European contests, which have deluged the eastern world in blood. His
character, therefore, has not improperly been summed up in this comprehensive
manner: First in war; first in peace, and first in the hearts of his countrymen.

Another distinguished trait in his character, if it may not be rather
denominated a singular providence, whereby he was put in a capacity for more
extensive usefulness, was the surprising union of all hearts and voices in his
favor. This was partly owing to his very singular merits and talents, and
partly to a kind Providence in his own and country's behalf. When seeking for a
chief commander to head our armies, every voice pointed to him as the man, and
when a President of the United States was sought for, no other object was
thought of* Perhaps we may ransack the pages of history in vain, to find
another, who, for so long a time, and in such a great variety of trying
circumstances, had such an entire union of all hearts in his favor, and
maintained his popularity unimpaired, and almost unenvied. In all the trying
scenes which he went through, during eight years war, his character was secure,
even against calumny itself. And in the eight years in which he filled the
presidential chair, if we except the feeble attempts of a faction, the dupes of
French intrigue, and whose leaders would sacrifice their country, their
religion, and their God, at the shrine of French liberty, another name for the
most detestable slavery, his character has been unassailed. And these feeble
attempts have tended, in the end, to brighten its luster.

Such are a few traits in the public character of that great man, who has
lately fallen in our Israel. It would be more than falls to the portion of
humanity, to suppose him perfectly free from faults and blemishes. But if there
were failings in his public character, they were as few, and his public virtues
and great talents, as splended and as numerous, as we can reasonably expect to
fall to the lot of a mortal. My design was not to touch upon (...) private
character. This, from every source of information of which we are possessed,
was amiable. His public official character did not lead him to any particular
display of his religious system. Only, in his communications which have come
before the world, we find him frequently urging the necessity and importance of
religion in general, and expressing a firm and unshaken reliance upon
Providence: And, so far as an extensive benevolence to mankind, and integrity
and uprightness of conduct, are evidences of the reality of religion, they were
copied in his life. And that calm fortitude which was ever conspicuous in his
life, did not forsake him in his death.

I shall dismiss this part of my subject with one single observation, viz. That
those virtues which adorn the christian character are not of that splendid
kind, which catch the attention and command the admiration of the world, but
the unostentatious ones, of humility, meekness and selfdenial; and in those
things which are peculiar to christianity, the greatest and the least are all
alike. If the greatest hero or statesman is a christian, it is because he has
those virtues in common with the meanest, and not because he is possessed of
those splendid talents which adorn a public character: Though the most exalted
character cannot fail to derive an additional luster from the impression of the
peculiar christian virtues, on the heart and life.

Such was the man to whom his country, in so many ways, essays to do honor in
his death. But he is gone, and the places which once knew him, shall know him
again no more. Though justly entitled to the appellation of a God upon earth,
in the sense in which that title is applied to magistrates and rulers, he has
died like a common and ordinary man. His dust returns unto dust, and, in a
short time, unless it is by the costly monument that covers it, will be
undistinguishable from that of a common beggar, as a striking monument of the
vanity of every thing that is earthy. We need not invite his grateful
countrymen to honor him at his death, either by a sumptuous funeral, by
lamenting their loss, or by eulogies upon his character and worth. Of this kind
of respect there seems to be no deficiency. The danger is rather, that we shall
exceed, by giving him more honor than either is, or can be due to a mere man.
But there are two ways of honoring him in his death, in which we cannot
exceed, i. e. By continuing to depend upon, and adore that Divine Providence
which raised him up, and made him what h^ was: And by following his example as
a statesman, or by practicing the wise maxims of his administration.

As to his being raised up by Providence, and fitted for the work to which he
was called by his country; he was as truly so as Moses, Joshua, Gideon, David,
Samuel and others, though not precisely in the same manner. And we never can
pay a greater tribute to his memory, than by ascribing the glory of all he was
and did, to the supreme first cause. If we have seen him the enlightened
statesman, the great and successful commander, or the patriotic, virtuous
citizen, we have seen him just that in himself, and to his country, which the
all-wise disposer of events was pleased to make him, and to his name be the
glory. And the same Divine Providence can raise up other instruments, equally
qualified, whenever they are needed.

As to imitating his example, or copying after the wise maxims of his
administration, to mention no more, his farewell address upon his declining a
reelection to the presidency, is a political legacy of inestimable value, the
wise maxims of which ought never to be out of view; particularly that part of
it, which relates to foreign influence, and foreign connections.

Lycurgus, the famous lawgiver of Sparta, in order to give perpetuity to his
laws, withdrew from his country, professedly only for a time, and exacted an
oath of his fellow citizens, that they would make no alteration in his laws
till his return. But, instead of returning, he went into voluntary exile, and,
at his death, ordered his remains to be thrown into the sea, lest they should
be carried back to Sparta, and the citizens should think themselves thereby
absolved from the obligation of their oath.

If a method equally efficacious could be adopted, to render the wise maxims of
our WASHINGTON perpetual, particularly so far as they relate to foreign
influence, and foreign connections, the bane of all free states, it would be
happy for our country. Disconnected as she is, by nature, situation and
interest, from the other quarters of the globe, America needs a political
connection with no nation under heaven, nor can such a connection ever be any
thing else than a public curse. And as for mercantile connections, they ought
to be extended indiscriminately to all nations, so far as they are supported by
mutual advantage, the only bond of connection between nations, and no farther:
Whenever therefore, the time shall come in which foreign influence shall guide
our councils, it matters not whether it is French or British, Austrian or
Russian, Dutch or Spanish; and we shall enter, with spirit, into all the
intrigues, cabals, and quarrels of European nations: If ever the time comes
when, forgetting the dignity of our own national character, we shall be divided
into French and British factions, we may bid adieu to our peace, prosperity,
and even independence as a nation.

A melancholy proof of the deleterious effect of foreign influence, to the
peace, happiness, and independence of a nation, may be seen in illfated Poland.
Poland, which, if inhabited by an enlightened, free, and independent people, is
calculated by nature and situation, to be one of the fairest portions of
Europe. But Poland was a prey to foreign influence. She had her Russian,
Prussian, Austrian and French factions: She had also her religious factions;
armed against each other with all the animosity of party zeal. And what was the
consequence? She was first desolated by a civil war, then dismembered of some
of her fairest provinces, and, by the late partition, she ceases to be an
independent nation. If ever America becomes a prey to foreign influence, and is
doomed to such a curse, a partition of her fair inheritance may, one day,
compromise a quarrel between Britain, France, or some other European powers.
Let us therefore honor our deceased WASHINGTON, who, though dead yet speaks,
in his excellent parental advices; and consult our own happiness and national
prosperity, by bearing in mind, and steadily practicing these excellent maxims
of his administration.

While we express our sensibility for the loss of a WASHINGTON, we ought not to
forget to pay a just tribute of respect to other illustrious characters, who
have deserved well of their country, and who have lately finished their earthly
course; and whose memories ought to live in the breasts of their fellow
citizens. The year 1799 has been uncommonly mortal among illustrious
characters. To mention a few: This commonwealth has lost an enlightened
statesman, and illustrious patriot; a man who was justly considered an ornament
to his country, in our late excellent Governor SUMNER: Pennsylvania has lost
her MIFFLIN, the late governor of the state; a man heretofore well esteemed,
both as a statesman and military commander: Virginia has lost a statesman, and
a patriot of distinguished worth, in her late Governor, PATRICK HENRY: Maryland
has, likewise, lost a distinguished character, sometimes governor, of the same
name. South Carolina has lost her Governor RUTLEDGE, a man who has long been
considered as one of her most illustrious citizens: And the Supreme Federal
Bench has lost two of its ornaments, by the deaths of an IREDELL, and PACA: And
to close the scene, the whole continent has suffered a loss still greater in
her WASHINGTON.

Such an uncommon mortality among illustrious characters, in so short a time,
is an event which but rarely happens; and when it falls out, is one which calls
for the most serious attention. Frequently such a dispensation has been the
forerunner of some signal calamity. Good men are removed out of the reach of
evils they cannot avert. ISA. LVII. 1.
The righteous perishes, (faith the word of inspiration*) and no man lays it
to heart; and merciful men are taken away, none considering that the righteous
is taken away from the evil to come. There was a most signal calamity
threatened upon Judah and Jerusalem, by the Prophets, in these words: ISAI.
III. 1, 2, 3, 4.
For behold the Lord, the Lord of hosts, does take away from Judah and
Jerusalem, the stay and the staff. The mighty man, and the man of war, the
judge and the prophet, the prudent and the ancient, the captain of fifty, and
the honorable man, and the counselor; and the cunning artificer, and the
eloquent orator. And I will give children to be their princes, and strangers
shall rule over them. Children not in age, but in knowledge, and political
foresight. Two or three instances we may select from scripture, wherein the
deaths of eminently great and good men, were followed with signal calamities to
the nation, viz. The deaths of good Hezekiah, the subject of our text, and of
his great grandson, the singularly virtuous and pious Josiah, who was slain in
the valley of Megiddo; and the death of Jehoiada the priest, who was such a
great benefactor to the nation, and such a faithful counselor to Joash. At
these several periods the nation appears to have been ripe for scourge, and to
deserve to be punished with the wickedness of Manasseh, and of Josiah's sons,
and the folly of Joash, rather than be blessed with the virtue, piety, and
wisdom of Hezekiah or Josiah, and the prudent counsels of the aged and wise
Jehoiada. God, therefore, gave them princes in his anger, and subjected them to
a throne of iniquity, which established mischief by a law.

But we would wish to deprecate deserved judgments, and hope for better things
in the present instance. Perhaps Providence may have a different purpose in
view. Perhaps it may be to teach us the vanity, and even folly of placing too
great dependence upon any instrument whatsoever; or of thinking more highly of
a fellow worm, of mere dust and ashes, than we ought to think. God's hand is,
by no means shortened, that he cannot save. And when determined to save a
people, instruments can never be wanting for that purpose. He can raise up
WASHINGTONS without number, when either the advancement of his own glory, or
the happiness of a people, whom he delights to save, shall require it. So long
as we are a people favored of heaven, we never shall be wanting in leaders,
either to head our troops in the field, if necessary, or to guide the helm, in
the most intricate affairs of state. Such instruments, we trust, are not
wanting at present. Though a WASHINGTON is gone we have an ADAMS left, and when
he shall have served his generation as long as Providence sees meet, he by whom
kings reign, and who is a spirit of judgment to those who sit in judgment,
can, and probably will raise up, and qualify others in succession, equally
great and good, and make them blessings equally eminent in their day and
generation, as a Joshua succeeded Moses, and Eleazer succeeded Aaron, and
Solomon filled the throne of his father David.

There are, it is true, particular seasons, which sometimes occur, in which the
death of even one great and eminent man, may justly be considered as a very
singular calamity. As, when he is taken away at a time in which the success of
a cause, great and important to the happiness of mankind, depends, in a great
measure, upon a single life. But, even then, such instruments are sometimes
taken away, merely to show us the vanity of creature dependence. A striking
instance of this kind we see in that singularly great and good man, Gustavus
Adolphus, king of Sweden, commonly called Gustavus the second. His amazing
abilities, both in the cabinet and the field, pointed him out, as a fit
instrument to place at the head of the protestant league, at a very critical
time, for opposing the tyrannical, and seemingly irresistible encroachments of
the house of Austria, against both the civil and religious liberties of the
protestants in Germany. And the event fully testified the choice they had made.
He was the principal cement, and even soul of the confederacy. Success attended
nearly all his enterprises. But, at a critical moment, when the force of the
confederacy seemed to rest on his single life, and, in the midst of a career of
victory, he met the fatal bullet on the field of battle, on the plains of
Lutgen, at the premature age of thirty eight. But, though a universal
consternation spread over one half of Europe, and the other half rejoiced at
his death, yet the cause did not die with him. The plan of the confederacy had
been so happily laid, and so well cemented, and such able instruments survived
him, who had been trained up under so great a master, as completed the work he
had so happily begun; God by this dispensation, probably giving a practical
lesson to the world, not to lay too much dependence upon any one mere man,
however eminently great and good.

Our WASHINGTON has, it is true, been taken away in a citical time, a time when
his services were highly necessary to his country, to unite her divided
councils, in the system of defensive opposition to the unjust encroachments of
France; as well as by the weight of his character, to check the progress, and
counteract the baneful effects of foreign influence. At a time when his country
seemed to need, and his athletic constitution, though in an advanced age, to
promise a longer continuance of his services. Yet, in many respects, his death
cannot be called premature. He was spaired, not only till his military command
had been conducted to a successful termination, by an honorable peace, and the
establishment of our independence, but also, till he had conducted the
political bark so far, that we had grown up to a good degree of national
respectability, and till he had arrived at a good old age. Instead, therefore,
of regretting that he was mortal, and that, when he had served his generation,
he died like a common ordinary man, let grateful America express their
thankfulness to him by whom kings reign, that such a distinguished character
was raised up at a critical time, that he was, by Providence, so well qualified
for the great undertaking in which we have seen him engaged, that he was
spaired so long, even till his work was completed, and his endeavors for the
good of his country crowned with success, and that the cause of liberty and
America still lives. While we cease from man whose breath is in his nostrils,
let us trust in the Lord forever; for in the Lord there is everlasting
strength. Our WASHINGTON has already done as much for us, as we could
rationally expect from a mere man. And, unless we are disposed to attribute
part of the glory to a creature, which is justly due to the God of armies, why
should we desire more?

I cannot dismiss the subject without making one single remark more, which
appears to be suggested by that passage of sacred history, chosen as the
foundation of our present discourse. Hezekiah slept with his fathers, and
Manasseh his son, reigned in his stead. A most wicked profligate son, of a most
pious, virtuous, and illustrious father. Hezekiah appears as a bright shining
sun, between two very black clouds, Ahaz and Manasseh. Hereditary succession
frequently subjects nations to evils of this kind. It paves the way for sudden
transitions from the best to the worst of Princes. Where hereditary succession
is considered as essential to the established government of a nation, it
happens, and that not seldom, that both children and babes in a literal sense,
as well as children in knowledge, and experience, though full grown men in all
the vices which tarnish degenerate human nature, are given to nations to be
their princes; and strangers to their country's true interests, as well as to
the feelings of humanity, sway the scepter.

Tho the world has, at different times, been blessed with numbers of excellent
princes, who have been nursing fathers to their country, b^^h knowing and
steadily pursuing its true interests; and who, for beneficence, have resembled
the Sun when it breaks forth from under a cloud* and shines in its full
strength; yet a complete history of all the illustrious madmen, who under the
name, and in the character of Princes, have sported with the lives and
liberties of mankind, and have cast about firebrands, arrows and death, in
short, would chill the blood with horror.

The education which hereditary princes receive, previous to their arriving at
supreme power in the state, is, frequently, but little calculated to cultivate
those principles, either of the understanding or heart, which are necessary to
make wise and virtuous rulers. Born with the expectation of a throne, they
consider it as their natural inheritance, which must descend to them of course,
whether they possess one single qualification for it or no, they are hereby
deprived of one very powerful stimulous to excel. For if we consider human
nature to be the same in them, that it is in other men, they are, certainly,
under very strong temptations to neglect the cultivation of their
understandings. Being nursed up in the idea of their natural superiority to
other men, it is not to be wondered at, if, many times, they rather consider
the nation as their property, than their promotion as given them for the good
of the nation. And being frequently, from their early infancy, surrounded with
crowds of flatterers, who treat even their vices and foibles with every degree
of deference and indulgence, in expectation of future favors, can it be
thought strange, that, many times, they should rather abuse, than make a right
use of that authority with which they are clothed?

In limited Monarchies, even the virtues and talents of a sovereign, may be,
sometimes, dangerous to the liberties of a people. A sensible British writer,
whom I can quote only from memory and, probably, not with any considerable
degree of exactness, has an observation much to our present purpose, which may
apply to other nations as well as Britain. Whenever a prince of great
abilities, singular virtues, and such eminently popular talents as shall unite
all hearts in his favor, shall fill the throne of Great Britain, I tremble for
the liberties of my country. Tho Britons are possessed of sufficient resolution
and energy to defend their liberties, against any open encroachments of
Arbitrary power, yet they may be easily seduced by the bewitching glare of
popularity, to surrender those prerogatives to a prince, of singularly eminent
talents and virtues, which may prove a rod of iron in the hand of a successor,
of an opposite character. A singular instance of the danger of the popular
virtues of a sovereign to the liberties of a free people, we have in the famous
Gustavus Vasa, commonly called Gustavus the first, the noted Swedish hero of
the sixteenth century, who singly projected, and after surmounting an infinity
of difficulties, the bare recital of which, were they not sufficiently
attested, would stagger belief, effected the deliverance of his country from
the cruel, and tyrannical yoke of Denmark. Having delivered his native land
from a galling foreign yoke, he was chosen, first administrator, and soon
after, king of Sweden. His country after having had such large experience of
his incomparable abilities, and eminent virtues, loaded him with every honor
that a grateful people could bestow; and made such daily, and gradual additions
to his prerogative, that he became, in a manner, an absolute prince. Such was
the wisdom, justice, and energy of his administration, tempered with mildness
and benevolence; and so steadily, and uniformly, were all the measures of his
administration; directed to that object which is the ultimate end of all good
government, viz. the prosperity and happiness of his people, that the happy
Swedes felt no inconvenience from his extensive, and almost unlimited
authority. But when his successor, without his talents, and without his
virtues, claimed his extensive prerogative, Sweden was well nigh reduced to
slavery, which it avoided only by wading through the horrors of a civil war, in
which the son, and immediate successor of the great Gustavus, was justly
expelled from that throne which he had debased, but which his worthy father had
so dearly purchased, so richly merited, and filled with such dignity. Happy
America, if she but knew, and duly estimated her privileges; in being favored
with an elective, instead of an hereditary government.

A late celebrated traveller, (Margrave of Baden,) speaking of some one of the
German Principalities, I forget which, takes notice of the singular happiness
and prosperity of the people of that principality, which was chiefly owing to
the virtues and talents of the reigning Prince, and contrasts it with the
depression and misery of the people, under princes of an opposite character,
closes his remarks with this judicious observation. Such a prince is really a
public blessing, and that people are singularly fortunate who live under such a
government. But much more fortunate are they whose liberties are protected by
the government of their country, independent of the good and in spite of the
evil qualities of reigning princes. Dr. MOORE'S View of Society and Manners in
France, etc. etc Vol. 1. Page 186.


I confess that for myself, I have sometimes indulged the thought, that it was
not a disagreeable event for his country, that our late illustrious and beloved
chief had no natural heirs, lest that, in time, the high respect which was so
justly paid to the father, might upon the father's account rather than on
account of any distinguishing virtues in the son, descend to his posterity. But
happy is it for America that her liberties rest upon a firmer basis, than to
depend upon the virtues and talents of any single man, though it were even a
WASHINGTON. Nor are we exposed to have them wrested from us, by, either the
artifice, ambition, or wickedness, of an individual, till we deserve to loose
them. But, when the time comes in which, by our vices we shall forfeit the
protection of heaven, and by our faction and disunion, shall sap the
foundations of our own strength, then we will deserve to be slaves; and some
fortunate, and factious demagogue, aided by a military force, may mount into
the seat of supreme authority, and prostrate the liberties of his country under
his feet. To effect such a change as this, when we shall be ripe for it, a
Caesar; a Cromwell or a Buonaparte, will not be wanting. But if public and
private virtues shall continue to be cultivated, and the sacred principles of
genuine religion and morality treated with due attention: If vice and
immorality of every kind could be universally checked and discouraged, if
knowledge shall continue to be diffused, and even increase among all ranks of
our citizens; if the fundamental principles of our free republican
constitution, continue to be duly respected; if the seeds of faction and
disunion, might be eradicated, and harmony established among the various
departments; if foreign influence, the bane of all free states, could be
completely banished, and virtue and talents principally respected, in the
advancement of men to places of important public trust, -- May we not entertain
a hope, that, through tho kindness of indulgent heaven, future WASHINGTONS will
be raised up as our necessities may require, and that the fair fabric of
American liberty will descend unimpaired to the latest posterity.

FINIS.

