CONVENTION, BETWEEN THE FRENCH REPUBLIC AND THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA;
SIGNED AT PARIS, SEPTEMBER 3d, 1800, BY THE RESPECTIVE PLENIPOTENTIARIES OF THE
TWO NATIONS.

Printed and Sold by T. C. CUSHING, Salem.

Convention BETWEEN THE FRENCH REPUBLIC AND THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA.
THE First Consul of the French Republic, in the name of the French People, and
the President of the United States of America, equally animated with a desire
to put an end to the differences which have arisen between the two States, have
respectively nominated their Plenipotentiaries, and invested them with full
powers to negoti^^^ upon these differences, and terminate them: That is to say,
the First Consul of the French Republic, in the name of the French People, has
nominated for Plenipotentiaries of the said Republic, the Citizens Joseph
Bonaparte, Ex-Ambassador of the French Republic at Rome, and Counselor of
State; Charles-Pierre Claret-Fleurieu, Member of the National Institute, and of
the Office of Longitude of France, and Counselor of State, President of the
Section of Marine; and Pierre-Louis Roederer, Member of the National Institute,
and Counselor of State, President of the Section of the Interior; and the
President of the United States of America, by and with the advice and consent
of the Senate of said States, has appointed for their Plenipotentiaries, Oliver
Ellsworth, Chief Justice of the United States, William Richardson Davie,
^i-devant Governor of North Carolina, and William Vans Murray, Resident
Minister of the United States at the Hague:

Who, after having exchanged their full powers, and patiently and carefully
discussed their respective interests, have agreed to the following articles:

ARTICLE I. There shall be a firm, inviolable and universal peace, and true and
sincere friendship, between the French Republic and the United States of
America, as well between their countries, territories, cities and places, as
between their citizens and inhabitants, without exception of persons or places.

II. The Ministers Plenipotentiary of the two parties, not being empowered at
present to agree relative to the treaty of alliance of the 6th of February,
1778, to the treaty of friendship and commerce of the same date, and to the
convention of the 14th of November, nor to the indemnities mutually due and
claimed, the parties shall further negotiate upon these points at a convenient
time; and until they shall be agreed upon these points, the said treaties and
convention shall have no effect, and the relations of the two nations shall be
regulated as follows:

III. The ships belonging to the State taken on either side, or which may be
taken before the exchange of ratifications, shall be given up.

IV. The properties captured and not yet definitively condemned, or which may
be captured before the exchange of ratifications, except contraband merchandise
destined for an enemy's port, shall be mutually restored upon the following
proofs of property, viz.

On the one part, and on the other, the proofs of property relative to merchant
vessels, armed or unarmed, shall be a passport in the following form:

To all those to whom these presents shall come, be it known, that power and
permission has been given to --, Master or Commander of the vessel called the
--, of the city of --, of the burden of -- tons, or thereabouts, now lying in
the port or harbor of --, and destined for --, laden with --, that after his
ship has been visited, and before his departure, he shall make oath, before
officers authorized for that purpose, that the said ship belongs to one or more
subjects of --, the execution of which form shall be annexed to these presents,
in order that he may observe and cause to be observed by his crew the maritime
ordinances and regulations, and give in a list signed and attested, containing
the names and surnames, places of birth and abode, of the persons composing the
crew of his ship, and of all on board her, whom he shall not receive on board
without the knowledge and permission of the officers authorized for that
purpose; and in every port and harbor where he shall enter with his ship, he
shall show the present permission to the proper officers, and make to them a
faithful report of all that has passed during his voyage, and carry the
colors, arms and flags of the French Republic or the United States, during his
said voyage: In testimony of which we have signed these presents, caused them
to be countersigned by --, and thereunto put the seal of our arms.

"Given at --, in the year of our Lord --.

And this passport shall be sufficient without any other document,
notwithstanding any regulation to the contrary.

It shall not be necessary to renew or revoke this passport, whatever number of
voyages the said ship shall have made, unless they shall not have returned home
within the space of a year.

With respect to the cargo, the proofs shall be certificates, containing an
account what place the ship has left, and where it is going to, so that
prohibited and contraband merchandise may be distinguished by certificates,
which certificates shall have been made by the officers of the place from
whence the ship shall have set out, agreeable to the accustomed forms of the
country. And if these passports or certificates, or both, shall have been
destroyed by accident, or taken away by force, the want of them shall be
supplied by every other proof of property admissible according to the general
usage of nations.

For other ships besides merchant ships, the proof shall be the commissions
they bear. This article shall take effect from the date of the signature of the
present Convention; and if by the date of the said signature property shall
have been condemned contrary to the spirit of the said Convention, and previous
to the knowledge of this stipulation, the property so condemned shall be
restored or paid for.

V. The debts contracted by either of the two nations toward the individuals
of each shall be acquitted, or the payment shall be in course, as if there had
been no misunderstanding between the two states; but this clause shall not
extend to indemnities, claimed for captures or condemnations.

VI. The trade between the two parties shall be free; the ships of the two
nations, and their privateers, as well as their prizes, shall be treated in
their respective ports as those of the most favored nation; and in general the
two parties shall enjoy in each other's ports, with respect to commerce and
navigation, the same privileges as the most favored nations.

VII. The citizens and inhabitants of the United States may dispose by will,
donation, or otherwise, of their goods, moveable and immovable property,
possessed in the European territory of the French Republic; and the citizens of
the French Republic shall have the same power with regard to the goods,
moveable and immovable property, possessed in the territory of the United
States, in favor of such persons as they shall think proper. -- The citizens
and inhabitants of one of the two States, who shall be heirs of the goods,
moveable or immovable property situate in the other, may succeed ab intestat,
without there being any necessity for letters of neutrality, and without the
effect of this stipulation being contested or impeached under any pretense
whatever; and the said heirs, whether by private right, or ab intestat, shall
be exempt from all right whatever of any one in either of the two nations. It
is agreed, that this article shall not derogate in any manner from the laws
which are now in force, in either of the two nations, or which may be
promulgated hereafter against emigration; and also, that in case the laws of
either of the two states shall limit to foreigners the exercise of the right of
immovable property, such immovable property may be sold, or otherwise
disposed of, in favor of the inhabitants or citizens of the country where they
shall be situate; and it shall be open to the other nation to establish similar
laws.

VIII. To favor the commerce of both nations, it is agreed, that if war (which
God forbid) should break out between the two nations, the merchants and other
citizens, or respective inhabitants, shall be allowed on both sides six months
after the declaration of war; during which period they shall have time to
retire, with their effects and movables, which they may carry away, or sell,
as they shall think proper, without the least impediment; their effects, and
still less their persons, shall not, during the period of six months, be
seized. On the contrary, they shall have passports, which shall be valid for
the time necessary to enable them to return home, and those passports shall be
given for themselves, as well as for their ships and effects which they shall
desire to take or send away. These passports shall serve as protections against
all insults and all captures on the part of privateers, as well with regard to
themselves as their effects; and if within the term above mentioned there shall
have been committed by one of the parties, its citizens, or inhabitants, any
wrong toward their persons or their property, they shall have complete
satisfaction.

IX. The debts due by individuals of one of the two nations to the individuals
of the other shall not, in case of war or national dispute, be sequestered or
confiscated, no more than the claims or funds which shall be found in the
public funds, or in the public or private banks.

X. The two contracting parties may nominate for the protection of trade
Commercial Agents, who shall reside in France and the United States. Each of
the parties may accept such place as it shall judge proper, where the residence
shall be fixed. Before any agent can exercise his functions, he must be
accepted according to the received forms of the party to which he is sent, and
when he shall be received and provided with his exequatur, he shall enjoy the
rights and prerogatives which are enjoyed by similar agents of the most
favored nations.

XI. The citizens of the French Republic shall not pay, in any ports, harbors,
roads, countries, islands, cities and places of the United States, other or
greater duties or imposts, of what nature soever they may be, and whatever
names they may have, than those which the most savoured nations are, or shall
be bound to pay; and they shall enjoy all rights, liberties, privileges,
immunities, and exemptions, relating to trade, navigation, and commerce,
whether in passing from one part of the said states to another, or whether in
going there or returning from some part to any part of the world, that the said
nations enjoy, or shall enjoy; and reciprocally the citizens of the United
States shall enjoy in the territory of the French Republic, in Europe, the same
privileges, and immunities, as well for their goods as their persons, as for
what concerns trade, navigation, and commerce.

XII. The citizens of the two nations may conduct their vessels and their
merchandises (always excepting such as are contraband) from any port to another
belonging to the enemy of the other nation. They may navigate and commerce with
full liberty and security, with their ships and merchandises, in the countries,
ports, and places of the enemies of the two parties, or of the one or the other
party, without obstacles or interruption, and not only pass directly from the
places and ports of the enemy abovementioned to neutral ports and places, but
from every place belonging to an enemy, whether it be or be not subject to the
same jurisdiction, unless those places or ports shall be really blockaded,
besieged, or invested.

And in case, as it often happens, when vessels shall be sailing for places or
ports belonging to an enemy, ignorant that they are blockaded, besieged, or
invested, it is agreed that every ship which shall be found under such a
predicament shall be turned from that place or port without any part of its
cargo being retained or confiscated (unless it shall be contraband, or it shall
be proved that the said ship, after having been informed of the blockade or
investiture, attempted to enter the same port) but it shall be allowed to go to
any other port or place it shall think proper. No ship of either nation,
entered in a port or place before it shall have been really blockaded,
besieged, or invested by the other, shall be prevented from going out with its
cargo: If it shall be there when the said place shall surrender, the ship and
cargo shall not be confiscated, but sent away to the proprietors.

XIII. To regulate what shall be understood by contraband warlike stores, under
this denomination shall be comprised powder, saltpetre, petards, matches,
balls, bullets, bombs, grenades, carcasses, pikes, halberts, swords, belts,
pistols, scabbards, saddles, harness, cannon, mortars, with their carriages,
and generally all arms and ammunitions of war and utensils for the use of
troops. All the above articles, whenever they shall be destined for an enemy's
port, are declared contraband, and justly subject to confiscation: but the ship
in which they shall be laden, as well as the rest of the cargo, shall be
considered as free, and shall in no manner be vitiated by the contraband
merchandise, whether they belong to the same or different proprietors.

XIV. It is stipulated by the present treaty, that the free ships shall equally
assure the liberty of merchandise, and that all things shall be deemed free,
which are found on board ships belonging to the citizens of one of the
contracting parties, even though the same, or part of it, shall belong to the
enemies of one of the two; provided, nevertheless, that contraband goods are
always excepted. It is likewise agreed, that this same liberty shall extend to
persons who may be on board the free ship, though they should be enemies of one
of the two contracting parties, and they shall not be taken from the said free
ships, unless they are in a military capacity* and actually in the service of
the enemy.

XV. It is on the contrary agreed, that all property which shall be put, by the
respective citizens, on board ships belonging to an enemy of either party, or
their subjects, shall be confiscated without distinction of merchandise,
prohibited or not prohibited, so and in like manner as if it belonged to an
enemy, with the exception always of property and effects which shall have been
put on board the said ships before the declaration of war, or even after the
said declaration, if at the time of l^ding the party were ignorant of it; so
that the merchandises of citizens of the two parties, whether they be in the
number of contraband or not, which as has been already said, shall have been
put on board a ship belonging of an enemy before the war, or even after the
said declaration of war, in ignorance of it, shall not be in any manner subject
to confiscation, but shall be faithfully and truly given up without delay to
the owners claiming them, provided nevertheless that they shall not be
permitted to carry into the enemies ports merchandise which shall be
contraband. The two contracting powers agree, that after a term of two months
has passed from the declaration, their respective citizens, in whatever part of
the world they may be, shall not be at liberty to plead the ignorance mentioned
in this article.

XVI. Merchant vessels belonging to citizens of either of the contracting
powers, when they shall have a mind to pass to the port of an enemy of the one
or the other, and that their voyage as well as the nature of their cargo, shall
afford just cause of suspicion, the said ship shall be obliged to exhibit at
high sea, as well as in ports and roads, not only their passports, but further
their certificates, proving that these goods are not of the class of contraband
specified in the 13th article of the present convention.

XVII. And in order to prevent captures on frivolous suspicions, and the damage
thus resulting, it is agreed, that when one of the two powers shall be at war,
and the other neutral, the vessels of the neutral party shall be provided with
passport similar to those specified in the 4th article, so that it may thence
appear that the parties belongs to a neutral party. These passports shall be
valid for any number of voyages whatever; but they shall be renewed every year,
if the ship returns home within the space of a year. If these ships are laden,
they shall be provided not only with the passports abovementioned, but also
with certificates of the description of those mentioned in the same article, so
that it may be known whether they have on board contraband goods. No other
paper shall be required, all usages and regulations to the contrary
notwithstanding; and if it should appear from these certificates that there is
not contraband merchandise on board, the said ships shall be left to pursue
their destination. If, on the contrary, it should appear from these
certificates that the said ships have contraband merchandise on board, and the
Commander offers to deliver them up, the offer shall be accepted, and the ship
left at liberty to prosecute her voyage, unless the quantity of contraband
goods should be too great to admit of taking on board the ship of war or
cruiser; in this case the ship shall be carried into port for the purpose of
there delivering the said goods.

Should a ship be found without the passports or the certificates above
required, the business shall be examined by competent judges or tribunals; and
if it should appear from other documents or proofs, admissible by the law of
nations, that the ship belongs to citizens of the neutral power, it shall not
be condemned, and it shall be set at liberty with its cargo, contraband goods
excepted, and shall have leave to prosecute its voyage.

Should the Captain named in the passport, happen to die or be removed, and
another shall have been appointed in his place, the ship and cargo shall be
nevertheless secure, and the passport shall remain in full force.

XVIII. If the vessels belonging to citizens of the one nation or the other
shall be met along the coast, or on the high seas, by any ship of war or
cruizer belonging to the other, to prevent all disorder, the said ships or
cruisers shall keep beyond the reach of cannon shot, and shall send their boat
on board the merchant vessel so met with. They shall not be allowed to send on
board more than two or three men to demand from the master or Captain of the
ship the exhibition of his passport concerning the property of said ship,
executed agreeable to the form prescribed in the 4th article, as also the
certificates above mentioned relative to the cargo. It is expressly agreed that
the neutral Captain shall not be obliged to go on board the visiting ship for
the purpose of there showing the papers demanded, or for any other information
whatever.

XIX. It is expressly agreed by the parties, that the above stipulations
relative to the conduct to be observed at sea by the cruisers of the
belligerent party toward the vessels of the neutral party shall apply only to
ships sailing without convoy; and in case, when the said ships shall be
convoyed, the intention of the parties being to observe all the respect due to
the protection of the flag hoisted on board ships of the state, no visit shall
be made. But the verbal declaration of the Commander of the escort, that the
ships under his convoy belong to the nation whose flag he carries, and that
they have not any thing contraband on board, shall be taken by the respective
cruisers as amply sufficient. The two parties bind themselves reciprocally not
to admit under protection of their convoys any vessels carrying contraband
merchandise destined for an enemy.

XX. In case when the ships shall be taken or stopped, under alleged grounds of
their carrying any contraband articles to the enemy, the captor shall give a
receipt of the ship's papers which he shall detain, which receipt shall be
subjoined to a declaratory list of the said papers. He shall not be permitted
to force open the hatches, coffers, chests, drawers, bales, etc. found on board
ships, nor to carry off the smallest article of the effects, before the cargo
has been disembarked in presence of the officers competent to make an inventory
of the said effects. They cannot in any manner be sold, exchanged, or
alienated, unless, after a legal process, the competent judge or judges have
passed upon the said effects a sentence of confiscation (excepting always the
ship and the other objects that it contains.)

XXI. In order that the vessel and the cargo may be watched with care, and in
order to prevent mistakes, it is decreed that the master, captain or supercargo
of the captured ship cannot be taken from on board, either while the ship is at
sea, after being taken, during the proceedings against it, its cargo, or any
thing relative to it.

In case of the ship belonging to either party being taken, seized, and
retained for judgment, its officers, passengers and crews shall be treated with
humanity; they cannot be imprisoned nor robbed of their clothes or pocket
money, not exceeding for the captain, supercargo, and second, five hundred
dollars each, and for the sailors and passengers, one hundred dollars each.

XXII. It is moreover agreed on, that in every case the tribunals appointed for
prize causes in the countries whither the prizes shall be taken, shall alone be
competent to try them; and every judgment which the tribunal of either party
pronounces against a ship, or merchandise, or property reclaimed by the
citizens of the other party, the sentence or decree shall make mention of the
reasons or motives which have determined this judgment, of which an authentic
copy, as well as of all the proceedings relative to it, shall, on their
requisition, be delivered without delay to the captain or agent of the said
ship, after paying the expenses.

XXIII. And finally, in order more effectually to provide for the respective
security of the citizens of the two contracting parties, and to prevent the
injuries to be feared from ships of war or privateers of either party, all the
commanders of ships of war or privateers, and all the citizens of both parties,
shall refrain from all violence against one another, and from every personal
insult. If they act in a contrary manner they shall be punished, and bound over
in their persons and properties to give satisfaction and reparation for the
damage, with interest, of whatever kind the said damage may be.

To this effect all the captains of privateers, before receiving their
commissions, shall become bound before a competent judge, to give security by
two responsible cautions at least, who shall have no interest in the said
privateer, and whom each, as well as the captain, shall engage individually for
the sum of 7,000 dollars, or 36,820 francs, if the said vessels carry more than
150 sailors or soldiers, for the sum of 15,000 dollars, or 73,670 francs, which
shall serve to repair the damage that the said privateers, their officers, or
crews, or any of them, shall have committed during their cruise contrary to the
dispositions of the present convention, or to the laws and instructions which
ought to be the rule of their conduct; besides this, the said commission shall
be revoked and annulled in every case where an aggression has been committed.

XXIV. When the ships of war of the two contracting parties, or those which
their citizens shall have armed, shall be admitted with their prizes into the
ports of either of the two parties, the said public or private vessels, as well
as their prizes, shall not be obliged to pay any duties, either to the officers
of the place, or to the judges, or to any others. The said prizes entering in
the harbors or ports of one of the two parties, shall not be arrested or
seized, and the officers of the place shall not take cognizance of the validity
of the said prizes, which are to be suffered to go out, and be conducted with
full freedom and liberty to their ports, by the commissions which the captains
of the said vessels shall be obliged to show. It is always understood, that the
stipulations of this article shall not extend beyond the privileges of the most
favored nations.

XXV. All foreign privateers having commissions from a State or Prince at war
with one or other nation cannot arm their vessels in the ports of either
nation, or dispose of their prizes there, or in any manner exchange them. --
They shall not be allowed to buy provisions further than the necessary quantity
to gain the nearest port of the State or Prince from whom they shall have
received their commissions.

XXVI. It is further agreed that neither of the two contracting parties shall
receive pirates in its ports, roads, or cities, and shall not permit any of its
inhabitants to receive, protect, support or conceal them in any manner, but
shall deliver up to due punishment such of its inhabitants as shall be guilty
of the like acts or crimes: the ships of those pirates, as well as their
effects and merchandise, shall be seized wherever they shall be discovered, and
restored to their proprietors, agents or factors, duly authorized by them,
after having proved their right before judges competent to decide respecting
the property.

If the said effects have passed by sale into other hands, and the purchasers
were or might be informed, or have suspected, that the said effects were
carried away by pirates, they shall be equally restored.

XXVII. Neither of the two nations shall interfere in the fisheries of the
other upon its coasts, nor disturb it in the exercise of the rights which it
now has, or may acquire, on the coasts of Newfoundland, in the Gulf of St.
Laurence, or elsewhere on the coast of America, or the north of the United
States; but the whale and seal fishery shall be free for the two nations in all
parts of the world.

The Convention shall be ratified on both side^ in due form, and the
ratifications shall be exchanged in the space of six months, or sooner if it be
possible. In faith whereof the respective Plenipotentiaries have signed the
above articles as well in the French as in the English language, and have
placed their seals, declaring nevertheless that the signature in two languages
shall not be cited as an example, and shall not prejudice either of the two
parties.

Done at Paris, the eighth day of Vendemiaire, the 9 th year of the French
Republic, and the 3 d of September, 1800. (SIGNED) JOSEPH BONAPARTE. C. P.
FLEURIEU. ROEDERER. OLIVER ELLSWORTH. W. R. DAVIE. W. V. MURRAY.

For an exact Copy. C. M. TALLEYRAND.


