AN ORATION, PRONOUNCED AT BENNINGTON. VERMONT, On the 22d February, 1800. IN
COMMEMORATION OF THE DEATH OF General GEORGE WASHINGTON.

BY ROYAL TYLER, Esquire.

WALPOLE, NEWHAMPSHIRE, PRINTED FOR THOMAS and THOMAS, BY DAVID CARLISLE. 1800.

BENNINGTON, March 3, 1800. ROYAL TYLER, ESQUIRE. DEAR SIR,
MANY of the admirers of your Oration, delivered on the 22d ult. in
commemoration of the Death of our late beloved WASHINGTON, request a copy for
publication; this is at the special request of his Excellency Isaac Tichenor,
the Hon. Supreme Court, and many other respectable citizens, with that of

Your Most Obedient, and very Humble Servant. AMOS PORTER.

AN ORATION.
GOD alone is immortal -- Jehovah alone lives forever. -- Were immortality the
lot of man; were it not appointed unto man once to die; could the practice of
the sublimest virtues; could the prayers of the pious, or the blessings of a
grateful nation have averted the stroke of Death; we should not, my fathers,
friends, and fellow citizens, have met to mourn the death of our beloved
WASHINGTON. We should not, at this time, have attuned our voices to mournful
melody, or raised our prayers for comfort to the Great Source of consolation in
this day of our sorrow. For our nation would yet have rejoiced in his life; and
our children's children would have seen the man who gave them that liberty,
which, I trust in a merciful God, our children's children will ever enjoy.

BUT never ending length of days are not the laurels, with which the Supreme
Being crowns virtue; and WASHINGTON, the great and the good, is mingled with
the clod of the valley. That voice, which inspired us with courage in the hour
of danger, shall no more be heard in the land; and that invincible arm, so
often raised for our protection, is laid low in the dust. But, though his voice
is forever silent, yet he shall forever speak to us by his great example.
Gather then ye children of our political father, around his tomb, and hear the
instructive lesson of your parent's life.

TRUE, my friends, no children of his loins lifted their little arms and raised
their suffused eyes around his dying bed, to catch a father's last blessing;
but WASHINGTON was not childless; he was the father of his country, the parent
of millions; and who is there so mean among you, that is not of the happy
number?

ON this day, sacred to family sorrow, let every jarring passion be hushed; and
let the tomb of WASHINGTON be the grave of political animosity. Often, fellow
citizens, may we turn the historic page, often may we read lessons of virtue in
the volumes of the moralist; but alas! a thousand volumes are too few to teach
us what is virtuous and honorable. But the life of WASHINGTON is a compendium
of instruction. His life is a practical treatise of the cardinal virtues. Would
you learn how, to live? Read his life. Would you learn how to die? Visit his
dying bed.

HE taught us how to live, and oh! too high a price for human knowledge, taught
us how to die. Point me out a virtue which adorns man, and I will show it to
you brilliantly illuminated in his life.

WOULD our youth learn that vigor of mind which incites to deeds of pith and
moment, see the youthful WASHINGTON, in the dawn of life, pursuing alone his
hardy career through the trackless desert, to avert the tomahawk of the savage
from the vitals of his countrymen; or see him protect the baffled troops of the
expiring Braddock on the banks of the Monongahela.

WOULD our fellow citizens be soldiers? Are they ambitious to command the
armies of their country? View WASHINGTON on the heights near Boston, teaching
the hands of the untutored yeoman to war, and his fingers to fight.

WOULD you possess that martial courage which commands success? Pass the
Schuylkill with WASHINGTON, on that tremendous night, when, warring with the
embattled elements and superior forces, he led in triumph the troops of Heffer.

WOULD you imitate that fortitude which sustains the hero in the dreadful hour
of adversity? Follow WASHINGTON through the Jersies, at the head of his
discomfited troops, when the last spark of American hope was coruscated from
his freeled breast.

WOULD you learn that Christian, that divine grace of forgiveness to your
enemies? See him save the youthful ASGIL from ignominy and a disgraceful death.

WOULD you possess that dignified virtue of equanimity, in the possession of
Dictatorial power, and humility in the resignation of it? Pursue WASHINGTON to
the tented field, and read his Resignation of his high Commission of Commander
in Chief of the armies of the United States.

WOULD you impress modesty, that seal of all the Virtues, upon all your
actions? Peruse his official Letters.

WOULD you entwine the laurels of glory round deeds like these? Then, like him,
serve your country without pecuniary reward

DOES civil life delight you? Are you ambitious of serving your country with
reputation in the civil grades of Society? Remember that gloomy, distracting
period, which succeeded the close of our War with Great Britain, when Americans
knew not how to enjoy, in peace, that Liberty and Independence which their
valor had won in war; when our nerveless general government could only
recommend measures, and the States received their recommendations with
indifference or contempt; when our American Government was trampled upon at
home, and insulted from abroad; when the jarring States lost sight of the
national good in their own individual interest; when all was tumult and
confusion; then remember how WASHINGTON, like the fabled god of the Ocean,
raised his majestic head amidst the political storm, and stilled the madness of
the people. Remember how he associated with the Fathers of our land; traced the
principles of our Government with his pen; and signed that great Charter of our
Freedom, the Federal Constitution; and, as the First President of the United
States, reduced to practice the transcendent theory of Government, which his
wisdom had conceived: and when he retired to private life, to prepare to mount
to a world more congenial with his spirit, remember how like the prophet Elijah
he dropped his mantle upon us in his last legacy to the people. Would you learn
the true interest of America? Study attentively this precious relic; and as you
study, bless, gratefully bless, the sainted lips which pronounced it.

WOULD you learn to devote your whole lives to the service of your country? See
Washington, when new dangers threatened our country, again issue from the
peaceful scenes of domestic life, from the bosom of his family, and inspired by
a love for you, again arm his aged limbs for battle, and close his well spent
life in your service.

BUT there are many in this assembly, who may despair of imitating these
illustrious deeds; but to the meanest of you, in the humblest walks of private
life, I repeat, copy WASHINGTON; for he was not only the glory the wonder of
public, but the brightest ornament of private life.

IF it be not your ambition, my humble friends, to be elevated in the armies or
the councils of your country, yet would you fill the minor offices of society?
I point you to the great WASHINGTON, once the leader of our armies; once and
again the First Magistrate of our Union; with all his blushing honors thick
upon him, selling the place of a common juryman at a State Court in Virginia,
and humbly thanking his fellows for raising him to the importance of their
foreman.

WOULD you excel as farmers? See WASHINGTON, the husbandman, following his own
plough, and tracing the furrow in his native fields.

WOULD you become estimable in married life? Would you be loved and respected
as affectionate husbands? Where shall I show you a brighter example of conjugal
excellence? Would you know what a husband WASHINGTON was; go to the mournful
halls of Mount Vernon; seek there the sorrowing widowed matron, who, with our
nation this day, deplores her mighty loss. -- Oh! she will tell you that though
the same of her hero, his wisdom in council, his might in battle, have
delighted her ears; yet it was the milder virtues of the husband which touched
her heart.

MINGLE your tears with hers, my fair country women. They are the tears of
virtue: and they adorn the fairest cheek. Man may admire her fortitude, but it
is the female heart alone which can participate in her griefs. When she lost a
husband, you lost a friend. It was his arm which protected you, and the
helpless innocence of your babes in the rage of battle; he respected your sex
in the person of this amiable woman; and will you not sympathize with her in
her affliction and sorrow? Some of you perhaps have been separated from
excellent men by the stroke of death. Oh! at those solitary moments, when busy,
meddling memory, in barbarous succession, musters up the fond endearments of
your tender heart; at those cheerless moments when you recollect pressing the
clay cold hand of a dying husband, wiping the clammy sweat from his forehead,
while his fixed eye balls gave the last look of affection upon you, and closed
forever; when you remember that heart rending hour, when you thought all
happiness flown from you forever, and you felt yourself alone, and the world
was a blank before you; then, while your agonized bosoms throb with anguish at
your own loss; think on the pangs of her who mourns a WASHINGTON.

BUT, to return to the delightful theme of his virtues, would you, my friends,
practice charity?

"He had an eye suffus'd with pity's softest drops,
And a hand open as day to melting charity."
He was the kindest neighbor, the humanest master, and the firmest friend the
world ever saw. In a word, he loved his country and reverenced his God. His
belief in the Christian verity was not ostentatiously displayed from his lips;
but he conformed to the outward duties of Religion; he reverenced the holy
ministers of the Gospel, and I trust his deeds are recorded in the Lamb's Book
of Life.

SUCH was the man whom we lament; and such was the man whom the world applauds.
The would is filled with the fame of our departed hero; and the sighs we this
day raise, and the lamentation we utter, will be reechoed across the broad
Atlantic. The citizens of France will weep over the corse of their great
preceptor in the school of Liberty; and British generosity, in spite of British
pride, will deplore the death of the man who, with strong arm rent asunder
their empire. -- While on the distant shores of Africa, if they are saddened
with the report of his death, the sooty native shall bless the memory of the
man who, with his last breath, emancipated hundreds of their countrymen from
the shackles of slavery. But though the world may do justice to his
transcendent merit, it is we alone who can truly feel his loss. Perhaps the
ungenerous policy of European Courts may profit themselves by our loss; and
sudden invasion may succeed his decease. If, my fellow citizens, we of this
generation should be again exposed to the ravages of foreign invasion; if we
should again see our towns sacked, and our wives and children again driven from
their peaceful habitations by a ferocious, foreign soldiery; then shall we
truly bemoan the death of WASHINGTON; for then, citizens of America, and then
only, will you know the worth of the man you have lost.

BUT let us not spend our breath in unavailing sorrow: let it be ours to profit
by his great example.

LET the aged among us, whose gray hairs give certain presage that they shall
soon follow him, console themselves with the sure and certain hope that they
shall see him in the world of spirits. --

LET those, who are engaged in the active scenes of busy life, when they would
serve their generation, remember WASHINGTON: and though they may justly despair
of imitating this great exemplar, let them reflect that the man who can achieve
one solitary deed, or practice one virtue of WASHINGTON, will deserve well of
his country. Let our youth be taught to look to his conduct as their polar
star, in their passage through the boisterous ocean of human life. And even, my
little friends, who came with your parents to weep over the grave of your
political father; though you are too young to value his worth, or know your
loss; yet, if you would become the comfort of your parents, and the pride of
your country, reflect, and let it excite your emulation, that this unrivalled
hero, this delight of every heart, this matchless WASHINGTON was once an infant
in the cradle. Those lips, which spoke a language which would have adorned the
Roman Forum in Rome's proudest days, once lisped his native tongue with
infantine accent. Once like you he was a pupil of the schools, and his
expanding virtues were marked only by his preceptors, and perhaps only
appreciated by parental affection. Who, at that early day, could have foretold
the revolution of our country? What prophetic spirit, "rapt into future times,"
could have pointed to the blooming boy, and said, in that child you see the
savior of his country? Five millions of happy people shall bless him while he
lives; a nation shall lament him when he dies.

And who but the Omnifcient can declare that I do not, among the smallest of
you, see some future statesman who shall give energy to our public councils;
some warrior who shall free our country from invasion; or some little
WASHINGTON, who, like his great predecessor, shall unite all talents and all
hearts?

THE hopes of our country, fellow citizens, are in the rising generation. In a
few more hasty revolving years, the sages, the warriors, the statesmen, who
conducted our American revolution, will be numbered with the mighty dead.
WASHINGTON is not; and Adams stands on the summit of the age of man, plumes his
wings, and prepares to mount to glory. Where are Green, Warren, Mercer, and
Montgomery? Where is the good Chittenden, who founded our state? Alas! the
places which once knew them shall know them no more. Where are the brave Starks
and Warner, under whose banners many of you, who now hear me, fought the
battles of your country in yonder field of victory, and gave the first check to
British superiority in arms?

WHERE are Fay and Walbridge; those youthful heroes, who, when the desolating
Hessians hung over you like a black cloud surcharged with destruction, though
new in arms, girded themselves for war, and, in defense of your property, your
wives, your little ones, this pleasant town, and this temple went forth to the
fight, fought like veterans, and sealed their country's liberty with their
blood. Their precious memory is embalmed in our hearts; but we shall see their
faces no more. Their hope in the hour of dissolution was fixed on God and the
rising generation. The consolation of WASHINGTON in his dying hour was, that he
saw the defenders of Liberty growing up around him -- and that the Independence
he had established would be maintained by our posterity to the latest
generation.

LET us not disappoint his dying hopes. On this day, fellow citizens, on this
wide extended continent, men of adverse, political sentiment have drowned their
animosity in the tears shed for our common loss. On this day, good men,
unhappily differing about the interests of their country, perhaps, equally dear
to them all, have forgotten their dislike; and, like the children of one great
family, are come to weep over their father's grave.

THUS united in affliction, let us be united in love; and at this moment, while
we recline over his bier, let us resolve never more to separate; but to inhabit
the goodly heritage, which God has given us, like a band of brothers; and let
it add to the glory of our lamented WASHINGTON, that he, who in his life,
obtained for us Freedom and Independence, by his death bound us together in one
bundle of fraternal love; "So,". shall it be said of him as it was of the
Ifraelitish man of might, "the dead which he slew at his death, were more than
those which he slew in his life."

FINALLY, brethren, farewell -- retire to your habitations; and if, perchance,
your homes salute you with a father's honored name; go, call your sons; tell
them of WASHINGTON; instruct them what a debt they owe their ancestors, and
make them swear to pay it, by transmitting down entire, those sacred rights
which WASHINGTON obtained.

FINIS.

