National Bankrupt Law. BY AUTHORITY. Sixth Congress of the United States, At
the first Session, begun and held at the city of Philadelphia, in the State of
Pennsylvania, on Monday the second of December, one thousand seven hundred and
ninety nine.
A LAW To establish an uniform System of Bankruptcy throughout the United
States.
Sect. 1. BE it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the
United States of America, in Congress assembled, That from and after the first
day of June next, if any merchant or other person, residing within the United
States, actually using the trade of merchandise, by buying and selling in
gross, or by retail, or dealing in exchange, or as a banker, broker, factor,
underwriter, or marine insurer, shall, with intent unlawfully to delay on
defraud his or her creditors, depart from the state in which such person
usually resides, or remain, absent therefrom, or conceal him or herself
therein, or keep his or her house, so that he or she cannot be taken or served
with process, or willingly or fraudulently procure him or herself to be
arrested, or his or her lands, goods, money or chattels to be attached,
sequestered or taken in execution, or shall secretly convey his or her goods
out of his or her house, or conceal them to prevent their being taken in
execution, or make or cause to be made, any fraudulent conveyance of his or her
lands or chattels or make or admit any false or fraudulent security or evidence
of debt, or being arrested for debt, or having surrendered him or herself in
discharge of bail, shall remain in prison two months or more, or escape
therefrom, or whose lands or effects being attached by process issuing out of,
or returnable to any court of common law, shall not, within two months after
written notice thereof, enter special bail and dissolve the same, or in
districts in which attachments are not dissolved by the entry of special bail,
being arrested for debt after his or her lands and effects, or any part
thereof, have been attached for a debt or debts amounting to one thousand
dollars or upwards, shall not, upon notice of such attachment, give sufficient
security for the payment of what may be recovered in the suit in which he or
she shall be arrested, at, or before the return day of the same, to be approved
by the judge of the district, or some judge of the court out of which the
process issued, upon which he is arrested, or to which the same shall be
returnable, every such person shall be deemed and adjudged a bankrupt:
Provided, That no person shall be liable to a commission of bankruptcy, if the
petition be not preferred, in manner herein-after directed, within six months
after the act of bankruptcy committed.

Sec. 2. And be it further enacted, That the judge of the district court of the
United States, for the district where the debtor resides, or usually resided at
the time of committing the act of bankruptcy, upon petition, in writing,
against such person or persons being bankrupt, to him to be exhibited by any
one creditor, or by a greater number, being partners, whose single debt shall
amount to one thousand dollars, or by two creditors, whose debts shall amount
to one thousand five hundred dollars, or by more than two creditors, whose
debts shall amount to two thousand dollars, shall have power, by commission
under his hand and seal, to appoint such good and substantial persons, being
citizens of the United States, and resident in such district, as such judge
shall deem proper, not exceeding three, to be commissioners of the said
bankrupt, and in case of vacancy or refusal to act, to appoint others, from
time to time, as occasion require. Provided always, That before any commission
shall issue, the creditor or creditors petitioning, shall make affidavit or
solemn affirmation before the said judge, of the truth of his, her or their
debts, and give bond, to be taken by the said judge, in the name and for the
benefit of the said party, so charged as a bankrupt, and in such penalty, and
with such surety as he shall require, to be conditioned for the proving of his,
her or their debts, as well before the commissioners, as upon a trial at law,
in case the due issuing forth of the said commission shall be contested, and
also for proving the party a bankrupt, and to proceed on such commission, in
the manner herein prescribed. And if such debt shall not be really due, or
after such commission taken out, it cannot be proved that the party was a
bankrupt, then the said judge shall, upon the petition of the party aggrieved,
in case there be occasion, deliver such bond to the said party, who may sue
thereon and recover such damages, under the penalty of the same, as, upon trial
at law, he shall make appear he has sustained, by reason of any breach of the
condition thereof.

Sec. 3. And be it further enacted, That before the commissioners shall be
capable of acting, they shall respectively, take and subscribe the following
oath or affirmation, which shall be administered by the judge issuing the
commission, or by any of the judges of the supreme court of the United States,
or any judge, justice, or chancellor of any state court, and filed in the
office of the clerk of the district court: "I, A. B. do swear, or affirm, that
I will faithfully, impartially, and honestly, according to the best of my skill
and knowledge, execute the several powers and trust reposed in me, as a
commissioner in a commission of bankruptcy against (...) and that, without
favor or affection, prejudice or malice." And the commissioners who shall be
sworn as aforesaid, shall proceed, as soon as may be, to execute the same, and
upon due examination, and sufficient cause appearing against the party charged,
shall and may declare him or her to be a bankrupt: Provided, That before such
examination be had reasonable notice thereof, in writing, shall be delivered to
the person charged as a bankrupt, or if he or she be not found at his or her
usual place of abode, to some person of the family, above the age of twelve
years, or if no such person appear, shall be fixed at the front or other public
door of the house, in which he or she usually resides, and thereupon it shall
be in the power of such person, so charged as aforesaid, to demand, before or
at the time appointed for such examination, that a jury be impanelled to
enquire into the fact or facts alleged as the causes for issuing the
commission, and on such demand being made, the enquiry shall be had before the
judge granting the commission, at such time as he may direct; and in that case,
such person shall not be declared bankrupt, unless by the verdict of the jury,
he or she shall be found to be within the description of this act, and shall be
convicted of some one of the acts described in the first section of this act:
Provided also, That any commission which shall be taken out as aforesaid, and
which shall not be proceeded in as aforesaid, within 30 days thereafter, may be
superceded by the said judge, who shall have granted the same, upon the
application of the party thereby charged as a bankrupt, or of any creditor of
such person, unless the delay shall have been unavoidable, or upon a just
occasion.

Sec. 4. And be it further enacted, That the commissioners so to be appointed,
shall have power, forthwith, after they have declared such person a bankrupt,
to cause to be apprehended, by warrant under their hands and seals, the body of
such bankrupt, wheresoever to be found, within the United States: Provided,
They shall think there is reason to apprehend that the said bankrupt intends to
abscond or conceal him or herself, and in case it be necessary, in order to
take the body of the said bankrupt, shall have power to cause the doors of the
dwelling house of such bankrupt, to be broken, or the doors of any other house
in which he or she shall be found.

Sec. 5. And be it further enacted, That it shall be the duty of the
commissioners so to be appointed, forthwith, after they have declared such a
person a bankrupt, and they shall have power to take into their possession, all
the estate, real and personal, of every nature and description to which the
said bankrupt may be entitled, either in law or equity, in any manner
whatsoever, and cause the same to be inventoried and appraised to the best
value (his or her necessary wearing apparel, and the necessary wearing apparel
of the wife and children, and necessary beds and bedding of such bankrupt, only
excepted) and also to take into their possession, and secure, all deeds and
books of account, papers and writings belonging to such bankrupt; and shall
cause the same to be safely kept, until assignees shall be chosen or appointed,
in manner hereafter provided.

Sec. 6. And be it further enacted, That the said commissioners shall,
forthwith, after they have declared such person a bankrupt, cause due and
sufficient public notice thereof to be given, and in such notice shall appoint
some convenient time and place for the creditors to meet, in order to choose an
assignee or assignees of the said bankrupt's estate and effects; at which
meeting the said commissioners shall admit the creditors of such bankrupt, to
prove their debts; -- and where any creditor shall reside at a distance from
the place of such meeting, shall allow the debt of such credit to be proved by
oath or affirmation, made before some competent authority, and duly certified,
and shall permit any person duly authorized by letter of attorney from such
creditor (due proof of the execution of such letter of attorney being first
made) to vote in the choice of an assignee or assignees of such bankrupt's
estate and effects, in the place and stead of such creditor; and the said
commissioners shall assign, transfer or deliver over, all and singular the said
bankrupt's estate and effects aforesaid, with all muniments and evidences
thereof, to such person or persons as the major part, in value, of such
creditors, according to the several debts then proved, shall choose as
aforesaid. Provided always, that in such choice, no vote shall be given by, or
in behalf of any creditor, whose debt shall not amount to two hundred dollars.

Sec. 7. Provided always, and be it further enacted, That it shall be lawful
for the said commissioners, as often as they shall see cause, for the better
preserving and securing the bankrupt's estate, before assignees shall be chosen
as aforesaid, immediately to appoint one or more assignee or assignees of the
estate and effects aforesaid, or any part thereof; which assignee or assignees
aforesaid, or any of them, may be removed at the meeting of the creditors, so
to be appointed, as aforesaid, for the choice of assignees, if such creditors,
entitled to vote as aforesaid, or the major part, in value, of them, shall
think fit, and such assignee or assignees as shall be so removed, shall deliver
up all the estate and effects of such bankrupt, which shall have come to his or
their hands or possession, unto such other assignee or assignees as shall be
chosen by the creditors as aforesaid; and all such estate and effects shall be,
to all intents and purposes, as effectually and legally vested in such new
assignee or assignees, or as if the first assignment had been made to him or
them, by the said commissioners, and if such first assignee or assignees, shall
refuse or neglect, for the space of ten days next after notice, in writing,
from such new assignee or assignees, of their appointment, as aforesaid, to
deliver over as aforesaid, all the estate and effects as aforesaid, every such
assignee or assignees, shall, respectively, forfeit a sum, not exceeding five
thousand dollars, for the use of the creditors, and shall, moreover, be liable
for the property so detained.

Sect. 8. And be it further enacted, That at any time previous to the closing
of the accounts of the said assignee or assignees, so chosen as aforesaid, it
shall be lawful for such creditors of the bankrupt, as are hereby authorized,
to vote in the choice of assignees, or the major part of them, in value, at a
regular meeting of the said creditors, to be called for that purpose, by the
said commissioners, or by one fourth, in value, of such creditors, to remove
all or any of the assignees chosen as aforesaid, and to choose one or more in
his or their place and stead, and such assignee or assignees as shall be so
removed, shall deliver up all the estate and effects of such bankrupt, which
shall have come into his or their hands or possession, unto such new assignee
or assignees as shall be chosen by the creditors, at such meeting, and all such
estate and effects shall be, to all intents and purposes, as effectually and
legally vested in such new assignee or assignees, as if the first assignment
had been made to him or them, by the said commissioners: and if such former
assignee or assignees, shall refuse or neglect, for the space of ten days next
after notice, in writing, from such new assignee or assignees, of their
appointment, as aforesaid, to deliver over, as aforesaid, all the estate and
effects aforesaid, every such former assignee or assignees, shall respectively,
forfeit a sum not exceeding five thousand dollars for the use of the creditors,
and shall, moreover, be liable for the property so detained.

Sec. 9. And be it further enacted, That whenever a new assignee or assignees
shall be chosen as aforesaid, no suit at law or in equity shall be thereby
abated, but it shall and may be lawful for the court in which any suit may
depend, upon the suggestion of a removal of a former assignee or assignees, and
of the appointment of a new assignee or assignees, to allow the name of such
new assignee or assignees, to be substituted in place of the name or names of
the former assignee or assignees, and thereupon the suit shall be prosecuted in
the name or names of the new assignee or assignees, in the same manner as if he
or they had originally commenced the suit in his or their own names.

Sec. 10. And be it further enacted, That the assignment or assignments of the
commissioners of the bankrupt's estate and effects as aforesaid, made as
aforesaid, shall be good at law or in equity, against the bankrupt, and all
persons claiming by, from, or under such bankrupt, by any act done at the time,
or after he shall have committed the act of bankruptcy, upon which the
commission issued. Provided always, That in case of a bona fide purchase made
before the issuing of the commission from or under such bankrupt for a valuable
consideration, by any person having no knowledge, information or notice of any
act of bankruptcy committed, such purchase shall not be invalidated or
impeached.

Sec. 11. And be it further enacted, That the said commissioners shall have
power by deed or deeds, under their hands and seals, to assign and convey to
the assignee or assignees, to be appointed or chosen as aforesaid, any lands,
tenements, or hereditaments, which such bankrupt shall be seized of, or
entitled to, in fee tail, at law, or in equity, in possession, remainder or
reversion, for the benefit of the creditors, and all such deeds being duly
executed and recorded according to the laws of the state within which such
lands, tenements or hereditaments, may be situate, shall be good and effectual
against all persons whom the said bankrupt, by common recovery, or other means,
might or could bar of any estate, right, title, or possibility of or in the
said lands, tenements or hereditaments.

Sec. 12. And be it further enacted, That if any bankrupt shall have conveyed
or assured any lands, goods or estate, unto any person, upon condition or power
of redemption, by payment of money or otherwise, it shall be lawful for the
commissioners, or for any person by them duly authorized for that purpose, by
writing, under their hands and seals, to make tender of money or other
performance, according to the nature of such condition, as fully as the
bankrupt might have done, and the commissioners, after such performance or
tender, shall have power to assign such lands, goods and estate, for the
benefit of the creditors, as fully and effectually as any other part of the
estate of such bankrupt.

Sec. 13. And be it further enacted, That the commissioners aforesaid, shall
have power to assign, for the use aforesaid, all the debts due to such
bankrupt, or to any other person for his or her use or benefit, which
assignment shall vest the property and right thereof in the assignee or
assignees of such bankrupt, as fully as if the bond, judgment, contract or
claim had originally belonged or been made to the said assignees, and after the
said assignment, neither the said bankrupt, nor any person acting as trustee
for him or her, shall have power to recover or discharge the same, nor shall
the same be attached as the debt of the said bankrupt, but the assignee or
assignees aforesaid shall have such remedy to recover the same, in his or their
own name or names, as such bankrupt might or could have had, if no commission
of bankruptcy had issued; and when any action in the name of such bankrupt
shall have been commenced, and shall be pending, for the recovery of any debt
or effects of such bankrupt, which shall be assigned, or shall or might become
vested in the assignee or assignees of such bankrupt as aforesaid, then such
assignee or assignees may claim to be, and shall be, thereupon admitted to
prosecute such action in his or their name, for the use and benefit of the
creditors of such bankrupt; and the same judgment shall be rendered in such
action, and all attachments or other security taken therein, shall be in like
manner holden and liable, as if the said action had been riginally commenced in
the name of such assignee or assignees, after the original plaintiff therein
had become a bankrupt as aforesaid: Provided, That where a debtor shall have,
bona fide, paid his debt to any bankrupt, without notice that such person was
bankrupt, he or she shall not be liable to pay the same to the assignee or
assignees.

Sec. 14. And be it further enacted, That if complaint shall be made or
information given to the commissioners, or if they shall have good reason to
believe or suspect, that any of the property, goods, chattels, or debts of the
bankrupt, are in the possession of any other person, or that any person is
indebted to, or for the use of the bankrupt, then the said commissioners shall
have power to summon, or cause to be summoned, by their attorney or other
person duly authorized by them, all such persons before them, or the judge of
the district where such person shall reside, by such process or other means, as
they shall think convenient, and upon their appearance to examine them by parol
or by interrogatories, in writing, on oath or affirmation, which oath or
affirmation they are hereby empowered to administer, respecting the knowledge
of all such property, goods, chattels and debts; and if such person shall
refuse to be sworn or affirmed, and to make answer to such questions, or
interrogatories, as shall be administered, and to subscribe the said answers,
or upon examination, shall not declare the whole truth, touching the subject
matter of such examination, then it shall be lawful for the commissioners, or
judge, to commit such person to prison, there to be detained until they shall
submit themselves to be examined, in manner aforesaid, and they shall moreover,
forfeit double the value of all the property, goods, chattels and debts, by
them concealed.

Sec. 15. And be it further enacted, That if any of the aforesaid persons
shall, after legal summons to appear before the commissioners or judge, to be
examined, refuse to attend, or shall not attend at the time appointed, having
no such impediment as shall be allowed of by the commissioners or judge, it
shall be lawful for the said commissioners or judge to direct their warrants,
to such person or persons, as by them shall be thought proper, to apprehend
such persons as shall refuse to appear, and to bring them before the
commissioners or judge, to be examined, and upon their refusal to come, to
commit them to prison, until they shall submit themselves to be examined
according to the directions of this act: Provided, That such witnesses, as
shall be so sent for, shall be allowed such compensation as the commissioners
or judge, shall think fit, to be rateably borne by the creditors, and if any
person, other than the bankrupt, either by subornation of others, or by his or
her own act, shall wilfully or corruptly commit perjury, on such examination,
to be taken before the commissioners as aforesaid, the party so offending, and
all persons who shall procure any person to commit such perjury, shall, on
conviction thereof, be fined not exceeding four thousand dollars, and
imprisoned not exceeding two years, and moreover shall, in either case, be
rendered incapable of being a witness in any court of record.

Sec. 16. And be it further enacted, That if any person or persons shall
fraudulently or collusively, claim any debts, or claim or obtain any real or
personal estate of the bankrupt, every such person shall forfeit double the
value thereof, to and for the use of the creditors.

Sec. 17. And be it further enacted, That if any person, prior to his or her
becoming a bankrupt, shall convey to any of his or her children, or other
persons, any lands or goods, or transfer his or her debts or demands into other
persons' names, with intent to defraud his or her creditors, the commissioners
shall have power to assign the same, in as effectual a manner, as if the
bankrupt had been actually seized or possessed thereof.

Sec. 18. And be it further enacted, That if any person or persons who shall
become bankrupt, within the intent and meaning of this act, and against whom a
commission of bankruptcy shall be duly issued, upon which commission, such
person or persons shall be declared bankrupt, shall not, within forty-two days
after notice thereof, in writing, to be left at the usual place of abode, of
such person or persons; or personal notice, in case such person or persons be
then in prison, and notice given in some gazette, that such commission has
been issued, and of the time and place of meeting of the commissioners,
surrender him or herself to the said commissioners, and sign or subscribe such
surrender, and submit to be examined, from time to time, upon oath or solemn
affirmation, by and before such commissioners, and in all things conform to the
provisions of this act, and also upon such his or her examination, fully and
truly disclose and discover all his or her effects and estate, real and
personal, and how and in what manner, to whom and upon what consideration, and
at what time or times he or she has disposed of, assigned or transferred, any
of his or her goods, wares or merchandise, moneys, or other effects and
estates, and of all books, papers and writings, relating thereunto, of which he
or she was possessed, or in or to which he or she was any ways interested or
entitled, or which any person or persons shall then have, or shall have had in
trust for him or her, or for his or her use, at any time before or after the
issuing of the said commission, or whereby such bankrupt, or his or her family
then has, or may have or expect any profit, possibility of profit, benefit, or
advantage whatsoever, except only such part of his or her estate and effects,
as shall have been really and bona fide before sold and disposed of, in the way
of his or her trade and dealings, and except such sums of money a shall have
been laid out in the ordinary expenses of his or her family, and also upon such
examination, execute in due form of law, such conveyance, assurance and
assignment of his or her estate, whatsoever and wheresoever, as shall be
devised and directed by the commissioners, to vest the same in the assignees,
their heirs, executors, administors and assigns forever, in trust for the use
of all and every the creditors of such bankrupt, who shall come in and prove
their debts under the commission; and deliver up unto the commissioners, all
such part of his or her the said bankrupt's goods, wares, merchandises, money,
effects and estate, and all books, papers and writings, relating thereunto, as
at the time of such examination, shall be in his or her possession, custody or
power (his or her necessary wearing apparel, and the necessary wearing apparel
of the wife, and children, and necessary beds and bedding of such bankrupt only
excepted) then he or she, the said bankrupt, upon the conviction of any wilful
default, or omission in any of the matters or things aforesaid, shall be
adjudged a fraudulent bankrupt, and shall suffer imprisonment, for a term not
less than twelve months, nor exceeding ten years, and shall not, at any time
after, be entitled to the benefits of this act: Provided always, That in case
any bankrupt shall be in prison or custody at the time of issuing such
commission, and is willing to surrender and submit to be examined, according to
the directions of this act, and can be brought before the said commissioners
are creditors for that purpose, the expense thereof shall be paid out of the
said bankrupt's effects; and in case such bankrupt is in execution, or cannot
be brought before the commissioners, that then the said commissioners, or some
one of them, shall, from time to time, attend the said bankrupt in prison or
custody, and take his or her discovery, as in other cases; and the assignees,
or one of them, or some person appointed by them, shall attend such bankrupt in
prison or custody, and produce his or her books, papers and writings, in order
to enable him or her to prepare his or her discovery, a copy whereof the said
assignees shall apply for, and the said bankrupt shall deliver to them or their
order, within a reasonable time, after the same shall have been required.

Sec. 19. And be it further enacted, That the said commissioners shall appoint,
within the said forty-two days, so limited as aforesaid, for the bankrupt to
surrender and conform as aforesaid, not less than three several meetings for
the purposes aforesaid, the third of which meetings shall be on the last of the
said forty-two days: Provided always, that the judge of the district within
which such commission issues, shall have power to enlarge the time so limited
as aforesaid, for the purposes aforesaid, as he shall think fit, not exceeding
fifty days, to be computed from the end of the said forty-two days, so as such
order for enlarging the time be made as least six days before the expiration of
said term.

Sec. 20. And be it further enacted, That it shall be lawful for the
commissioners, or any other person or officers, by them to be appointed, by
their warrant, under their hands and calls, to break open in the day time, the
houses, chambers, shops, warehouses, doors, trunks, or chests of the bankrupt,
where any of his or her goods or estate, deeds, books of account or writings,
shall be, and to take possession of the goods, money, and other estate, deeds,
books of account or writings, of such bankrupt.

Sec. 21. And be it further enacted, That if the bankrupt shall refuse to be
examined, or to answer fully, or to subscribe his or her examination as
aforesaid, it shall be lawful for the commissioners to commit the offender to
close imprisonment, until he or she shall conform him or herself; and if the
said bankrupt shall submit to be examined, and upon his or her examination, it
shall appear thathe or she has committed wilful or corrupt perjury, he or she
may be indicted therefore, and being thereof convicted, shall suffer
imprisonment, for a term not less than two years, nor exceeding ten years.

Sec. 22. And be it further enacted, That every bankrupt, having surrendered,
shall, at all seasonable times, before the expiration of the said forty-two
days, as aforesaid, or of such further time as shall be allowed to finish his
or her examination, be at liberty to inspect his or her books and writings, in
the presence of some person to be appointed by the commissioners, and to bring
with him or her for his or her assistance, such persons as he or she shall
think fit, not exceeding two at one time, and to make extracts and copies to
enable him or her to make a full discovery of his or her effects; and the said
bankrupt shall be free from arrest in coming to surrender, and after having
surrendered to the said commissioners, for the said forty-two days, or such
further time as shall be allowed for the finishing his or her examintion; and
in case such bankrupt shall be arrested for debt, or taken on any escape,
warrant, or execution, coming to surrender, or after his surrender within the
time before mentioned, then, on producing such summons or notice, under the
hand of the commissioners, and giving the officer a copy thereof, he or she
shall be discharged; and in case any officer shall afterward detain such
bankrupt, such officer shall forfeit to such bankrupt, for his or her own use,
ten dollars for every day he shall detain the bankrupt.

Sec. 23. And be it further enacted, That every person who shall, knowingly, or
wilfully receive or keep concealed, any bankrupt, so as aforesaid summoned to
appear, or who shall assist such bankrupt in concealing him or herself, or in
absconding, shall suffer such imprisonment, not exceeding twelve months; or pay
such fine to the United States, not exceeding one thousand dollars, as, upon
conviction thereof, shall be adjudged.

Sec. 24. And be it further enacted, That the said commissioners shall have
power to examine, upon oath or affirmation, the wife of any person lawfully
declared a bankrupt, for the discovery of such part of his estate as may be
concealed or disposed of by such wife, or by any other person, and the said
wife shall incur such penalties for not appearing before the said
commissioners, or refusing to be sworn or affirmed, or examined, and to
subscribe her examination, or for not disclosing the truth, as by this act is
provided against any other person in like cases.

Sec. 25. And be it further enacted, That in case any person shall be committed
by the commissioners for refusing to answer, or for not fully answering any
question, or for any other cause, the commissioners shall, in their warrant,
specify such question or other cause of commitment.

Sec. 26. And be it further enacted, That, if after the bankrupt shall have
finished his or her final examination, any other person or persons shall
voluntarily make discovery of any part of such bankrupt's estate, before
unknown to the commissioners, such person or persons shall be entitled to five
per cent. out of the effects so discovered, and such farther reward as the
commissioners shall think proper, and any trustee having notice of the
bankruptcy, wilfully concealing the estate of any bankrupt, for the space of
ten days after the bankrupt shall have finished his final examination, as
aforesaid, shall forfeit double the value of the estate so concealed, for the
benefit of the creditors.

Sec. 27. And be it further enacted, That if any person shall become bankrupt,
and at such time, by consent of the owner, have in his or her possession and
disposition, any goods, whereof he or she shall be reputed owner, and take upon
him or herself, the sale, alteration or disposition thereof, as owner, the
commissioners shall have power to assign the same, for the benefit of the
creditors, as fully as any other part of the estate of the bankrupt.

Sec. 28. And be it further enacted, That if any bankrupt, after the issuing
any commission against him or her, pay to the person who sued out the same, or
give or deliver to such person goods or any other satisfaction or security, for
his or her debt, whereby such person shall privately have and receive a greater
proportion of his or her debt than the other creditors, such preference shall
be a new act of bankruptcy, and on good proof thereof, such commission shall,
and may be superseded, and it shall and may be lawful for either of the judges,
having authority to grant the commission as aforesaid, to award any creditor
petitioning another commission, and such person so taking such undue
satisfaction as aforesaid, shall forfeit and lose, as well his or her whole
debts, as the whole he or she shall have taken and received, and shall pay
back, or deliver up the same, or the full value thereof, to the assignee or
assignees, who shall be appointed or chosen under such commission in manner
aforesaid, in trust for, and to be divided amongst the other creditors of the
said bankrupt, in proportion to their respective debts.

Sec. 29. And be it further enacted, That every person who shall be chosen
assignee of the estate and effects of a bankrupt, shall, at some time after the
expiration of four months, and within twelve months from the time of issuing
the commission, cause at least thirty days public notice to be given, of the
time and place the commissioners and assignees intend to meet to make a
dividend or distribution of the bankrupt's estate and effects; at which time
the creditors who have not before proved their debts, shall be at liberty to
prove the same, and upon every such meeting the assignee or assignees, shall
produce to the commissioners and creditors then present, fair and just accounts
of all his or their receipts and prayments, touching the bankrupt's estate and
effects, and of what shall remain outstanding, and the particulars thereof, and
shall, if the creditors then present, or a major part of them, require the
same, be examined upon oath or solemn affirmation before the same
commissioners, touching the truth of such accounts, and in such accounts, the
said assignee or assignees, shall be allowed and retain all such sum and sums
of money, as they shall have paid or expended ensuing out and prosecuting the
commission, and all other just allowances on account of, or by reason or means
of their being assignee or assignees, and the said commissioners shall order
such part of the nett produce of the said bankrupt's estate, as by such
accounts, or otherwise, shall appear to be in the hands of the said assignees,
as they shall think fit, to be forthwith divided among such of the bankrupt's
creditors, as have duly proved their debts under such commission, in proportion
to their several and respective debts, and the commissioners shall make such
their order for a dividend, in writing, under their hands, and shall cause one
part of such order to be filed amongst the proceedings under the said
commission, and shall deliver unto each of the assignees under such commission
a duplicate of such their order, which order of distribution shall contain an
account of the time and place of making such order, and the sum total or
quantum of all the debts proved under the commission, and the sum total of the
money remaining in the hands of the assignee or assignees to be divided, and
how many percent. in particular is there ordered to be paid to every creditor
of his debt; and the said assignee or assignees, in pursuance of such order,
and without any deed or deeds of distribution to be made for the purpose, shall
forthwith make such dividend and distribution accordingly, and shall take
receipts in a book to be kept for the purpose from each creditor, for the part
or share of such dividend or distribution which he or they shall make, and pay
to each creditor respectively; and such order and receipt shall be a full and
effectual discharge to such assignee for so much as he shall fairly pay,
pursuant to such order as aforesaid.

Sec. 30. And be it further enacted, That within eighteen months, next after
the issuing of the commission, the assignee or assignees shall make a second
dividend of the bankrupt's estate and effects, in case the same were not wholly
divided upon the first dividend, and shall cause due public notice to be given
of the time and place the said commissioners intend to meet, to make a second
distribution of the bankrupt's estate and effects, and for the creditors, who
shall not before have proved their debts, to come in and prove the same; and at
such meeting, the said assignees shall produce, on oath or solemn affirmation
as aforesaid, their accounts of the bankrupt's estate and effects, and what
upon the balance thereof shall appear to be in their hands, shall, by like
order of the commissioners, be forthwith divided amongst such of the bankrupt's
creditors as shall have made due proof of their debts, in proportion to their
several and respective debts, which second dividend shall be final, unless any
suit at law, or equity be depending, or any part of the estate standing out,
that could not have been disposed of, or that the major part of the creditors
shall not have agreed to be sold or disposed of, or unless some other or future
estate or effects of the bankrupt shall afterward come to, or rest in the said
assignees, in which cases the said assignees shall, as soon as may be, convert
such future or other estate and effects into money, and shall, within two
months after the same be converted into money, by like order of the
commissioners, divide the same among such bankrupt's creditors, as shall have
made due proof of their debt under such commission.

Sec. 31. And be it further enacted, That, in the distribution of the
bankrupt's effects, there shall be paid to every of the creditors a
portion-rate, according to the amount of their respective debts, so that every
creditor having security for his debt, by judgment, statute, recognizance, or
specialty, or having an attachment under any of the laws of the individual
states, or of the United States, on the estate of such bankrupt (provided,
there be no execution executed upon any of the real or personal estate of such
bankrupt, before the time he or she became bankrupts) shall not be relieved
upon any such judgment, statute, recognizance, specialty, or attachment for
more than a ratable part of his debt, with the other creditors of the bankrupt.

Sec. 32. And be it further enacted, That the assignees shall keep one or more
distict book or books of account, wherein he or they shall duly enter all sums
of money, or effects, which he or they shall have received or got into his or
their possession of the said bankrupt's estate, to which books of account every
creditor who shall have proved his or her debt, shall, at all reasonable times
have free resort, and inspect the same as often as he or she shall think fit.

Sec. 33. And be it further enacted, That every bankrupt not being in prison or
custody, shall at all times after his surrender, be bound to attend the
assignees, upon every reasonable notice, in writing, for that purpose, given or
left at the usual place of his or her usual place of abode, in order to assist
in making out the accounts of the said bankrupt's estate and effects, and to
attend any court of record, to be examined, touching the same, or such other
business as the said assignees shall judge necessary; for which he shall
receive three dollars per day.

Sec. 34. And be it further enacted, That all and every person and persons, who
shall become bankrupt as aforesaid, and who shall, within the time limited by
this act, surrender him or herself to the commissioners, and in all things
conform as in and by this act is directed, shall be allowed five per cent. upon
the nett produce of all the estate that shall be recovered in and received,
which shall be paid unto him or her by the assignee or assignees, in case the
nett produce of such estate, after such allowance made, shall be sufficient to
pay the creditors of said bankrupt, who shall have proved their debts under
such commission, the amount of fifty per cent, on their said debts,
respectively, and so as the said five per cent. shall not exceed, in the whole,
the sum of five hundred dollars; and in case the nett produce of the said
estate shall over and above the allowance hereafter mentioned, be sufficient to
pay the creditors seventy-five per cent. on the amount of their said debts,
respectively, that then the said bankrupt shall be allowed ten per cent. on the
amount of such nett produce, to be paid as aforesaid, so as such ten per cent.
shall not, in the whole, exceed the sum of eight hundred dollars, and every
such bankrupt shall be discharged from all debts by him or her due or owing, at
the time he or she became bankrupt, and all which were or might have been
proved under the said commission; and in case any such bankrupt shall
afterward be arrested, prosecuted, or impleaded, for or on account of any of
the said debts, such bankrupt may appear without bail, and may plead the
general issue, and give this act and the special matter in evidence; and the
certificate of such bankrupts conforming, and the allowance thereof, according
to the directions of this act, shall be, and shall be allowed to be sufficient
evidence prima facie of the party's being a bankrupt within the meaning of this
act, and of the commission and other proceedings precedent to the obtaining
such certificate, and a verdict shall thereupon pass for the defendant, unless
the plaintiff in such action can prove the said certificate was obtained
unfairly and by fraud, or unless he can make appear any concealment of estate
or effects, by such bankrupt, to the value of one hundred dollars: Provided,
That no such discharge of a bankrupt, shall release or discharge any person who
was a partner with such bankrupt, at the time he or she became bankrupt, or who
was then jointly held or bound with such bankrupt for the same debt or debts
from which such bankrupt was discharged as aforesaid.

Sec. 35. Provided always, and be it further enacted, That if the nett proceeds
of the bankrupt's estate, so to be discovered, recovered and received, shall
not amount to so much as will pay all and every of the creditors of the said
bankrupt, who shall have proved their debts under the said commission, the
amount of fifty per cent. on their debts, respectively, after all charges first
deducted, that then, and in such case, the bankrupt shall not be allowed five
per centum on such estate as shall be recovered in, but shall have and be paid
by the assignees so much money as the commissioners shall think fit to allow,
not more than three hundred dollars, nor exceeding three per cent. on the nett
proceeds of the said bankrupt's estate.

Sec. 36. Provided also, and be it further enacted, That no person becoming a
bankrupt, according to the intent and provisions of this act, shall be entitled
to a certificate of discharge, or to any of the benefits of the act; unless the
commissioners shall certify, under their hands, to the judge of the district
within which such commission issues, that such bankrupt has made a full
discovery of his or her estate and effects, and in all things conformed him or
herself to the directions of this act, and that there does not appear to them
any reason to doubt of the truth of such discovery, or that the same was not a
full discovery of the said bankrupt's estate and effects; or unless the said
judge should be of opinion that the said certificate was unreasonably denied by
the commissioners, and unless two-thirds in number and in value of the
creditors of the bankrupt, who shall be creditors for not less than fifty
dollars, respectively, and who shall have duly proved their debts under the
said commission, shall sign such certificate to the judge, and testify their
consent to the allowance of a certificate of discharge, in pursuance of this
act; which signing and consent shall also be certified by the commissioners;
but the said commissioners shall not certify the same till they have proof by
affidavit or affirmation, in writing, of such creditors or of the persons,
respectively authorized for that purpose, signing the said certificate: which
affidavit, or affirmation, together with the letter or power of attorney to
sign, shall be laid before the judge of the district within which such
commission issues, in order for the allowing the certificate of discharge; and
the said certificate shall not be allowed, unless the bankrupt make oath or
affirmation, in writing, that the certificate of the commissioners, and consent
of the creditors thereunto, were obtained fairly and without fraud; and any of
the creditors of the said bankrupt are allowed to be heard, if they shall think
fit, before the respective persons aforesaid, against the making or allowing of
such certificates by the commissioners or judge.

Sec. 37. And be it further enacted, That if any creditor or pretended creditor
of any bankrupt, shall exhibit to the commissioners, any fictitious or false
debt or demand, with intent to defraud the real creditors of such bankrupt, and
the bankrupt shall refuse to make discovery thereof, and suffer the fair
creditors to be imposed upon, he shall lose all title to the allowance upon the
amount of his effects, and to a certificate of discharge as aforesaid; nor
shall he be entitled to the said allowance or certificate, if he has lost at
any one time fifty dollars, or in the whole, three hundred dollars, after the
passing of this act, and within twelve months before he became a bankrupt, by
any manner of gaming or wagering whatever.

Sec. 38. And be it further enacted, That if any bankrupt, who shall have
obtained his certificate, shall be taken in execution, or detained in prison,
on account of any debts owing before he became a bankrupt, by reason that
judgment was obtained before such certificate was allowed, it shall be lawful
for any of the judges of the court wherein judgment was so obtained, or for any
court, judge or justice within the district in which such bankrupt shall be
detained, having powers to award or allow the writ of habeas corpus, on such
bankrupt, producing his certificate so as aforesaid allowed, to order any
sheriff or jailer, who shall have such bankrupt in custody, to discharge such
bankrupt without see or charge, first giving reasonable notice to the
plaintiff, or his attorney, of the motion for such discharge.

Sec. 39. And be it further enacted, That every person who shall have bona fide
given credit to, or taken securities, payable at future days, from persons who
are or shall become bankrupts, not due at the time of such person's becoming
bankrupt, shall be admitted to prove their debts and contracts, as if they were
payable presently, and shall have a dividend in proportion to the other
creditors discounting, where no interest is payable, at the rate of so much per
centum per annum, as is equal to the lawful interest of the state where the
debt was payable; and the obligee of any bottomry or respondentia bond, and the
assured in any policy of insurance, shall be admitted to claim, and after the
contingency or loss, to prove the debt thereon, in like manner as if the same
had happened before issuing the commission; and the bankrupt shall be
discharged from such securities, as if such money had been due and payable
before the time of his or her becoming bankrupt; and such creditors may
petition for a commission, or join in petitioning.

Sec. 40. And be it further enacted, That in case any person, committed by the
commissioners warrant, shall obtain a habeas corpus, in order to be discharged,
and there shall appear any insufficiency in the form of the warrant, it shall
be lawful for the court or judge before whom such party shall be brought by
habeas corpus, by rule or warrant, to commit such person to the same prison,
there to remain until he shall conform as aforesaid, unless it shall be made to
appear that he had fully answered all lawful questions put to him by the
commissioners: or in case such person was committed for not signing his
examination, unless it shall appear that the party had good reason for refusing
to sign the same, or that the commissioners had exceeded their authority in
making such commitment, and in case the jailer to whom such person shall be
committed, shall wilfully or negligently suffer such person to escape, or go
without the doors or walls of the prison, such jailer shall, for such offense,
being convicted thereof, forfeit a sum, not exceeding three thousand dollars,
for the use of the creditors.

Sec. 41. And be it further enacted, That the jailer shall, upon the request of
any creditor, having proved his debt, and showing a certificate thereof, under
the hands of the commissioners (which the commissioners shall give without fee
or reward) produce the person so committed; and in case such jailer shall
refuse to show such person to such creditor, requesting the same, such person
shall be considered as having escaped, and the jailer or sheriff so refusing,
shall be liable as for a wilful escape.

Sec. 42. And be it further enacted, That where it shall appear to the said
commissioners that there has been mutual credit given by the bankrupt, and any
other person, or mutual debts between them at any time before such person
became bankrupt, the assignee or assignees of the estate, shall state the
account between them, and one debt may be set off against the other, and what
shall appear to be due on either side, on the balance of such account, after
such set off, and no more, shall be claimed or paid on either side,
respectively.

Sec. 43. And be it further enacted, That it shall and may be lawful to and for
the assignee or assignees of any bankrupt's estate and effects, under the
direction of the commissioners, and by and with the consent of the major part
in value of such of the said bankrupt's creditors as shall have duly proved
their debts under the commission, and shall be present at any meeting of the
said creditors, to be held in pursuance of due and public notice for that
purpose given, to submit any difference or dispute, for, on account of, or by
reason or means of, any matter, cause or thing whatsoever, relating to such
bankrupt, or to his or her estate or effects, to the final end and
determination of arbitrators, to be chosen by the said commissioners, and the
major part in value of such creditors, as shall be present at such meeting as
aforesaid, and the party or parties with whom they shall have such difference
or dispute, and to perform the award of such arbitrators, or otherwise to
compound and agree the matter in difference or dispute as aforesaid, in such
manner as the said assignee or assignees, under the direction, and with the
consent aforesaid, shall think fit and can agree, and the same shall be binding
on the several creditors of the said bankrupt, and the said assignee or
assignees are hereby indemnified for what they shall fairly do according to the
directions aforesaid.

Sec. 44. And be it further enacted, That the assignees shall be, and hereby
are vested with full power to dispose of all the bankrupt's estate, real and
personal, at public auction or vendue, without being subject to any tax, duty,
imposition, or restriction, any law to the contrary notwithstanding.

Sec. 45. And be it further enacted, That if after any commission of
bankruptcy, sued forth, the bankrupt happen to die before the commissioners
shall have distributed the effects, or any part thereof, the commissioners
shall, nevertheless, proceed to execute the commission, as fully as they might
have done if the party were living.

Sec. 46. And be it further enacted, That where any commission of bankruptcy
shall be delivered to the commissioners, therein named to be executed, it shall
and may be lawful for them, before they take the oath or affirmation of
qualification, to demand and take from the creditor or creditors, prosecuting
such commission, a bond, with one good security, if required, in the penalty of
one thousand dollars, conditioned for the payment of the costs, charges and
expenses, which shall arise and accrue upon the prosecution of the said
commission, Provided always, That the expenses, so as aforesaid to be secured
and paid by the petitioning creditor or creditors, shall be repaid to him or
them by the commissioners or assignees, out of the first moneys arising from
the bankrupt's estate or effects, if so much be received therefrom.

Sec. 47. And be it further enacted, That the district judges, in each district
respectively, shall fix a rate of allowance, to be made to the commissioners of
bankruptcy, as compensation of services to be rendered under the commission,
and it shall be lawful for any creditor, by petition to the district judge, to
except to any charge contained in the account of the commissioners; and the
said judge, after hearing the commissioners, may, in a summary way, decide upon
the validity of such exception.

Sec. 48. And be it further enacted, That all penalties given by this act, for
the benefit of the creditors, shall be recovered by the assignee or assignees,
by action of debt, and the money so recovered, the charges of suit being
deducted, shall be distributed toward payment of the creditors.

Sec. 49. And be it further enacted, That if any action shall be brought
against any commissioner, or assignee, or other person, having authority under
the commission, for any thing done or performed by force of this act, the
defendant may plead the generalissue, and give this act and the special matter
in evidence; and in case of nonsuit, discontinuance, or verdict, or judgment
for him, he shall recover double costs.

Sec. 50. And be it further enacted, That if any estate, real or personal,
shall descend, revert to, or become vested in any person, after he or she shall
be declared a bankrupt, and before he or she shall obtain a certificate, signed
by the judge as aforesaid, all such estate shall, by virtue of this act, be
vested in the said commissioners, and shall be by them assigned and conveyed to
the assignee or assignees, in fee simple, or otherwise, in like manner as above
directed, with the estate of the said bankrupt, at the time of the said
bankruptcy, and the proceeds thereof shall be divided among the creditors.

Sec. 51. And be it further enacted, That the said commissioners shall, once in
every year, carefully file in the clerk's office of the district court, all the
proceedings had, in every case before them, and which shall have been finished,
including the commissions, examinations, dividends, entries and other
determinations of the said commissioners, in which office the final certificate
of the said bankrupt may also be recorded; all which proceedings shall remain
of record in the said office, and certified copies thereof shall be admitted as
evidence in all courts, in like manner as the copies of the proceedings of the
said district court are admitted in other cases.

Sec. 52. And be it further enacted, That it shall and may be lawful for any
creditor of such bankrupt, to attend all or any of the examinations of said
bankrupt, and the allowance of the final certificate, if he shall think proper,
and then and there to propose interrogatories, to be put by the judge or
commissioners to the said bankrupt and others, and also to produce and examine
witnesses and documents before such judge or commissioners, relative to the
subject matter before them. And in case either the bankrupt or creditor shall
think him or herself aggrieved by the determination of the said judge or
commissioners, relative to any material fact in the commencement or progress of
the said proceedings, or in the allowance of the certificate aforesaid, it
shall and may be lawful for either party to petition the said judge, setting
forth such facts, and the determination thereon, with the complaint of the
party and a prayer for trial by a jury to determine the same; and the said
judge shall, in his discretion, make order thereon, and award a venire facias
to the marshal of the district, returnable within fifteen days before him, for
the trial of the facts mentioned in the said petition, notice whereof shall be
given to the commissioners and creditors concerned in the same, at which time
the said trial shall be had, unless on good cause shown, the judge shall give
farther time, and judgment being entered on the verdict of the jury, shall be
final on the said facts, and the judge or commissioners shall proceed agreeably
thereto.

Sec. 53. And be it further enacted, That the commissioners, before the
appointment of assignees, and the assignees after such appointment, may, from
time to time, make such allowance out of the bankrupt's estate, until he shall
have obtained his final discharge, as, in their opinion, may be requisite, for
the necessary support of the said bankrupt and his family.

Sec. 54. And be it further enacted, That it shall be lawful for the major part
in value of the creditors, before they proceed to the choice of assignees, to
direct in what manner, with whom, and where the moneys arising by, and to be
received from time to time out of the bankrupt's estate, shall be lodged, until
the same shall be divided among the creditors as herein directed, to which
direction every such assignee and assignees shall conform, as often as three
hundred dollars shall be received.

Sec. 55. And be it further enacted, That every matter and thing, by this act
required to be done by the commissioners of any bankrupt, shall be valid to all
intents and purposes if performed by a majority of them.

Sec. 56. And be it further enacted, That in all cases where the assignees
shall prosecute any debtor of the bankrupt for any debt, duty or demand, the
commission, or a certified copy thereof, and the assignment of the
commissioners of the bankrupt's estate, shall be conclusive evidence of the
issuing the commission, and of the person named therein, being a trader and
bankrupt, at the time mentioned therein.

Sec. 57. And be it further enacted, That every person obtaining a discharge
from his debts, by certificate as aforesaid, granted under a commission of
bankruptcy, shall not, on any future commission, be entitled to any other
certificate, than a discharge of his person only; unless the nett proceeds of
the estate and effects of such person so becoming bankrupt a second time, shall
be sufficient to pay seventy-five per cent. to his or her creditors on the
amount of their debts, respectively.

Sec. 58. And be it further enacted, That any creditor of a person, against
whom a commission of bankruptcy shall have been sued forth, and who shall lay
his claim before the commissioners appointed in pursuance of this act, may, at
the same time, declare his unwillingness to submit the same to the judgment of
the said commissioners, and his wish that a jury may be impannelled to decide
thereon: and in like manner, the assignee or assignees of such bankrupt, may
object to the consideration of any particular claim by the commissioners, and
require that the same should be referred to a jury. In either case, such
objection and request shall be entered on the books of the commissioners, and
thereupon, an issue shall be made up between the parties, and a jury shall be
impannelled, as in other cases, to try the same in the circuit court for the
district in which such bankrupt has usually resided. The verdict of such jury
shall be subject to the control of the courts, as in suits originally
instituted in the said court, and when rendered, if not set aside by the court,
shall be certified to the commissioners, and shall ascertain the amount of any
such claim, and such creditor or creditors shall be considered, in all
respects, as having proved their debts under the commission.

Sec. 59. And be it further enacted, That the lands and effects of any person
becoming bankrupt, may be sold on such credit, and on such security, as a major
part in value of the creditors may direct: Provided, nothing herein contained,
shall be allowed so to operate, as to retard the granting the bankrupt's
certificate.

Sec. 60. And be it further enacted, That if any person becoming bankrupt,
shall be in prison, it shall be lawful for any creditor or creditors, at whose
suit he or she shall be in execution, to discharge him or her from custody; or
if such creditor or creditors shall refuse to do so, the prisoner may petition
the commissioners to liberate him or her; and thereupon, if, in the opinion of
the commissioners, the conduct of such bankrupt shall have been fair, so as to
entitle him or her, in their opinion, to a certificate, when by law such
certificate might be given, it shall be lawful for them to direct the discharge
of such prisoner, and to enter the same in their books; which being notified to
the keeper of the gaol in which such prisoner may be confined, shall be a
sufficient authority for his or her discharge: Provided, That in either case,
such discharge shall be no bar to another execution, if a certificate shall be
refused to such bankrupt: And provided also, That it shall be no bar to a
subsequent imprisonment of such bankrupt, by order of the commissioners, in
conformiry to the provisions of this act.

Sec. 61. And be it further enacted, That this act shall not repeal or annul,
or be construed to repeal or annul the laws of any state, now in force, or
which may be hereafter enacted, for the relief of insolvent debtors, except so
far as the same may respect persons, who are, or may be clearly within the
purview of this act, and whose debts shall amount, in the cases specified in
the 2d section thereof, to the sums therein mentioned; and if any person,
within the purview of this act, shall be imprisoned for the space of three
months for any debt, or upon any contract, unless the creditors of such
prisoner shall proceed to prosecute a commission of bankruptcy against him or
her, agreeably to the provisions of this act, such debtor may and shall be
entitled to relief, under any such laws for the relief of insolvent debtors,
this act notwithstanding.

Sec. 62. And be it further enacted, That nothing contained in this law shall,
in any manner, effect the right of preference to prior satisfaction of debts
due to the United States, as secured or provided by any law heretofore passed,
nor shall be construed to lessen or impair any right to, or security for money
due to the United States, or to any of them.

Sec. 63. And be it further enacted, That nothing contained in this act shall
be taken, or construed, to invalidate or impair any lien existing at the date
of this act, upon the lands or chattels of any person who may become a bankrupt.

Sec. 64. And be it further enacted, That this act shall continue in force
during the term of five years, and from thence to the end of the next session
of Congress thereafter, and no longer: Provided, That the expiration of this
act shall not prevent the complete execution of any commission which may have
been previously thereto issued.

THEODORE SEDGWICK, Speaker of the House of Representatives. THOMAS JEFFERSON,
Vice President of the United States, and President of the Senate.

Approved, April 4, 1800. JOHN ADAMS, President of the United States.


