VIRGINIA: In the High Court of Chancery, MARCH 16, 1798.
BETWEEN ROBERT PLEASANTS, son and heir of John Pleasants, dec'd. Pltf. AND
MARY LOGAN, widow and administratrix of Charles Logan, and divisee of John
Pleasants and Jonathan Pleasants, deceased, Elizabeth Pleasants, administratrix
of Joseph Pleasants, deceased, Isaac Pleasants and Jane his wife, Samuel
Pleasants, junior, Thomas Pleasants, junior, and Margaret his wife, Robert
Langley and Elizabeth his wife, Daniel Teasdale and Margaret his wife, late
Margaret Langley, Elizabeth Langley the younger, and Anne May, Defendants.

ON the motion of the Plaintiff by his counsel, the court does order that the
Defendants, who are in possession of (...) of the slaves, that are the subject
of controversy between the parties in this suit, do not carry or remove them,
or cause them, or any of them, to be carried or removed out of this
commonwealth during the pendency of this suit, or until the further order of
the court.

June 7, 1798.
On the motion of Daniel Teasdale by his counsel, leave is given him to amend
his answer, whereupon he filed the same.

September the 12th, 1798.
Between Robert Pleasants, son and heir of John Pleasants, Pltf.

And Carry Pleasants and Mary Pleasants his wife, late Mary Logan,
administratrix of Charles Logan, and divisee of John Pleasants and Jonathan
Pleasants, dec'd. and others, Defts.

And between Ned, a pauper, Pltf.

And Elizabeth Pleasants, Deft.

IN these causes, which came on last term to be heard on the bills, demurrers
and answers, and on the testaments of John Pleasants and Jonathan Pleasants,
and the Journal of the House of Delegates, exhibited and read, and were argued
by counsel, the court on this twelfth day of September, in the year of our Lord
one thousand seven hundred and ninety eight, overruled the demurrers, because
the right to freedom proposed to be asserted by the plaintiff on behalf of
certain men, women and children detained in slavery, which freedom the former
owner of some of them and of the progenitors of others could not bestow,
although solicitous to bestow it, during his life time, was, preserved, if it
could he preserved, until enjoyment of the blessing would be permitted by
temporary and conditional bequests of the slaves, with a confidence that in an
event which might remove the legal obstacle to deliverance from thraldom, the
legataries would fulfill the testator's desire, so that the intermediate
possession of the legataries, if that desire were not inane was fiduciary, and
in such a case, the elements, from which juridical arrangements commence, prove
the question which has occurred to be peculiarly proper for praetorian
animadversion for decision before a tribunal erected especially to foster and
effectuate conscientious fideicommissa: and upon that question which is the
capital subject of disceptation and some others, in consequence thereof the
court declared its opinion in these terms, the condition which the testator,
John Pleasants, enjoined the legataries, and which, if it were lawful,
excepting the bequests they were obliged implicitly to perform, was not
contrary to law. Such a provision for emancipation was not prohibited literally
by the statute in 1748, the only instituted law then extant, which can be
quoted for that purpose, enacting that no slave shall be set free, upon any
pretense, except for services to be adjudged by the governor and council to be
meritorious, the statute operated only upon emancipations efficatious
immediately, not those of which the efficacy was fortuitous; and ampliation of
the statute giving it energy in cases of which similar predicaments might seem
to require similar policy, is reprobated in this instance, where the
defendants, in a court of equity, are invoking its aid to hinder the
restitution of a right, of which they, on whose behalf it is claimed, and their
progenitors, could not have been deprived without violation of equitable
constitutional principles. An objection urged by one of the counsel for the
defendants, if it were not misunderstood, namely, that John Pleasants, who
dying before the statute permiting manumission of slaves, enacted in the year
1782, was never authorized to manumit his slaves, could not enjoin manumission
of them in any circumstances, is founded upon a position conceived not to be
true, unless the act required by the condition to be performed were a malum in
se; that a condition requiring performance of an act, not whilst the
performance would be unlawful, but when it would, if ever it should be lawful,
that such a condition to be performed, not after an intolerable length of time,
is unlawful seems an absurd position: upon the doctrine of perpetuities, if
applicable to any cases, in which human liberty is challenged, can not be found
an objection against the slaves existing at the death of the testator, John
Pleasants, or against the slaves born after, of mothers existing before his
death; for their cases are examples of the legitimate periods, during which
emergence or lapse of contingent dispositions may be suspended, namely, where
events before the termination of a life or lives existent, or of a life or
lives immediately succeeding the existent, must fix the destiny. Here the
slaves for whose benefit the testator intended the bequests are first, those of
whom he was POSSESSED at the time of his death, and secondly, those of whose
MOTHERS he was so possessed. The period of time during ability of the slaves to
enjoy when the legislature should permit them to enjoy, this benefit was
suspended, did not excede the tolerated period. I was during the lives of them,
who survived the testator, and of them who were born after his death, of
mothers surviving him, so that, in equity, of the slaves, on whose behalf this
prosecution was instituted, they who were thirty years old or older, in the
year one thousand seven hundred and eighty two, when the statute authorizing
manumission was enacted, were, at that time entitled, they, who born before his
death are not yet thirty years old, will be when they shall attain that age,
entitled to freedom, they who were born between the times of the said
testator's death and of enacting the said statute will be when they shall
attain the same age entitled to freedom, and they who have been born since the
said statute was enacted, were at their birth entitled to freedom; and the
plaintiff not only the heir but the surviving executor of the said John
Pleasants, is the proper party to vindicate that freedom, and require
fulfillment of his desire repeatedly declared in his testament, and the court
does direct one of the commissioners thereof to report a catalogue of the
slaves aforesaid, distinguishing the times when, according to the foregoing
opinion, any of them ought heretofore to have been and hereafter to be
liberated from servitude, and stating accounts of profits, to which they who
have been wrongfully detained are entitled.

September 26th, 1798.
The Defendants Carry Pleasants and Mary his wife, late Mary Logan,
administratrix of Charles Logan, and devisee of John Pleasants and Jonathan
Pleasants, deceased, Elizabeth Pleasants, administratrix of Joseph Pleasants,
deceased, Isaac Pleasants and Jane his wife, Samuel Pleasants, jun. and Thomas
Pleasants, junior, and Margaret his wife, in the first suit, and the defendant
in the other suit prayed an appeal from the decree pronounced in these ^^^ses,
on the twelfth day of the present month, which is allowed them on their giving
bond and security in each suit in the penalty of twenty pounds, with such
condition as the law requires.

June 5th, 1799.
In these causes, in order that the decree of the Court of Appeals, which is
certified by the clerk thereof in the following words. -- "At a Court of
Appeals, held at the Capitol in the City of Richmond, the sixth day of May, one
thousand seven hundred and ninety-nine, Carry Pleasants and Mary Pleasants his
wife, late Mary Logan, administratrix of Charles Logan, and devisee of John
Pleasants and Jonathan Pleasants, deceased, Elizabeth Pleasants, administratrix
of Joseph Pleasants, Isaac Pleasants and Jane his wife, Samuel Pleasants, jun.
and Margaret his wife, appellants against Robert Pleasants, son and heir of
John Pleasants, appellee, and Elizabeth Pleasants appellant against Ned, a
pauper, appellee, upon appeals from a decree of the High Court of Chancery,
pronounced the twelfth day of September, one thousand seven hundred and
ninety-eight. This day came the parties by their counsel, and the court having
maturely considered the transcript of the record, and the argument of the
counsel, is of opinion that there is no error in so much of the decree of the
said High Court of Chancery, as overruleth the demurrers of the appellants Mary
Pleasants, Isaac Pleasants and Samuel Pleasants, jun. for want of jurisdiction
in the said court; but that there is error in some of the principles, on which
the decree upon the merits is founded, and part of the reasoning thereupon is
not approved by this court, therefore it is decreed and ordered, that so much
of the said decree as overruleth the said demurrers be affirmed, and that the
residue of the said decree be reversed, and this court proceeding to make such
decree as the said High Court of Chancery should have pronounced, is of
opinion, that although the testators at the time of making their respective
wills had not power to manumit, and if they had devised them upon conditions
that the devisees should emancipate them immediately, the condition being
unlawful would have been void, and the property vested, yet the condition that
they should become free when the law would permit it, was not of that sort.
That to apply the rule respecting the limitation of the remainder of a chattel
upon too remote a contingency, with all its consequences, to the present case,
would be too rigid, but that a reasonable principle ought to be adopted to suit
its peculiar circumstances, which is this, that if the event happens whilst the
slaves remain in the possession of the family without change by the
intervention of creditors or purchasers since the contending parties would be
those whose interest had been contemplated by the testators, the bequest ought
to take place, but that the case of such intervening claims not being in the
view of the testators it ought to be considered how far they should in equity
prevent the devise of the manumission from taking effect. So far therefore as
concerns the family, the court would have had no difficulty in decreeing in
favor of the paupers, if the wills had directed a general emancipation, when
permitted by law, and the legislature had permitted it without any condition
annexed; but a difficulty arises from the testators' not having directed a
general manumission, when allowed by law, but a limited one, directing that
all future generations of these people born whilst their mothers were under
thirty should serve to that age, founded no doubt, upon considerations of the
interest of his family, and that of the slaves on which middle state the
legislature have not declared their will, and on the other hand the legislature
have permitted an unlimitted emancipation, but annexed a condition imposing
upon the person liberating certain terms for the sake of the community, of
which the persons making voluntary manumissions might judge, whether they would
do the act upon these terms and use their pleasure: and on these terms the
testators have not declared their minds whether they would or would not have
compelled the devisees against their inclination to emancipate subject to them.
Under this difficulty, the court endeavored to model a decree to effect the
purpose of the paupers without essentially violating the wills, and is of
opinion that the limited manumission, according to the modifications, in the
wills of the testators, can alone take place and be decreed, and that the terms
for securing the public against the maintenance of the aged or infirmed, cannot
be equitably imposed upon the devisees. It is therefore further decreed and
ordered, that all the slaves of which the testators were possessed as their
property, at the time of their respective deaths, not subject to the claims of
the creditors or purchasers, before stated, and who are now above the age of
forty five years, and their increase, born after their respective mothers had
attained the age of thirty years (so soon as Robert Pleasants the executor, the
several trustees, or any other person, shall in the courts of the several
counties in which the said slaves respectively reside, enter into bonds, with
approved security, payable to the justices then sitting in each court, and
their successors, with condition that the said slaves shall not become
chargeable to the public, or enter into one such bond for the whole in the
General Court,) and all such as are now above thirty and under the age of
forty-five years immediately shall be emancipated and set free to all intents
and purposes, in like manner as if they had been born free; and that all who
are now under the age of thirty, and whose mothers had not attained that age at
the time of their birth, and all their future descendants, born whilst their
mothers are in such service, do serve their several owners, until they shall
respectively attain the age of thirty years, and then be in like manner free,
and when their freedom shall severally take effect according to this decree,
there shall be delivered to each of them, by their respective masters or
mistresses, a certificate, written or printed, attesting their freedom, in such
form as shall be directed by the said High Court of Chancery. That no account
ought to be taken of profits, it being unusual in such cases and less
reasonable in this very difficult one. And the cause is remanded to the said
High Court of Chancery for a state to be taken of the present condition of the
several persons, and their rights ascertained, according to the principles of
this decree, also for further proceedings to be had respecting the claims of
Elizabeth Pleasants and Daniel Teasdale to part of the slaves, under titles
paramount to the will of John Pleasants, and the claims of the creditors of
Charles Logan, upon proper statements of the facts and exhibits relative
thereto, which they are to be at liberty to introduce in the said court, which
is ordered to be certified to the said High Court of Chancery.

A copy, J. Brown, C. C.

if it be not misunderstood by him, whom the law requires to enter it as his
own, may be executed; this court does direct that a commissioner thereof do
report, first the names and sexes of the slaves of which the testators intended
by the said decree, were possessed, as their property at the time of their
respective deaths, not subject to the claims of the creditors or purchasers in
the decree stated, and who were, when the decree was pronounced, above the age
of forty five years, and their increase, born after their respective mothers
had attained the age of thirty years (so soon as Robert Pleasants, the
executor, the several trustees or any other person, shall in the courts of the
several counties, in which the said slaves respectively reside, enter into
bonds, which approved securities, payable to the justices then sitting in each
court, and their successors, with condition that the said slaves shall not
become chargeable to the public, or enter into one such bond for the whole in
the General Court) and all such as were, when the decree was pronounced, above
thirty and under the age of forty-five years, and secondly, the names and sexes
of the slaves of which the testators were possessed as their property at the
time of their respective deaths, and who were, when the decree was pronounced,
under the age of thirty, and whose mothers had not attained that age at their
birth: and this court does order, that when the freedom of the slaves shall
severally take effect, according to the decree of the Court of Appeals, there
shall be delivered to each of them, by their respective masters or mistresses,
a certificate, written or printed, attesting their freedom in this form: -- is
emancipated and set free according to the decree of the Court of Appeals, in
May, one thousand seven hundred and ninety-nine.

June 7th, 1799.
Thomas Pleasants of Beaverdam, James Pleasants of Goochland, William Moseley,
Frederick Woodson and William Bentley, or any three of them, are appointed
commissioners for performing the order made in these causes on Wednesday last,
in place of a commissioner of the court.

September 10th, 1799.
On the motion of the plaintiff in the first suit by his counsel, Benjamin
Good, George Williamson, Abell Janney, James Denson L^dd, Robert Evans, John
Nicholas and John Ponsonby are added to the commissioners heretofore appointed
to perform the order made in these causes on the fifth day of June last, who,
or any two of whom are empowered to execute the same.

VIRGINIA, -- In the High Court of Chancery, May 22nd, 1797.
Between Ned, Plaintiff. and Elizabeth Pleasants, Defendant.
On the motion of Ned, who is detained in slavery by the defendant, he is
allowed to sue his said mistress in this court, in forma pauperis, and John
Warden is assigned his counsel to prosecute the said suit; and it is ordered,
that his said mistress do not presume to beat or misuse him upon this account,
and that she suffer him to come to the clerk's office for commissions to take
the depositions of his witnesses and to attend their examinations and the
trial, and commissions are awarded the parties to examine and take the
depositions of their witnesses.

LIST of NEGROES in the possession of Samuel Pleasants, held under the wills of
John and Jonathan Pleasants; whose ages were ascertained by Thomas Pleasants,
James Pleasants. William Moseley and Frederick Woodson, on the 19th day of
August, 1799.
Persons above the age of 45 years.
David, Saunders, Ceasar, York, London, Nanny, Charlotte, Sall, Arthur, Will,
Maria, Judy, Phillis Po^der. -- In all 13.

Persons between 30 and 45 years old.s
Sterling 1, Frederick 2, Joe 3, Phil 4, Tom 5, Harry 6, Jacob Powder 7, George
8, Jacob 9, D^ll 10, Ben 11, Pender 12, John Powder 13, Silvia 14, Frank Cozens
15, Chloe Cozens 16, Peter 17, Aggy 18, Bob 19, Fanny 20, Nelly 21, Betty 22,
James 23, Patty 24, Lucy Gloucester 25, Cuffy 26, Sukey 27, Sukey 28, Amy 29.

Persons born of mothers after they were 30 years old.
Jack 1, George 2, Pender 3, York 4, Amy 5, Eve 6, Joe 7, Nelly 8. David 9,
Molly 10, Rose 11, Kate 12, Jacob 13, Phebe 14, Lucy 15, D^lphin 16, Lilly 17,
Mourning 18, Tabb 19, Caesar 20, Sally 21, Mourning 22, Hampton 23, Jerry 24,
Aggy 25, Mary Ann 26, Alice 27, Amy 28, Rachel 29.

Persons judged to be infirm and unable to earn a support, entitled to freedom
when 30 years old.
Nancy, 25 years old; Isabel, born February 1782; John, born July 1783. --
(...) 3.

Persons born of mothers under 30 years old, and entitled to fredom at (...)
age.
Names. When born. When to be discharged. Solomon, May 1772 May 1802 D^^^ass,
February 1782 February 1812 Hannah, October 1784 October 1814 Lucy, April 1787
April 1817 Sterling, April 6th, 1789 April 1819 Peter, January 1792 January
1822 Joe, September 1794 September 1824 Charlotte, April 1784 April 1814 Biddy,
April 17th, 1786 April 17th, 1816 Mourning, December. 25, 1787 December. 25, 1817
Winter, October 1789 October 1819 Gabriel, March 1792 March 1822 Lewis, May
1794 May 1824 R^^ney, September 1796 September 1826 Ben, February 1799 February
1829 Frank, May 1777 May 1807 Hannah, May 1779 May 1809 Thornton, July 1781
July 1811 Henry, December 1786 December 1816 Milly, February 1789 February 1819
Ri^ley, September 1791 September 1821 Frederick, October 1793 October 1823
Frank, April 1795 April 1825 Ben, May 15th, 1782 May 15th, 1812 Luke, July 1784
July 1814 Not, March 1789 March 1819 Isaac, March 1788 March 1818 Alace, April
1790 April 1820 Betty, August 1775 August 1805 Beck, June 1795 June 1825 Phil,
May 1797 May 1827 Ned Abrey, August 9th, 1799 August 9th, 1829 Critty, March
1777 March 1807 Sall, October 1778 October 1808 Janey, February 1784 April 1814
Hester, November 1786 November 1816 Patience, March 1783 March 1813 Milton,
April 1785 April 1815 Anderson, May 1787 May 1817 Clarissa, June 1789 June 1819
Caroline, July 1792 July 1822

Names. When born. When to be discharged. Reubin, August 1793 August 1823
Arthur, August 1795 August 1825 Mary, December. 23, 1775 December. 23, 1805 Fanny,
January 1792 January 1822 Bob, May 28th, 1795 May 28, 1825 Celia, May 28th,
1798 May 28, 1828 Toney, May 1776 May 1806 Janey, December 1775 December 1805
Phebe, January 15, 1797 January 15, 1827 Judy, January 31, 1799 January 31,
1829 Doll, November 1774 November 1804 Ursula, May 1789 May 1819 Peyton, August
1791 August 1821 Julia, August 1793 August 1823 Grace, October 1795 October
1825 Jim, January 1798 January 1828 Charles, August 1774 August 1804 Will,
December 1776 December 1806 Bridget, November 1783 November 1813 Watt, August
1770 August 1800 Rachel, May 1778 May 1808 Maria, August 1795 August 1825 Aggy,
March 1798 March 1828 Lydia, September 1780 September 1810 Moses, March 1797
March 1827 Charles, November. 3, 1798 November. 3, 1828 James, October 5, 1788
October 5, 1818 Anthony, April 23, 1791 April 23, 1821 Myrtilla, Novem. 29,
1792 Novem. 29, 1822 Lucy, August 28, 1794 August 28, 1824 Isaac, Novem. 18,
1796 Novem. 18, 1826 Judy, November. 5, 1798 Novem. 5, 1828 Judith, August 1793
August 1803 Duncan, August 1793 August 1823 Hall, March 1780 March 1810 Caesar,
August 1788 August 1818 Gloucester, August 1798 August 1823 Nancy, August 1790
August 1820 Caesar, May 1774 May 1804 Aggy, August 1777 August 1807 Celia,
August 1795 August 1825 Milly, August 1790 August 1800 Stephen, November 1777
November 1807 Phillis, August 1772 August 1802

Names. When born. When to be discharged. Jacob, September 1790 September 1820
Abbey, February 1782 February 1812 Mingo, October 1797 October 1827 Jim,
December 1777 December 1807 Eve, June 1779 June 1809 Phillis, December 1781
December 1811 Lavinia, June 1783 June 1813 Gloucester, December 1784 December 1814
Tom, June 1786 June 1816 Frank, December 1787 December 1817 Lucy, December 1789
December 1819 Mike, June 1791 June 1821 Abraham, June 1793 June 1823 Jessee,
December 1778 December 1808 Tabb, December 1780 December 1810 Cuffy, December
1782 December 1812 London, December 1786 December 1816 Biddy, December 1788
December 1818 Nelly, December 1785 December 1815 Sall, September 1787 September
1817 Nanny, May 1791 May 1821 Poll, May 1795 May 1825 Judy, January 1781
January 1811 Ad^line May 1799 May 1829 Amy, August 1773 August 1803 Joe, June
1781 June 1811 Corey, December 1782 December 1812 Moses, December 1784 December
1814 Molly, May 1786 May 1816 Patty, October 1789 October 1819 In all 115.

LIST of NEGROES in the possession of Isaac W. Pleasants, held under the Wills
of John and Jonathan Pleasants; whose ages were ascertained by Thomas
Pleasants, James Pleasants, William Mosely and Frederick Woodson, on the 19th
day of Aug. 1799.
Persons above the age of 45 years.
-- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- --

Persons between 30 and 45 years old.
Janey 1, Phillis 2, Hannah 3, invalids, Peter 4.

Persons born of mothers under 30 years old and entitled to freedom at that age.
Names. When born. When to be discharged. B^lly, November 1778 November 1808
J^^n, January 1781 January 1811 Sall, June 1782 June 1812 Gaby, December 1783
December 1813 Charles, December 1784 December 1814 Sall, June 1773 June 1803

The above lists was taken agreeable to a decree of the High Court of Chancery.
Given under our hands the day and year above written.

William Moseley, Frederick Woodson, James Pleasants, Thomas Pleasants.


LIST of NEGROES in possession of Robert Carry Pleasants, and formerly in
possession of Charles and Mary Logan, held under the wills of John and Jonathan
Pleasants, whose ages were ascertained by William Moseley, William Bentley and
Frederick Woodson, commissioners appointed by the High Court of Chancery for
that purpose, August 23rd, 1799.
Persons above 45 years old.
Tom 1, Pompey 2, Will 3, Cato 4, Ned 5, Doll 6, Rachel 7, Amy 8, Jocob 9, Ned
Gwin 10, Billy 11, Sarah 12, Richard Sharp 13, Not 14.

Persons between 30 and 45 years old.
Nelly 1, Fanny 2, John Gray 3, Rachel Gray 4, David 5, Jessee 6, Mirtilla 7,
Easter 8, Grace 9, Bob (son of Judy) 10, Sam Binns 11, Mirtilla 12, Mary 13,
Mourning 14, Caesar 15.

Persons born after their mothers were 30 years old.
Anthony 1, Arthur 2, Louisa 3, Emmily 4, Ned 5, Daniel 6, Bob Gray 7, Paul
Gray 8, Tarlton 9, Bartlet 10, Critty 11, Sukey (a cripple) 12, Charlotte 13,
Milly 14, Billy 15, Sally 16, Jack 17, Tom 18, Ursula 19, Moses 20, Jack 21,
Mirtilla 22, Jessee 23, Kesiah 24, Frederick 25, Tom 26, Doctor 27, John 28,
Rachel 29, Sally 30, Gaby 31, Winny 32, Diey 33, Elijah 34, Caesar 35, Mourning
Woodson 36, Fanny Woodson 37, Sam Woodson 38, Joseph Woodson 39, Lewis Moseley
40, Letty Moseley 41, Sterling 42, Peter 43, Frank 44.

Persons born of Mothers under 30 years old, and entitled to freedom at that
age.
Names. When born. When to be discharged. Hampton, December 1782 December 1812
Mourning, August 1789 August 1819 Polly Copland, March 1783 March 1813 Fanny
Copland, December 1785 December 1815 D^^k Copland, August 1787 August 1817 John
Copland, August 1789 August 1819 Sam Randolph, August 1770 August 1800 Edith,
March 1779 March 1809 Lucy, August 1770 August 1800 Lydia, March 1780 March
1810 Tabitha, August 1778 August 1808 Effee, February 1793 February 1823 Isham,
February 1791 February 1821 Lavinia, February 1795 February 1825 Polly,
December 1797 December 1827 Charles, March 1798 March 1828 Henrietta, August
1794 August 1824 Phillis, August 1781 August 1811 Molly, March 1783 March 1813
Stephen, August 1784 August 1814 Ben, March 1786 Much 1816 Nancy (a cripple)
August 1787 August 1817 Sam Binns, jun. August 1789 August 1819 Dick Baugh,
March 1798 March 1828 Beck, May 1771 May 1801 Kate, November 1772 November 1802
Jacob, May 1774 May 1804 Ned, May 1777 May 1807 Judy, August 1784 August 1814
David, November 1778 November 1808 Nancy, March 1795 March 1825 Shasteen,
August 1796 August 1826 Betty Ampy, August 1773 August 1803 James, April 1790
April 1820 Thruston, August 1795 August 1825 Bentley, April 1794 April 1824
Addison, May 1799 May 1829 Frank, February 1794 February 1824 Haskins, May 1795
May 1825 Henry, August 1796 August 1826 Peyton, July 1798 July 1828 Lewis,
August 1776 August 1806

Names. When born. When to be discharged. George, August 1787 August 1817
Harrison, September 1791 September 1821 Peter, August 1780 August 1810 Biddy,
March 1782 March 1812 Kitty, August 1790 August 1820 Abraham, January 1780
January 1810 Fleming, August 1781 August 1811 Saunders, March 1782 March 1812
Little Billy, August 1785 August 1815 Judy twins, August 1787 August 1817 James
twins, August 1787 August 1817 Emanuel, August 1795 August 1825 Janey, August
1797 August 1827 Lucy, August 1772 August 1802 Sam, August 1775 August 1805
Lewis, April 1777 April 1807 Ned, August 1779 August 1809 Sarah, August 1781
August 1811 Aby April 1783 April 1813 Reubin, December 1784 December 1814
Hannah, March 1792 March 1822 Peggy, March 1794 March 1824 William, August 1796
August 1826 Johnson, July 1798 July 1828 Matilda, January 1796 January 1826
Sukey, November 1797 November 1827 Joe, August 1775 August 1805 Milly, March
1777 March 1807 July, August 1779 August 1809 Aaron, March 1781 March 1811
Davy, August 1783 August 1813 Sukey, August 1785 August 1815 Billy, April 1783
April 1813 Phillis, April 1778 April 1808 Simeon, August 1779 August 1809 John,
April 1781 April 1811 Sylvia, August 1782 August 1812 Watt, April 1784 April
1814 Mourning, March 1798 March 1828 Robin Cuffy, March 1777 March 1807
Alexander, August 1778 August 1808 Pero, April 1786 April 1816 Billy Woodson,
August 1782 August 1812 Davy Woodson, April 1781 April 1811 Joseph Moseley,
August 1779 August 1809 87 Total.

The foregoing lists were made in pursuance of a decree of the High Court of
Chancery. Given under hands the day and year above written.

Wm Mosely, W. Bentley, Frederick Woodson,


List of Negroes, formerly the estate of John Pleasants, deceased, and by his
Will given to his grand daughter Margaret, wife of Thomas Pleasants, jun. under
certain conditions, and now held as part of the estate of the said Thomas
Pleasants.
No. 1 Pender, born in 1742, 57 years of age, all free. 2 Tom. her son, 1759,
40 do. 3 Biddy, of do. 1761, 38 do. 4 Olisf, of do. 1765, 34 do. 5 Obra, of do.
1762, 31 do. 6 Lewis, of do. 1774, 25 do.

born after his mother was 30 years of age.

List of Negroes, held under the wills of John and Jonathan Pleasants, as part
of the estate of Charles and Mary Logan, dec. in Henrice county.
7 Lucy, born in 1746, 53 years of age. 8 Sylvia Gray, her daughter, 1769, 30
do. 9 Charles Gray, son of do. June 1791, to be free in 1821 10 Peter Gray, of
do. June 1793, do. 1823 11 Patty Gray, of do. Sept. 1798, do. 1828 12 Sylvia,
daughter of Phillis, 1755, do. 44 years old. 13 Billy, son of do. Jan. 1787,
born free. 14 Tom, son of do. Oct. 1788, do.

their mother being 30 years old at their birth.

15 Mary London, born in 1753, 46 year old. 16 Beck, daughter of Sucky, Sep.
1775, to be free in 1805 17 David, son of do. March 1797, do. 1827 18 Annna, of
do. May 1799, do. 1829 19 Sally, daughter of Sukey, Sep. 1784, born after her
mother was 30 years of age. born free.

Henrico county, September 21st, 1799.
Pursuant to a commission to us directed, from the High Court of Chancery, We
have examined into the ages and sexes of several Negroes in a decree of the
said court mentioned, and agreeable to the above statement, which we hereby
certify to be just, to the best of our knowledge and belief.

Benjamin Good. Geo. Williamson. Abel Janney.


BETWEEN ROBERT PLEASANTS, son and heir of John Pleasants, Plaintiff, and Carry
Pleasants and Mary Pleasants his wife, late Mary Logan, administratrix of
Charles Logan, and devisee of John Pleasants and Jonathan Pleasants, deceased,
Elizabeth Pleasants, administratrix of Joseph Pleasants, deceased, Isaac
Pleasants and Jane his wife, Samuel Pleasants, junior, Thomas Pleasants,
junior, and Margaret his wife. Robert Langley and Elizabeth his wife, Daniel
Teasdale and Margaret his wife, late Margaret Langley, Elizabeth Langley the
younger, and Anne May, Defendants.

And between Ned, a pauper, Plaintiff, and Elizabeth Pleasants, Defendant.

THE Court, this twenty-fourth day of September, in the year of our lord one
thousand seven hundred and ninety nine, taking into consideration the report of
William Moseley. William Bentley and Frederick Woodson; and also the report of
Benjamin Good, George Williamson and Abel Janny, persuant to the decretal
order made in this cause on the fifth day of June last, to which reports were
no exceptions, does approve and confirm the same: in consequence whereof the
slaves in the said reports mentioned to be above thirty and under the age of
forty five years, are immediately entitled to certifites attesting their
freedom, in the form prescribed by the said decretal order.

A LIST of NEGROES found in the possession of Daniel Teasdale and others, which
appear to be derived from the wills of John Pleasants and Jonathan his son.
In the possession of Daniel Teasdale the following Negroes, the issue of Suky,
now dead, who was devised by the said Jonathan Pleasants to Margaret the wife
of the said Teasdale.

Suky dec'd at the time of her last child's birth, was aged 41 years.
1. Isabel, her daughter, aged 21, free in 9 years. 2. Hampton, her son 20, do.
10. 3. Molly, 14, do. 16. 4. Frank, 13, do. 17. 5. 6. 7. Jack, 11 years; Suky,
8 years, and Peter, 4 years; all born free, as their mother was then 30 years
of age. 8. Numa, aged 21, son of Fanny, free in 9 years.
In the possession of the estate of the late John May. Sally, now 42 years of
age.
9. Charles, her son, born in December, 1783, now 16. 10. Chloe, October, 1785,
now 14. 11. Tom, September, 1787, now 12. 12. Jack, April, 1789, now 10.
Of course Charles it free in 14 years, Chloe in 16 years, and Tom and Jack
born free, their mother then 30 years.
13. Jenny, aged 35, in the possession of Robert Pleasants, jun. 14. Cis, her
daughter, born Sept. 1783, 16 years, free in 14. 15. Betty, aged 14, 16. 16.
Sally, 12, 18. 17. Jenny, 11, 19. 18. Sharper, her son, 7, 23. 19. Fanny,
April, 1794, 5, Born free, their mother then 30 years. 20. Charles, December.
1796, 3, Born free, their mother then 30 years. 21. Jack, March, 1799, 6 Mo.
Born free, their mother then 30 years. 22. Will, aged 56 years In the possesion
of Robert Langley's estate. 23. Caesar, 61, In the possesion of Robert Langley's
estate. 24. Benjamin, 76, and In the possesion of Robert Langley's estate. 25.
Lucy, his wife, 61, In the possesion of Robert Langley's estate. 26. Sharper,
38, of Hannah, now free.
In consequence of a commission to us directed, from the High Court of
Chancery, we have examined into the ages and sexes of several Negroes which
appears to us to be comprised in a decree of the said court ordering the said
commission, and having placed the same against the name of each Negro,
according to the list upon the first page of this paper, and also the list upon
page the third, continued to page the fourth, and do hereby certify the same,
to the best of our knowledge, in Dinwiddie county, this eighteenth day of
September, one thousand seven hundred and ninety-nine.

Abel Janney. John Ponsonby.


A List of Negroes that are part of those, or the descendants of those Negroes,
appraised as the estate of John Pleasants, of Curles (deceased) in the month of
August, 1773, said to have been sold to him the said Pleasants, by Robert
Langley, now deceased, and which appears to have been made previously liable by
an instrument of writing now on record in the county of Dinwiddie, for the
payment of L 300 currency, due Roger Atkinson, now dec'd, dated October the 21,
1765, and which are now in the possession of the different persons placed
opposite to their names, or at the head of each list

In the possession of Daniel Teasdale, held in right of his wife Margaret,
daughter of Robert Langley.
1. Amy, a Negro woman, 49 years old. 2. Sampson, man, 33 do. of Hannah. 3.
Chloe, woman, 30 do. of do. of do. 4. Jacob, son of Amy, 20 do. 5. Dick, of
Pendar, 28 do. 6. Letty, of do. 26 do. 7. Ned, of do. 24 do. 8. Billy, of
Chloe, 12 do. 9 King, of do. 7 do. 10. Patty, of do. 5 do. 11. Eve, of do. 4
do. 12. Chloe, of do. 2 do. 13. Joe, of Letty, 4 do. 14. Pendar, of do. 2 do.

In the possession of Those. Lewis, in right of his wife Ann, daughter of Robert
Langley.
15. Jack, of Hannah, aged 35. 16. Hannah, of Amy 16. 17. Fanny, of do. 1^. 18.
Lucy, of do. 12. 19. Hannah, of do. 12. 20. Davy, of do. 29.

In the possession of Robt. Pleasants, jun. in right of his wife Elizabeth,
daughter of Robt. Langley
21. Pendar, aged 46 years. 22. Peter, 42. 23. Israel, of Amy, 10. 24. Betty,
of Pendar, 18. 25. Jack, of do. 17. 26. Beck, of do. 14.

VIRGINIA. In the High Court of Chancery, March the 19th, 1800.
The Court, this nineteenth day of March, in the eighteen hundredth year of the
Christian area, taking into consideration the report of Abel Janney, and John
Ponsonby, bearing date the eighteenth day of September in the last year, to
which report was no exception, does approve and confirm so much thereof as
relates to the descendants of the Negro slave Suky, said to have been devised
by Jonathan Pleasants to Margaret, the wife of Daniel Teasdale; in consequence
whereof such of the descedants of the said Suky, mentioned in the said report
to be above thirty and under the age of forty five years, are immediately
entitled to certificates attesting their freedom in the form prescribed by the
decretal order made in this cause on the fifth day of June last.

The foregoing Orders, Decrees and Reports, are true copies from the originals,
in the suits of Pleasants etc. v. Logan, et al, and Ned, a pauper, v. Pleasants.

Test, (...)


