THE LAST Will and Testament, OF General George Washington.

WORCESTER: PRINTED BY ISAIAH THOMAS, JUN.

February -- 1800.

THE WILL, etc.
IN THE NAME OF GOD, AMEN.
I GEORGE WASHINGTON, of MOUNT VERNON, a CITIZEN of the United States, and
lately President of the same. DO make, ordain, and declare this Instrument,
which is written with my own hand, In the original manuscript, GEORGE
WASHINGTON'S name was written at the bottom of every page.
and every page thereof subscribed with my Name, to be my last WILL and
TESTAMENT, revoking all others. -- Imprimus. All my debts, of which there are
but few, and none of magnitude, are to be punctually and speedily paid, and the
Legacies herein after bequeathed, are to be discharged as soon as circumstances
will permit, and in the manner directed.

Item. -- To my dearly beloved Wife, Martha Washington, I give and bequeath the
use, profit and benefit of my whole Estate, real and personal, for the term of
her natural life, except such parts thereof as are specially disposed of
hereafter. -- My improved Lot, in the town of Alexandria, situated on Pit and
Cameron streets, I give to her and her heirs forever; as I also do my Household
and Kitchen Furniture, of every sort and kind, with the Liquors and Groceries
which may be on hand at the time of my decease, to be used and disposed of as
she may think proper.

Item. -- Upon the decease of my wife, it is my will and desire that all the
Slaves which I hold in my own right shall receive their freedom. To emancipate
them during her life, would, though earnestly wished by me, be attended with
such insuperable difficulties, on account of their intermixture by marriages
with the dower Negroes, as to excite the most painful sensations, if not
disagreeable consequences from the latter, while both descriptions are in the
occupancy of the same proprietor; it not being in my power, under the tenure by
which the dower Negroes are held, to manumit them. And whereas, among those who
will receive freedom according to this devise, there may be some, who from old
age or bodily infirmities, and others, who on account of their infancy, that
will be unable to support themselves, it is my will and desire, that all who
come under the first and second description, shall be comfortably clothed and
fed by my heirs while they live; and that such of the latter description as
have no parents living, or if living, are unable or unwilling to provide for
them, shall be bound by the court until they shall arrive at the age of twenty
five years; and in cases where no record can be produced, whereby their ages
can be ascertained, the judgment of the court, upon its own view of the
subject, shall be adequate and final. The Negroes thus bound, are (by their
masters or mistresses) to be taught to read and write, and to be brought up to
some useful occupation, agreeably to the laws of the Commonwealth of Virginia,
providing for the support of orphan and other poor children. And I do hereby
expressly forbid the sale or transportation, out of the said Commonwealth, of
any Slave, I may die possessed of, under any pretense whatsoever. And I do
moreover, most pointedly and most solemnly enjoin it upon my Executors
hereafter named, or the survivor of them, to see that this clause respecting
Slaves, and every part thereof, be religiously fulfilled at the epoch at which
it is directed to take place, without evasion, neglect or delay, after the
crops which may then be on the ground are harvested, particularly as it
respects the aged and infirm; seeing that a regular and permanent fund be
established for their support, as long as there are subjects requiring it; not
trusting to the uncertain provision to be made by individuals: And to my
mulatto man, William, (calling himself William Lee) I give immediate freedom,
or if he should prefer it (on account of the accidents which have befallen him,
and which have rendered him incapable of walking, or of any active employment)
to remain in the situation he now is, it shall be optional in him to do so; in
either case, however, I allow him an annuity of Thirty Dollars during his
natural life, which shall be independent of the victuals and clothes he has
been accustomed to receive, if he chooses the last alternative; but in full
with his freedom, if he prefers the first; and this I give him, as a testimony
of my sense of his attachment to me, and for his faithful services during the
Revolutionary War.

Item. -- To the Trustees (Governors, or by whatsoever other name they may be
designated) of the Academy, in the town of Alexandria, I give and bequeath, in
trust, Four Thousand Dollars, or in other words, twenty of the Shares which I
hold in the Bank of Alexandria, toward the support of a Free School,
established at, and annexed to, the said Academy, for the purpose of educating
such Orphan Children, or the Children of such other poor and indigent persons,
as are unable to accomplish it with their own means; and who, in the judgment
of the Trustees of the said Seminary, are best entitled to the benefit of this
donation. The aforesaid 20 Shares I give and bequeath in perpetuity; the
dividends only of which are to be drawn for, and applied by the said Trustees,
for the time being, for the uses abovementioned; the Stock to remain entire and
untouched, unless indications of failure of said Bank should be so apparent, or
a discontinuance thereof, should render a removal of this fund necessary. In
either of these cases, the amount of the Stock here devised is to be vested in
some other bank, or public institution, whereby the interest may with
regularity and certainty be drawn and applied as above: And, to prevent
misconception, my meaning is, and is hereby declared to be, that these Twenty
Shares are in lieu of, and not in addition to, the Thousand Pounds given by a
missive letter some years ago; in consequence whereof, an annuity of Fifty
Pounds has since been paid toward the support of this institution.

Item. -- WHEREAS by a law of the Commonwealth of Virginia, enacted in the year
1785, the Legislature thereof, was pleased, as an evidence of its approbation
of the services I had rendered the public, during the Revolution, and partly I
believe, in consideration of my having suggested the vast advantages which the
community would derive from the extension of its inland navigation under
Legislative patronage, to present me with One hundred shares, of One Hundred
Dollars each, in the incorporated Company, established for the purpose of
extending the navigation of James' River, from tide water to the mountains; --
and also with Fifty shares of L100 sterling each, in the corporation of another
company likewise established for the similar purpose of opening the navigation
of the river Potowmack, from the tide water to Fort Cumberland; the acceptance
of which, although the offer was highly honorable and grateful to my feelings,
was refused, as inconsistent with a principle which I had adopted, and had
never departed from -- viz. not to receive pecuniary compensation for any
services I could render my country in its arduous struggle with Greatbritain
for its rights; and because I had evaded similar propositions from other States
in the Union. Adding to this refusal, however, an intimation that, if it should
be the pleasure of the legislature, to permit me to appropriate the said shares
to public uses, I would receive them on those terms with due sensibility; and
this it having consented to, in flattering terms, as will appear by a
subsequent law, and sundry resolutions, in the most ample and honorable manner,
I proceed after this recital, for the more correct understanding of the case,
to declare -- That as it has always been a source of serious regret with me, to
see the youth of these United States sent to foreign countries for the purpose
of Education, often before their minds were formed, or they had imbibed any
adequate ideas of the happiness of their own; contracting too frequently, not
only habits of dissipation and extravagance, but principles unfriendly to
Republican Government, and to the true and genuine liberties of mankind; which
thereafter are rarely overcome. -- For these reasons it has been my ardent
wish, to see a plan devised on a liberal scale, which would have a tendency to
spread systematic ideas through all parts of this rising empire, thereby to do
away local attachments and State prejudices, as far as the nature of things
would, or indeed ought to admit, from our National Councils. -- Looking
anxiously forward to the accomplishment of so desirable an object as this is,
(in my estimation) my mind has not been able to contemplate any plan more
likely to effect the measure than the establishment of an UNIVERSITY in a
central part of the United States, to which the Youths of fortune and talents
from all parts thereof, may be sent for the completion of their education, in
all the branches of polite literature; in arts and sciences, in acquiring
knowledge in the principles of politics and good government, and, (as a matter
of infinite importance in my judgment) by associating with each other* and
forming friendships in juvenile years, be enabled to free themselves, in a
proper degree, from those local prejudices and habitual jealousies which have
just been mentioned; and which, when carried to excess, are never sailing
sources of disquietude to the public mind and pregnant of mischievous
consequences to this country, under these impressions, so fully dilated.

Item. -- I give and bequeath in perpetuity, the Fifty shares which I hold in
the Potowmack company (under the aforesaid acts of the Legislature of Virginia)
toward the endowment of an UNIVERSITY* to be established within the limits of
the district of Columbia, under the auspices of the General Government, if that
government should incline to extend a fostering hand toward it; and until such
Seminary is established, and the funds arising on these shares shall be
required for its support, my further WILL and desire is that the profit
accruing therefrom, shall, whenever the dividends are made, be laid out in
purchasing Stock in the Bank of Columbia, or some other Bank, at the discretion
of my Excutors, or by the Treasurer of the United States for the time being,
under the direction of Congress -- provided that Honorable body should
patronize the measure; and the dividends proceeding from the purchase of such
Stock, is to be vested in more Stock, and so on, until a sum, adequate to the
accomplishment of the object is obtained; of which I have not the smallest
doubt before many years pass away, even if no aid or encouragement is given by
the Legislative authority, or from any other source.

Item. -- The Hundred Shares which I hold in the James River Company, I have
given, and now confirm in perpetuity, to and for the use and benefit of Liberty
Hall Academy, in the Country of Rockbridge, in the Commonwealth of Virginia.

Item. -- I release, exonerate, and discharge the Estate of my deceased Brother
Samuel Washington, from the payment of the money which is due to me for the
land I sold to Philip Pendleton (lying in the County of Berkley) who assigned
the same to him, the said Samuel, who by agreement, was to pay me therefore: And
whereas, by some contract, (the purport of which was never communicated to me,
between the said Samuel and his son, Thornton Washington, the latter became
possessed of the aforesaid Land, without any conveyance having passed from me,
either to the said Pendleton, the said Samuel, or the said Thornton, and
without any consideration having been made, by which neglect neither the legal
nor equitable title has been alienated; it rests therefore with me to declare
my intentions concerning the premises; and these are to give and bequeath the
said land to whomsoever the said Thornton Washington (who is also dead) devised
the same, or to his heirs forever, if he died intestate, exonerating the estate
of the said Thornton, equally with that of the said Samuel, from payment of the
purchase money, which, with interest, agreeably to the original contract with
the said Pendleton, would amount to more than a Thousand Pounds; And whereas,
two other sons of my said deceased Brother Samuel, namely George Steptoe
Washington, and Lawrence Augustine Washington, were, by the decease of th^se to
whose care they were committed, brought under my protection, and in
consequence, have occasioned advances on my part, for their education at
College, and other schools, for their board, clothing, and other incidental
expenses, to the amount of near Five Thousand Dollars, over and above the sums
furnished by their estate, which sum it may be inconvenient for them or their
father's estate to refund -- I do for these reasons, acquit them and the said
estate from the payment thereof -- my intention being that all accounts between
them and me, and their father's estate and me shall stand balanced.

Item. -- The balance due to me from the estate of Bartholomew Dandridge,
deceased, (my Wife's Brother) and which amounted on the first day of October,
1795, to four hundred and twentyfive pounds, (as will appear by an account
rendered by his deceased son John Dandridge, who was the acting executor of his
father's will) I release and acquit from the payment thereof -- and the Negroes
(then thirtythree in number formerly belonging to the said estate, who were
taken in execution, sold and purchased in on my account, in the year (blank)
and ever since have remained in the possession, and to the use of Mary, widow
of the said Bartholomew Dandridge, with their increase, it is my WILL and
DESIRE shall continue and be in her possession, without paying hire, or making
compensation for the same, for the time past or to come, during her natural
life; at the expiration of which, I direct that all of them who are forty years
old and upwards, shall receive their freedom; and all under that age and above
sixteen, shall serve seven years and no longer; and all under sixteen years
shall serve until they are twentyfive years of age, and then be free -- and to
avoid disputes respecting the ages of any of these Negroes, they are to be
taken into the court of the County in which they reside, and the judgment
thereof, in this relation, shall be final, and record thereof made, which may
be adduced as evidence at any time thereafter, if disputes should arise
concerning the same -- And I further direct that the heirs of the said
Bartholomew Dandridge shall, equally share the benefits arising from the
services of the said negroes, according to the tenor of this devise, upon the
decease of their mother.

Item. -- If Charles Carter, who intermarried with my Niece, Betty Lewis, is
not sufficiently secured in the title to the lots he had of me in the town of
Fredericksburg, it is my WILL and DESIRE that my Executors shall make such
conveyances of them as the law requires, to render it perfect.

Item. -- To my nephew, William Augustine Washington, and his Heirs (if he
should conceive them to be objects worth prosecuting) a Lot in the town of
Manchester (opposite to Richmond) No. 265, drawn on my sole account, and also
the tenth of one or two hundred acre lots, and two or three half acre Lots, in
the city an^ ^^^inity of Richmond, drawn in partnership with nine others, all
in the Lottery of the deceased William Byrd, are given; as is also a Lot which
I purchased of John Hood, conveyed by William Willie and Samuel Gordon,
Trustees of the said John Hood, numbered 139, in the town of Edinburgh, in the
County of Prince George, State of Virginia.

Item. -- To my Nephew, Bushrod Washington, I give and bequeath all the Papers
in my possession, which relate to my civil and military administration, of the
affairs of this country -- I leave to him also, such of my private Papers as
are worth preserving; and at the decease of my Wife, and before, if she is not
inclined to retain them, I give and bequeath my Library of Books and Pamphlets
of every kind.

Item. -- Having sold lands which I possessed in the State of Pennsylvania, and
part of a tract held in equal right with George Clinton, late Governor of
Newyork; in the State of Newyork, my share of land and interest, in the Great
Dismal Swamp, and a tract of land which I owned in the County of Gloucester --
withholding the legal titles thereto, until the consideration money should be
paid -- and having moreover leased, and conditionally sold (as will appear by
the tenor of the said leases) all my lands upon the Great Kenhawa, and a tract
upon Difficult run, in the County of Loudoun, it is my WILL and DIRECTION, that
whenever the contracts are fully and respectively complied with, according to
the spirit, true intent, and meaning thereof, on the part of the purchasers,
their heirs or assigns, that then, and in that case, conveyances are to be
made, agreeable to the terms of the said contracts, and the money arising
therefrom, when paid, to be vested in Bank Stock; -- the dividends whereof, as
of that also which is already vested therein, is to inure to my said Wife
during her life, but the Stock itself is to remain and be subject to the
general distribution hereafter directed.

Item. -- To the Earl of Buchan I recommit the "Box made of the Oak, that
sheltered the great Sir William Wallace, after the battle of Falkirk" presented
to me by his Lordship in terms too flattering for me to repeat, with a request
"to pass it, on the event of my decease, to the man in my country, who should
appear to merit it best, upon the same conditions that have induced him to send
it to me." Whether easy or not to select the Man who might comport with his
Lordship's opinion in this respect, is not for me to say; but conceiving that
no disposition of this valuable curiosity can be more eligible than the
recommitment of it to his own cabinet, agreeably to the original design of the
Goldsmiths' company of Edinburgh, who presented it to him, and at his request,
consented that it should be transferred to me -- I do give and bequeath the
same to his Lordship; and in case of his decease, to his heir, with my grateful
thanks for the distinguished honor of presenting it to me, and more especially
for the favorable sentiments with which he accompanied it.

Item. -- To my Brother Charles Washington, I give and bequeath the gold headed
Cane, left me by Dr. Franklin in his will. I add nothing to it, because of the
ample provision I have made for his issue. To the acquaintances and friends of
any juvenile years, Lawrence Washington and Robert Washington, of Chotanck, I
give my other two gold headed Canes, having my arms engraved on them; and to
each, as they will be useful where they live, I leave one of the Spyglasses,
which constituted part of my equipage during the late war. To my Compatriot in
arms and old and intimate Friend, Dr. Craik, I give my Bureau (or, as the
cabinet makers call it, Tambour Secretary) and the circular Chair, an appendage
of my study. To Dr. David Stuart I give my large Shaving and Dressing Table,
and my Telescope. To the Reverend, now Bryan, Lord Fairfax, I give a Bible, in
three large folio volumes, with notes -- presented to me by the Rt. Rev. Thomas
Wilson, Bishop of Sodor and Mann. To General De La Fayette I give a pair of
finely wrought steel Pistols, taken from the enemy in the revolutionary war. To
my Sisters in Law, Hannah Washington and Mildred Washington -- to my friends
Eleanor Stuart, Hannah Washington, of Fairfield, and Elizabeth Washington of
Hayfield, I give, each a mourning ring, of the value of one hundred dollars.
These bequests are not made for the intrinsic value of them, but as mementos of
my esteem and regard. To Tobias Lear, I give the use of the Farm which he now
holds, in virtue of a lease from me to him and his deceased wife (for and
during their natural lives) free from rent during his life; at the expiration
of which, it is to be disposed of as is herein after directed. To Sally B.
Haynie, (a distant relation of mine) I give and bequeath three hundred dollars.
To Sarah Green, daughter of the deceased Thomas Bishop, and to Ann Walker,
daughter of John Alton, also deceased, I give each one hundred dollars in
consideration of the attachment of their fathers to me; each of whom having
lived nearly forty years in my family. To each of my Nephews, William Augustine
Washington, George Lewis, George Steptoe Washington, Bushrod Washington and
Samuel Washington, I give one of the Swords, or Cutteaux, of which I may die
possessed; and they are to choose in the order they are named. -- These swords
are accompanied with an injunction not to unsheath them for the purpose of
shedding blood, except it be for self defense, or in defense of their country
and its rights; and in the latter case, to keep them unsheathed, and prefer
falling with them in their hands to the relinquishment thereof.

AND NOW, having gone through these specific Devises, with explanations for the
more correct understanding of the meaning and design of them, I proceed to the
distribution of the more important parts of my Estate, in manner following:

First. -- To my Nephew, Bushrod Washington, and his Heirs, (partly in
consideration of an intimation to his deceased Father, while we were Bachelors,
and he had kindly undertaken to superintend my Estate during my military
services, in the former war between Greatbritain and France that if I should
fall therein, Mount Vernon, (then less extensive in domain than at present)
should become his property, I give and bequeath all that part thereof, which is
comprehended within the following limits, viz. -- BEGINNING at the ford of
Dogue Run, near my Mill, and extending along the road, and bounded thereby, as
it now goes, and ever has gone, since my recollection of it, to the ford of
Little Hunting Creek, at the Gum Spring, until it comes to a knowl, opposite to
an old road which formerly passed through the lower field of Muddy Hole Farm;
at which, on the north side of the said road, are three Red or Spanish Oaks,
marked as a corner, and a stone placed -- thence by a line of trees, to be
marked rectangular, to the back line or outer boundary of the tract between
Thomson Mason and myself -- thence with that line easterly (now double
ditching, with a post and rail Fence thereon) to the run of Little Hunting
Creek -- thence with that run, which is the boundary between the lands of the
late Humphry Peake, and me, to the tide water of the said Creek -- thence by
that water to Potowmack river -- thence with the river to the mouth of Dogue
Creek -- and thence with the said Dogue Creek to the place of beginning at the
aforesaid ford, containing upwards of four thousand acres be the same more or
less, together with the Mansion House, and all other buildings and improvements
thereon. SECOND -- Inconsideration of the consanguinity between them and my
Wife, being as nearly related to her as to myself: as, on account of the
affection I had for, and the obligation I was under to, their Father when
living, who from his youth had attached himself to my person, and followed my
fortunes through ^^e vicissitudes of the late Revolution, afterward devoting
his time to the superintendence of my private concerns for many years, whilst
my public employments rendered it impracticable for me to do it myself thereby
affording me essential services, and always performing them in a manner the
most filial and respectful: For these reasons, I say, I give and bequeath to
George Fayette Washington, and Lawrence Augustine Washington, and their heirs,
my estate east of Little Hunting Creek, lying on the river Potowmack, including
the farm of three hundred and sixty acres, leased to Tobias Lear, as noticed
before, and containing in the whole, by deed, two thousand and twentyseven
acres, be it more or less; which said estate, it is my will and desire should
be equitably and advantageously divided between them, according to quantity,
quality, and other circumstances, when the youngest shall have arrived at the
age of twentyone years, by three judicious and disinterested men; one to be
chosen by each of the brothers, and the third by these two. In the mean time,
if the termination of my Wife's interest therein should have ceased, the
profits arising therefrom are to be applied for their joint uses and benefit.
THIRD -- And whereas it has always been my intention, since my expectation of
having issue has ceased, to consider the grandchildren of my Wife in the same
light as I do my own relations, and to act a friendly part by them, more
especially by the two whom we have raised from their earliest infancy, namely,
Eleanor Park Custis, and George Washington Park Custis, and whereas the former
of these has lately intermarried with Lawrence Lewis, a son of my deceased
sister, Betty Lewis, by which union the inducement to provide for (...) both
has been increased -- Wherefore, I give and bequeath to the said Lawrence
Lewis, and Eleanor Park Lewis his wife, and their heirs, the residue of my
Mount Vernon estate, not already devised to my Nephew, Bushrod Washington,
comprehended within the following description, viz. all the land north of the
road leading from the ford of Dogue Run to the Gum Spring, as described in the
devise of the other part of the tract to Bushrod Washington, until it comes to
the stone and three red or Spanish oaks on the knowl, thence with the
rectangular line to the back line (between Mr. Mason and me) thence with that
line westerly along the new double ditch to Dogue Run, by the tumbling dam of
my Mill, thence with the said run to the ford aforementioned: To which I add*
al^ the land I possess west of the said Dogue Run and Dogue Creek, bounded
easterly and southerly thereby: together with the mill, distillery, and all
other houses and improvements on the premises, making together about two
thousand acres, be it more or less. FOURTH -- Actuated by the principle already
mentioned, I give and bequeath to George Washington Park Custis, the grandson
of my Wife, and my ward, and to his heirs, the tract I hold on Four Mile Run,
in the vicinity of Alexandria, containing one thousand two hundred acres, more
or less, and my entire square, No. 21, in the city of Washington. FIFTH -- All
the rest and residue of my estate, real and personal, not disposed of in manner
aforesaid, in whatsoever consisting, wheresoever lying, and whenever found, a
schedule of which, as far as is recollected, with a reasonable estimate of its
value, is hereunto annexed, I desire may be sold by my Executors, at such
times, in such manner, and on such credits, (if an equal, valid and
satisfactory distribution of the specific property cannot be made without) as
in their judgment shall be most conducive to the interest of the parties
concerned; and the moneys arising therefrom to be divided into twentythree
equal parts, and applied as follow, viz. To William Augustine Washington,
Elizabeth Spotswood, Jane Thornton, and the heirs of Ann Ashton, sons and
daughters of my deceased Brother, Augustine Washington, I give and bequeath
four parts; that is, one part to each of them. To Fielding Lewis, George Lewis,
Robert Lewis, Howell Lewis and Betty Carter, sons and daughters of my deceased
sister, Betty Lewis, I give and bequeath five other parts; one to each of them.
To George Steptoe Washington, Lawrence Augustine Washington, Harriott Parks,
and the heirs of Thornton Washington, sons and daughters of my deceased
brother, Samuel Washington, I give and beqeath other four parts; one to each of
them. To Corbin Washington, and the heirs of Jane Washington, son and daughter
of my deceased Brother, John Augustine Washington, I give and bequeath two
parts; one to each of them. To Samuel Washington, Frances Ball and Mildred
Hammond, son and daughters of my Brother, Charles Washington, I give and
bequeath three parts: one part to each of them: And to George Fayette
Washington, Charles Augustine Washington, and Maria Washington, sons and
daughters of my deceased Nephew, George Augustine Washington, I give one other
part; that is, to each a third of that part. To Elizabeth Park Law, Martha Park
Peter's, and Eleanor Park Lewis, I give and bequeath three other parts, that is,
a part to each of them. And to my Nephew, Bushrod Washington and Lawrence
Lewis, and to my ward, the grandson of my Wife. I give and bequeath one other
part, that is, a third thereof to each of them. And if it should so happen,
that any of the persons whose names are here enumerated (unknown to me) should
now be dead, or should die before me, that in either of these cases, the heirs
of such deceased person shall, notwithstanding, derive all the benefits of the
bequest in the same manner, as if he or she was actually living at the time.
And by way of advice, I recommend it to my Executors not to be precipitate of
disposing of the landed property (herein directed to be sold) if from temporary
causes, the sale thereof should be dull; experience having fully evinced, that
the price of land, (especially above the falls of the river, and on the western
waters) have been progressively rising, and cannot be long checked in its
increasing value. And I particularly recommend it to such of the Legatees
(under this clause of my will) as can make it convenient, to take each a share
of my stock in the Potowmack Company, in preference to the amount of what it
might sell for; being thoroughly convinced myself, that no uses to which the
money can be applied, will be so productive as the tolls arising from this
navigation when in full operation, (and thus, from the nature of things, it
must be, ere long) and more especially if that of the Shenandoah is added
thereto.

The family vault at Mount Vernon requiring repairs, and being improperly
situated besides, I desire, that a new one of brick, and upon a larger scale,
may be built at the foot of what is commonly called the Vineyard Enclosure, on
the ground which is marked out: In which my remains, with those of my deceased
relations, (now in the old vault) and such others of my family as may choose to
be entombed there, may be deposited. And it is my express desire, that my
corpse may be interred in a private manner, without parade, or funeral oration.

Lastly, I constitute and appoint my dearly beloved Wife, Martha Washington, my
Nephew, William Augustine Washington, Bushrod Washington, George Steptoe
Washington, Samuel Washington, and Lawrence Lewis, and my ward, George
Washington Park Custis, (when he shall have arrived at the age of twentyone
years) Executrix and Executors of this Will and Testament: In the construction
of which it will be readily perceived that no professional character has been
consulted, or has had any agency in the draught; and that although it has
occupied many of my leisure hours to digest, and to throw it into its present
form, it may, notwithstanding, appear crude and incorrect; but, having
endeavored to be plain and explicit in all the devises, even at the expense of
prolixity, perhaps of tautology, I hope and trust that no disputes will arise
concerning them. But if, contrary to expectation, the case should be otherwise
from the want of legal expressions, or the usual technical terms, or because
too much or too little has been said on any of the devises to be consonant with
law, my will and ^^^^ction expressly is, that all disputes, (if unhappily any
should (...)) shall be decided by three impartial and intelligent men, known
for their probity and good understanding; two to be chosen by the disputants,
each having the choice of one, and the third by those two -- which three men,
thus chosen, shall, unfettered by law, or legal constructions, declare their
sense of the Testator's intention; and such decision is, to all intents and
purposes, to be as binding on the parties as if it had been given in the
Supreme Court of the United States.

In witness of all and of each of the things herein contained, I have set my
hand and seal, this ninth day of July, in the year One Thousand Seven Hundred
and Ninety, It appears the word "Nine," was omitted by the Testator.
and of the Independence of the United States, the twenty fourth.
George Washington. Seal.



A SCHEDULE of PROPERTY
Comprehended in the foregoing WILL, which is directed to be Sold; and some of
it conditionally is Sold: With descriptive and explanatory Notes relative
thereto.
In VIRGINIA.
Acres. Prices. Dollars. Loudoun County, Difficult Run, 300 Dolls. 6,666 a
Loudoun and Fauquier, Ashby's Bent, 2481 10 24,810 b Chattin's Run, 885 8 7,080
Berkly, South Fork of Bullskin, 1600 Head of Evans's M. 453 In Wormley's line,
183 2236 20 44,720 c Frederick, bought from Mercer, 571 20 11,420 d Hampshire,
on Potowmack River above B. 240 15 3,600 e Gloucester, on North River, 400
about 3,600 f Nansemond, near Suffolk, one third of 1119 acres, 373 8 2,984 g
Great Dismal swamp, my dividend thereof, about 20,000 h Ohio River, round
bottom, 587 Little Kenhawa, 2314 Sixteen miles lower down, 2448 Opposite Big
Bent, 4395 9744 10 97,440 i Great Kenhawa -- Near the mouth, west, 10990 East
side above, 7276 Mouth of Cole River, 2000 Opposite thereto, 2950, 3075 Burning
Spring, 125, 200,000 k MARYLAND.
Charles County, 600 6 3,600 l Montgomery County, 519 12 6,228 m PENNSYLVANIA.
Great Meadows, 234 6 1,404 n NEWYORK.
Mohawk River, about 1000 6 6,000 o NORTHWEST TERRITORY.
On Little Miami, 339 Ditto, 977 Ditto, 1235 3051 5 15,^51 p KENTUCKY.
Rough Creek, 3000 Ditto, adjoining, 2000 5000 2 10,000 q LOTS, VIZ. CITY OF
WASHINGTON.
Two near the Capitol Square, 634, cost 963 dollars, and with buildings, 15,000
r No. 5, 12, 13 and 14, the last three, water lots, on the Eastern Branch, in
square 667, containing together 34438 square feet, at 12 cents, 4,132 s
ALEXANDRIA.
Corner of Pit and Prince streets, half an acre laid out into buildings, 3 or
4 of which are let on ground rent at 3 dollars per foot, 4,000 t WINCHESTER.
A lot in the town, of half an acre, and another on the commons, of about six
acres, supposed, 4,000 u BATH OR WARM SPRINGS.
Two well situated and handsome buildings, to the amount of L 150, 800 v STOCK.
United States 6 per cents. 3746 6,246 w Ditto, deferred, 1873 ^500 Ditto, 3
per cents. 2946 Potowmack Company, 24 Shares, cost L100 sterling. 10,666 x James
River Company, 5 Shares, each cost 100 dollars, 500 y Bank of Columbia, 170
Shares, 40 dollars each, 6,800 z Bank of Alexandria -- besides 20 in the free
school, 5 1,000 STOCK LIVING, etc.
One covering horse, 5 carriage horses, 4 riding horses, 6 brood mares, 20
working horses and mares, 2 covering jacks, and 3 young ones, 10 she asses, 42
working mules, 15 younger ones, 329 head of horned cattle, 640 head of sheep,
and a large stock of hogs, the precise number unknown. My manager has estimated
this live stock at L7000; but I shall set it down, in order to make a round
sum, at 15,653 Aggregate Amount, Dollars, 530,000

NOTES.
(a) THIS tract, for the size of it, is valuable, more for its situation than
the quality of its soil; though that is good for farming, with a considerable
proportion of ground that might very easily be improved into meadow. It lies on
the great road from the city of Washington, Alexandria and Georgetown, to
Leesburgh and Winchester. At Difficult Bridge, nineteen miles from Alexandria,
less from the city of Georgetown, and not more than three from Matildaville, at
the Great Falls of Potowmack there is a valuable seat on the premises, and the
whole is conditionally sold for the sum annexed in the schedule.

(b) What the selling prices of lands, in the vicinity of these two tracts,
are, I know not; but* compared with those above the ridge and others below
them, he value annexed will appear moderate; a less one would not obtain them
from me.

(c) The surrounding land, not superior in soil. situation or properties of any
sort, sell currently at from twenty to thirty dollars an acre. The lowest price
is affixed to these.

(d) The observations, made in the last note, apply equally to this tract;
being in the vicinity of them, and of similar quality, although it lies in
another country.

(e) This tract, though small, is extremely valuable. It has on Potowmack
River, about 12 miles above the town of Bath or Warm Springs, and is in the
shape of a horseshoe; the river running almost around it. Two hundred acres of
it is rich low grounds, with a great abundance of the largest and finest walnut
trees; which with the produce of the soil might, (by means of the improved
navigation of the Potowmack) be brought to a shipping port, with more ease, and
at a smaller expense, than that which is transported 30 miles only, by land:

(f) This tract is of second rate Gloucester low ground; it has no improvements
thereon, but lies on navigable water, abounding in fish and oysters. It was
received in payment of a debt, (carrying interest) and valued in the year 1789,
by an impartial gentleman, to L800. N. B. It has lately been sold and there is
due there ^n a balance, equal to what is annexed in the schedule.

(g) These 373 acres are the third part of undivided purchase made by the
deceased Fielding Lewis, Thomas Walker and myself; on full conviction that they
would become valuable. The Lord lies on the road from Suffolk and Norfolk,
touches, (if I am not mistaken) some part of the navigable water of Nansemond
river; the Rich Dismal Swamp is capable of great improvement; and from its
situation must become extremely valuable.

(h) This is an undivided interest, which I held in the Great Dismal Swamp
company, containing about 4000 acres, with my part of the plantation and stock
thereon, belonging to the company in the said Swamp.

(i) These several tracts of land are of the first quality on the Ohio river,
in the parts where they are situated; being almost, if not altogether, river
bottoms. The smallest of these tracts is actually sold at ten dollars an acre,
but the consideration therefore not received. The rest are equally valuable, and
sold as high; especially that which lies just below the Little Kenhawa, and is
opposite to a thick settlement on the west side of the river. The four tracts
have an aggregate breadth upon, the river of sixteen miles, and is bounded
thereby that distance.

(k) These tracts are situated on the Great Kenhawa river, and the first four
are bounded thereby for more than forty miles. It is acknowledged by all who
have seen them, (and of the tract containing 10990 acres, which I have been on
myself, I can assert) that there is no richer or more valuable land in all that
region; they are conditionally sold for the sum mentioned in the schedule, that
is* 200,000 dollars; and if the terms of that sale are not complied with, they
will command considerably more. The tract, of which the 125 acres is a moiety,
was taken up by General Andrew Lewis and myself, for, and on account of a
bituminous spring which it contains, of so inflammable a nature as to burn as
freely as spirits, and is as nearly difficult to extinguish.

(l) I am but little acquainted with this land, although I have once been on
it. It was received, (many years since) in discharge of a debt to me from
Daniel Janifer Adams at the value annexed thereto, and must be worth more. It
is very level; lies near the river Potowmack.

(m) This tract lies about 30 miles above the city of Washington, not far from
Kittoctan. It is good farming land and by those who are well acquainted with
it, I am informed that it would sell at twelve or fifteen dollars per acre.

(n) This land is valuable on account of its local situation, and other
properties. It affords an exceeding good stand on Braddock's road, from Fort
Cumberland to Pittsburgh, and besides a fertile soil possesses a large quantity
of natural meadow, fit for the scythe. It is distinguished by the appellation
of the Great Meadows, where the first action with the French in 1754 was fought.

(o) This is the moiety of about 2000 acres, which remains unsold of 6071 acres
on the Mohawk river, (Montgomery county) in a patent granted to Daniel Coxe, in
the township of Coxeborough and Carolinas, as will appear by deed from Marinas
Willet and wife, to George Clinton, (late Governor of Newyork) and myself. The
latter sales have been at six dollars an acre, and what remains unsold, will
fetch that or more

(p) The quality of these lands and their situations, may be known by the
surveyors' certificates, which are filed along with the patents. They lie in
the vicinity of Cincinnati; one tract near the mouth of the Little Miami;
another seven, and the third ten miles up the same. I have been informed that
they will command more than they are estimated at.

(q) For the description of these tracts in detail, see General Spo^sw^^^'s
letters, filed with the other papers relating to them. Besides the general good
quality of the land, there is a valuable bank of Iron Ore thereon, which when
the settlement becomes more populous, (and settlers are moving that way very
fast) will be found very valuable; as the Rough Creek, a branch of Green River,
affords ample water for furnaces and forges.

LOTS, viz. CITY OF WASHINGTON.

(r) The two lots near the Capital in square 634, cost me 963 dollars only. But
in this price I was favored, on condition that I should build two brick houses,
three stories high each; without this reduction, the selling prices of those
lots would have cost me about 1350 dollars. These lots, with the buildings
thereon, when completed, will stand me in 15,000 dollars at least.

(s) Lots No. 5, 12, 13 and 14, on the Eastern branch, are advantageously
situated on the water, and although many lots, much less convenient, have sold
a great deal higher, I will rate these at ^2 cents the square foot only.

ALEXANDRIA.

(t) For this lot, though unimproved, I have refused 3500 dollars. It has since
been laid out into proper sized lots for building on; three or four of which
are let on ground rent forever, at three dollars a foot on the street, and this
price is asked for both fronts on Pit and Princess street.

WINCHESTER.

(u) As neither the lot in the town or common have any improvements on them, it
is not easy to fix a price; but as both are well situated* it is presumed that
the price annexed to them in the schedule is a reasonable valuation.

BATH.

(v) The lots in Bath, (two adjoining) cost me, to the best of my recollection,
between fifty and sixty pounds, 20 years ago; and the buildings thereon, 150 l.
more. Whether property there has increased or decreased in its value, and in
what condition the houses are, I am ignorant; but suppose they are not valued
too high.

STOCK.

(w) These are the sums which are actually funded; and though no more in the
aggregate than 7566 dollars, stand me in at least ten thousand pounds, Virginia
money, being the amount of bonded and other debts, due to me, and discharged
during the war, when money had depreciated in that rate, and was so settled by
public authority.

(x) The value annexed to these shares is what they have actually cost me, and
is the price affixed by law; and although the present selling price is under
par, my advice to the Legatees. (for whose benefit they are intended,
especially those who can afford to lie out of the money) is, that each should
take and hold one; there being a moral certainty of a great and increasing
profit, arising from them in the course of a few years.

(y) It is supposed that the shares in the James River Company must be
productive. But of this I can give no decided opinion, for want of more
accurate information.

(z) These are the nominal prices of the Shares in the banks of Alexandria and
Columbia; the selling prices vary according to circumstances; but as the stock
usually divide from eight to ten per cent per annum, they must be worth the
former, at least, so long as the banks are conceived to be secure, although
from circumstances, they may sometimes be below it.

The value of the live stock depends more upon the quality than quantity of the
different species of it, and this again upon the demand and judgment, or fancy
of purchasers.

George Washington.
MOUNT VERNON, July 9, 1799.
VIRGINIA, FAIRFAX, ss.
I GEORGE DENEALE, Clerk of Fairfax County Court, do hereby certify, that the
foregoing Copy of the Last Will and Testament of GEORGE WASHINGTON, deceased,
late President of the United States of America, with the Schedule annexed, is a
true copy from the original recorded in my office.

In Testimony whereof, I have hereunto set my hand, this twentythird day of
January, 1800.

GEORGE DENEALE,
Clerk of Fairfax County.

