THE VAGABOND. A NOVEL.

BY GEORGE WALKER.

DEDICATED TO THE LORD BISHOP OF Landaff.

First American, from the Fourth English Edition, With Notes.

(...).

Whatever is just, is equal; but whatever is equal is not always just.

PLUTARCH. The wayward nature of the time, and the paramount necessity of
securing to this kingdom her political and religious existence, and the rights
of society have urged me to this endeavor to preserve them, by a disinterested
appeal to my countrymen.

PURSUITS OF LITERATURE. BOSTON, Printed for WEST and GREENLEAF, No. 56, and
JOHN WEST, No. 75, Cornhill, From the Press of JOHN RUSSELL. 1800.

TO THE RIGHT REVEREND FATHER IN GOD, WATSON, LORD BISHOP OF LANDAFF, THIS BOOK
IS HUMBLY DEDICATED.
MY LORD,
IN dedicating the present trifling performance to your Lordship, I am actuated
by the same pride which glows in the bosom of a common soldier, who feels, and
has at heart, the success of his General. I am aware how insignificant are my
attempts to follow the track of your Lordship in the cause of genuine Religion,
Morality, and Liberty; but perhaps a Novel may gain attention, when arguments
of the foundest sense, and most perfect eloquence, shall fail to arrest the
feet of the Trifler from the specious path of the new Philosophy. It is also an
attempt to parry the enemy with their own weapons; for no channel is deemed
improper by them, which can introduce their sentiments.

I should not flatter myself the following pages would ever be honored with
perusal, did I not know that no branch of Literature is left unexplored by your
Lordship; and I might observe with the late Lord Or^ord, that Romances are only
Histories which we do not believe to be true, and Histories are Romances we do
believe to be true.

I am with the greatest respect, MY LORD, Your Lordship's most obedient Humble
servant, GEORGE WALKER.

PREFACE.
THE following work is written with a desire of placing, in a practical light,
some of the prominent absurdities of many self-important reformers of mankind,
who, having heated their imaginations, sit down to write political romances,
which never were, and never will be practical; but which, coming into the hands
of persons as little acquainted with human nature, the history of mankind, and
the proofs of religious authenticity, as themselves, hurry away the mind from
common life into dreams of ideal felicity; or, by breaking every moral tie
(while they declaim about morals) turn loose their disciples upon the world, to
root up and overthrow every thing which has received the sanction of ages, and
been held sacred by men of real genius and erudition.

Nothing is more easy, if we leave human nature and commonplace reason out of
the question, than to write a system of jurisprudence, a perfect republic, a
body of political justice, or a catalogue of rights: but a close attention to
any of these works will readily bring forward glaring and palpable
contradictions. What are the various classes of mankind to think, when these
men not only contradict themselves, but every one has a system widely opposite
to the other, agreeing only that every regular order and institution,
religious, moral, and political, is worn out in this age of reason, and must be
destroyed.

It may be right to apprise the reader, that the words political justice, are
scarce ever introduced, except when the sentiment is taken from Mr. Godwin's
Political Justice, 4to. edition.

No doubt those who feel themselves sore, will endeavor to cast upon the work
the charge of exaggeration; but, on this subject it is impossible to
exaggerate; so inimical are the doctrines of Godwin, Hume, Rousseau, etc. to
all civil society, that, when the reader heartily reflects, he will perceive
that the inferences I have drawn from their texts naturally result.

Can we wonder at the prevalence of adultery, when doctrines such as these men
hold out in fascinating language, are tolerated? Can we wonder at the vices and
crimes of a neighboring people? Or, can we wonder, that the generality of
shallow-thinking men embrace and support them with ardour?

Many of the modern reformists, amongst the most forward, Mr. Pain, asserts,
that there is no such existence as a British Constitution. Let those men, and
their adherents, peruse De Lolme on that subject; let all who are repining at
their lot read that excellent work, and they will perceive the singular
blessings they enjoy, which, because they are familiar, are despised; and let
us not act like men in health, who undermine their constitution by excess, till
sickness teaches them the inestimable value of what they have unthinkingly and
irreparably destroyed.

PREFACE TO THE FOURTH EDITION.
IT has been suggested to me to print a cheap edition, which might be within
the purchase of all ranks, and tend to open the eyes of many deluded followers
of the new Philosophers. But though this work was written from the most ardent
desire of warning the world of the intentions and tendency of jacobinical
principles, there are two reasons for my objecting to this advice: -- First, as
Mr. P^ayfair says, in his excellent History of Jacobinism, "He who pleaded the
cause of murder and plunder, saw his work distributed by thousands and hundreds
of thousands, and himself enriched; while he, who endeavored to support the
cause of law, of order, and of the proprietor, had his bookseller to pay, and
saw his labors converted into waste paper. It is true he had the consolation
of his own mind, and the esteem of the few to whom his intentions were known;
but with regard to effect upon the public mind, it produced none: his main
object was therefore unattained, and the revolutionary argument remained
triumphant. With energy, some money, and a disposition to make use of it on one
side; and on the other, indolence, with pecuniary means in abundance, but not
the will to employ one shilling of it; can we be surprised that things went in
favor of those who had the energy and the will? It would have been surprising
if it had not; and accordingly we have seen the shirtless, shoeless Vagabond,
burning the castles and title-deeds of the proprietor, and with an high hand
put themselves in the place. Let the rich ask, Which side will have most
writers, those who pay, or those who do not?" Secondly, through the medium of
circulating Libraries, any man may read the work for muchless, than though it
were printed on paper like the Rights of Man.

In the present instance, however, I cannot speak from what I have experienced,
and it gives me considerable hopes that the destructive torpor of the rich is
evaporating, and that they begin to take an active interest in the present
crisis: I have only to observe, that Two Editions have been sold in less than
six months.

Mr. Playfair, when he is speaking of the diffidence, and distrust, and
jealousy, and indifference of the different nations, says: "But if they will
not prepare seriously to resist, they must prepare to suffer; for France will
give law to Europe if she once gets the better, and then adieu to those
Principalities and Powers who have quarrelled about useless etiquette, when
they should have rivalled each other in MANLY COURAGE; and who will continue in
all likelihood to dispute about their rights and privileges, till there remain
none for them to dispute about."

It is here that the conduct and character of Great Britain deserves well of
mankind. But for the energy of this nation, Europe would, ere this, have been
squeezed to pieces with the Gallic hug: and this country would have swelled its
bloated pride. But the VOLUNTEERS have saved the nation. They have told France,
that before she can plunder and burn London, that selfish and shopkeeping city,
according to the threat of Barrere, she must float in the air, and march
through a forest of pikes and bayonets. They have told the French Propagande
that we are not to be cajoled with flatteries and lies to believe a people, who
conquer more by these means than by the sword; and they have told the idle and
rebellious, that they cannot hope for success. While we remain firm to
ourselves, we may suffer much, but cannot be brought under the yoke of France.

CONTENTS.
CHAPTER 1. THE meeting of two Republican Philosophers Page 1 CHAPTER 2. The
progress of Truth and Philosophy in an ignorant Mind Page 7 CHAPTER 3. The New
Morality of Friendship, Honor, and Philanthropy Page 17 CHAPTER 4. The
greatest good fully illustrated by a strange accident Page 30 CHAPTER 5. The
Vagabond meets with various Adventures -- a Duel in the Republican style Page
46 CHAPTER 6. The Vagabond achieves several noble exploits -- an unexpected
Meeting in the Cells of Newgate -- a slight Idea of a Revolution Page 62
CHAPTER 7. Humanity of a Mob -- the Vagabond is unfortunately prevented
attaining a Martyrdom -- Gaming demonstrated to be the only liberal Science.
Page 70 CHAPTER 8. Mr. Hume's arguments for Adultery, with practical
consequences -- the new Mode of Benevolence Page 79 CHAPTER 9. The omnipotence
of Modern Truth -- Meditations on a Gibbet -- and the consequences Page 91
CHAPTER 10. The Vagabond concludes his Story -- The effects of Reformation in a
Country parish -- The Vagabond's reasons in favor of Seduction Page 105
CHAPTER 11. Reasons for Peopling the World -- Specimens of the Sublime -- The
Consolations of Philosophy in Disappointment -- The immutability of Truth Page
119 CHAPTER 12. The introduction of a very great Man -- Matter and Spirit
discussed -- The raising of the Dead by Natural Magic Page 132 CHAPTER 13. The
Formation of the World -- A strange Event results from a Political Lecture,
which disgusts the Philosophers with Society Page 145 CHAPTER 14. Reflections
in a Storm -- The Delights of Philadelphia -- The Doctor purchases a large
estate in Kentucky Page 155 CHAPTER 15. The pleasures of bending Nature to the
Rules of Art -- Stupeo and Susan determine to people the Wilderness -- The
superiority of Savage life exemplified Page 171 CHAPTER 16 The Vagabonds arrive
at a perfect Republic on the Principles of Equality and Political Justice Page
185 CHAPTER 17. Moral virtues, theory and practice -- Stupeo is convinced there
are other existences besides his own ideas, by a tremendous Phenomenon in
Nature Page 202 CHAPTER 18. Stupeo quits the World in a blazing Idea -- An
unexpected Meeting, and the conclusion of what is not concluded Page 220
THE VAGABOND.
CHAPTER I. The Meeting of two Republican Philosophers.
ONE fine summer evening, Doctor Alogos walked out to the banks of Wynander
Mere, to enjoy the beautiful scenery surrounding, and reflected in the mirror
of the crystal lake.

'This is charming,' said he to himself, as he walked onward; 'the harmony of
nature is visible in every object round me; the clouds form a majestic and
ever-varying canopy; man alone deviates from that pure state of existence he
knew in the golden age; man alone is unhappy; his passions and his appetites in
society know no bounds short of attainment; and why? because he will not copy
the example of unerring nature in her conduct of animals. These never deviate
into rapine and outrage -- they live free, and are happy.'

At that moment he heard a noise in the air, and looking round, distinguished a
hawk in full pursuit after a lapwing. The harmless creature flattered, and
appeared nearly exhausted, while the bird of prey redoubled his exertions --
Doctor Alogos, who usually walked with a fowling-piece for his amusement,
brought the hawk down at a shot; and the lapwing, as if to thank him, settled
near upon the ground. In a little time it recovered from its fright, and a fine
worm creeping before it fell a prey to instinct.

The Doctor mused on this subject as he continued his walk. -- 'At worst,' said
he, 'this is only a partial evil, and does not interrupt the harmony of the
universe; it is only matter changing form, and making room in the great field
of nature for new existences; if we had no hawks, in twenty years the whole
surface of the earth would be covered with lapwings; and if we had no lapwings,
the whole globe would be so overrun with worms, that, like a Cheshire cheese
filled with mites, the crusting would crumble away. It is necessary that the
stronger animals should prey upon the weaker, and quite in the order of things:
but for men to murder each other, is very different, and arises from an unjust
accumulation of property. Oh happy times when property was unregarded, when no
tyrant could plant his foot upon an acre of ground, and repulse his fellow from
the sod! Property! Property! thou art the bane of earthly good, an ulcer in
society, and a cancer in the political economy.'

As the Doctor stamped his foot on the ground in the attitude of an orator,
heated with the idea of revolution and equality, a young man in a very ragged
dress leaped from a thicket of hazels, and holding a pistol to the Doctor's
breast, demanded his money.

The Doctor's piece was unloaded, or his benevolence for the human species
might have been lost in the agitation of surprise; but making a full p^^se, and
gazing at his antagonist, 'This,' said he, 'is not right in the nature of
things; force tells me that your argument is wrong; you should have first
convinced me of your wants, and then my purse would have been your just
property.'

'All property is a monopoly,' cried the young metaphysician, 'and the most
laconic arguments are best: these rags which I wear are sufficient vouchers for
my wants; and unless you can prove that some other has a greater claim to your
property, I must have the contents of your pocket.'

'You are a philosopher,' said the Doctor.

'Yes,' replied the youth; 'my dear Stupeo used to tell me so; but philosophy
is not rewarded in the present detestable system of things; virtue is
ridiculed, and vice rides in gilded coaches.'

'How much do you need?' said the Doctor, in transport. 'You are a pupil of the
new school; ^^me along with me, and you shall find me a man who will esteem you
exactly according to the quantity of merit you possess; your talents ought not
to be thus lost.'

'Stupeo was perfectly right,' said the youth, 'he told me that all men are
equal: I will go with you.'

'Who is this Stupeo?' inquired the Doctor, while the young man walked by his
side. 'He was a very great philosopher, a mythologist, a metaphysician, and a
scholar: he was my tutor at college.'

'You a collegian!' cried the Doctor, in surprise: 'how came you in this
miserable condition, and how could you commit such an act of dangerous
outrage?' 'From the most natural reason in the world: all crime, my dear sir,
arises from some possessing what others want; but in fact, there is no such
thing as crime; it is a mere chimera, existing only in the law, like John Do
and Richard Roe.'

'There surely are crimes,' interrupted the Doctor, 'crimes against political
justice, and the liberty of the individual: as for instance, I have, as a
willing animal, a right or power to take a walk; but if I am to be assassinated
every time I go out, my liberty is restrained, my house becomes a prison, and I
might as well be in a dungeon. I think crimes of this nature ought to be
punished.'

'How? By coercion or restraint? -- My dear Stupeo used to say that punishment
is a specious name, but is in reality nothing more than force, put upon one
being by another who happens to be stronger. How can truth be promoted by this?
If I am hanged for what is called a robbery, how am I convinced of my error?
And it is the reform of the individual you should seek, and not the punishment
of an action partial in its nature.'

'You are wrong,' said the Doctor; the offender ought to be restrained as long
as the safety of the community prescribes it, for this is just: restrain him
not an instant from a simple view to his own improvement, for this is contrary
to reason and morality See page 132 and 161 of Political Justice, where the two
last contradictory absurdities will be found verbatim.
.'

'But my dear sir,' cried the youth, warmly, 'Stupeo, who was a philosopher and
a metaphysician, says -- '

'Says a fiddlestick,' retorted the Doctor, 'it is the good of the whole we are
to seek; what signifies individuals? they are as mites in the universe. Truth,
truth must be propagated, and I glory to see we are making such rapid progress.'

They were by this time arrived at the gate of a neat-looking mansion, with
high chimnies, and heavy cornices, which declared it to have been erected in
the time of William the Third, a flower garden spread before it, in which a
beautiful young woman was gathering flowers. She appeared about eighteen, with
all the innocence of that period, and the beauty attending upon health and good
nature.

'Your daughter, I suppose?' said the stranger.

'No,' replied the Doctor; 'do you think I would belie my principles by uniting
myself for life to any object, when the human mind is of so changeable a
nature? She is my neice; her parents, who were very poor, and very ignorant,
are dead. I attempted to educate her on my plan; but she is of a perverse
disposition, she will not exert the divine privilege of resistance, and throw
off the shackles of domination: she persists that the very difference of sexes
should teach us that they are designed for different pursuits.'

'Laura,' cried the Doctor, 'have you set my room in order? I have brought home
a stranger.'

'No,' replied Laura, blushing; 'I was obliged to visit a poor old woman in the
village; and I intended, as soon as I had gathered some flowers, to arrange
your apartment.'

'The d -- l take all the old women in the universe,' cried the Doctor, in a
passion, 'with their diseases and their wants! What had you to do, you idle
slut, with gathering flowers, when all my room is covered with litter? What a
wretched state is society! every thing thwarting the temper, and spoiling our
reflections.'

'In a state of nature,' said the young stranger, 'we should certainly have
fewer wants. The pleasant spring would supply us with drink, and the mast of
the forest with food. How happy would it be if all mankind, by universal
consent, would destroy every vestige of society, and return to simple nature!'

'Nothing is more true,' cried Doctor Alogos, taking his hand and leading him
toward the house; 'you seem a youth of profound intelligence, and I glory in
having discovered such a gem. All the children of men are dear to my heart; and
my indignation boils when I hear that our brethren of Africa are urged to
labor with a lash -- torn from supreme felicity -- carried from the yellow
sands of Guinea to the burning furnace of the West Indies, and all for what? to
supply us with spices and sweetmeats. I could hug a Tartar to my breast, and
divide my little property with a Greenlander.'

A wounded soldier at that moment accosted them from the gate, entreating a
morsel of bread, or a farthing to buy it with.

The Doctor's countenance reddened, and turning round -- 'Go,' cried he, 'to
your parish; for what do I pay so many poor's rates, if my purse is to be
always open to such vagrants? In a state of nature there is no necessity for
soldiers; and I am determined I will not support the present infamous system.'
So saying, he slapped the door in the soldier's face; and leading his new
friend up stairs, they entered an elegant apartment, the furniture of which was
in a style of the greatest luxury.

'Is supper ready?' inquired the Doctor of a servant girl, who entered the room
to place his chair, -- 'It will not be ready this half hour,' replied she, pertly:
'if you want it sooner, you must come and help to get it yourself.'

'Go along, you baggage,' said the Doctor, laughing. Then turning to his guest,
'This,' said he, 'is a girl of independent spirit, the genuine equality for
which I admire her. If my niece were a little more of her disposition, I should
be extremely fond of her -- not for herself, because I am above all those false
notions of relative connection, but for her virtues.'

Supper was soon after served in a style that would have gratified an epicure.
The Doctor declaimed, between every bite, on the virtues of temperance, and the
beauties of nature. -- The young man ate little, being engaged with the
beauties of Laura: and the latter was much abashed by the company of a
stranger, who, though in a garb that declared present poverty, had yet a
nobleness of physiognomy, which shone forth beneath the cloud that enshrouded
him.

Having sufficiently satisfied the demands of nature and appetite, the Doctor
ordered his niece to retire; and having replenished the table with wine, which
he observed was taxed in an infamous manner, he requested the stranger to
relate the outlines of his history.

CHAPTER II. The progress of Truth and Philosophy in an ignorant mind.
MY name is Frederic Fenton. I might perhaps be ashamed to mention my family,
when you see me in these miserable garments; but truth must be spoken without
regard to those false prejudices, which call folly by the name of honor.

My parents have great landed possessions, that is, are great tyrants, in the
county of Kent. They educated me in all the superstitions of the Protestant
church, and my whole study was to conform to their desires, and restrain my
wishes to the line of what they called rectitude and religion.

I was so grossly ignorant, as to believe that disobeying them was displeasing
to the Almighty; and I considered religion as a sure means of leading me to a
better world, and making me hereafter happy: but these were the dreams of
unenlightened imagination, impressed upon me by education.

Learning appeared in my eyes the greatest object of human attainment; and my
parents delighting in my progress, my whole powers were bent to the acquirement
of what they called valuable knowledge.

I did not then know that profound ignorance is the real and only state in
which men can enjoy felicity; and that every advance from this is so far
diverging from the intention of nature.

I was never easy under the neglect of a duty, because I either feared the
censure of my parents, or the vengeance of an offended deity: and I refrained
for these reasons from committing any of those actions, false morality
particularly considers atrocious. So eager was my application to study, and so
tenacious my memory, that at fifteen I was judged capable of commencing student
in form.

I took leave of my parents with tears; and my bosom seemed to lose its
tranquillity at parting with a youth nearly my own age, and who had been my
friend and companion from infancy. Vernon was not less affected; and we vowed
eternal amity at our separation.

At the recommendation of a nobleman, the divine Stupeo became my preceptor. He
was a person of mean birth; but that distinction I despised, seeing in him only
a man of talents.

He began his plan of education, with starting bold truths, which shocked and
dazzled me with their luster, without confounding my perceptions. 'I will not,'
said he, 'overwhelm you at once with the whole blaze of knowledge, though I
would as little wish to lead you step by step, as though I would surprise you
to an acquiescence with truth: immortal truth can never lose by being seen; it
bears down every barrier; it is a mighty torrent; it may be stayed for a while,
but the acceleration of its rapidity will increase in equal ratio.'

At first I ventured to observe, that the human mind is too often led into
error by a deception of the senses, which are ever ready to adopt any new
object, however absurd. His eloquence, which was like the torrent he described,
soon overcame my weak objections, and the first gleam of truth and philosophy
dawned upon my soul.

He lamented the profound obedience I paid to my parents. 'My dear pupil,' said
he, 'what is this bondage you call duty? And what right have those beings you
call father and mother to direct your actions, and control the inborn vigor
of your soul?'

'By the claim of nature; by the trouble they have taken for my preservation;
and by the love they bear me in particular,' said I.

'Unjust in extreme!' cried he. 'Do your parents love you for your real value?
-- No! it is aristocracy, self-love, and family pride, that teach them to set a
value on you. No human being ought to be preferred because that being is my
father, my wife, or my son Political Justice.
; it is the good of the whole we should endeavor to promote. And what is your
claim of nature? Are not all men born free? Children can be no longer connected
with their father, than while they stand in wood of his assistance. When this
becomes needless, the natural tie is of course dissolved, the children are
exempted from the obedience they owe their father, and the father is equally so
from the solicitude due from him to his children; both assume a state of
independence respecting each other Rousseau.
.'

'But gratitude,' replied I, 'would seem to inspire reverence and esteem.'

'Gratitude! -- Nonsense,' answered he, 'I ought to esteem a benefactor, not
because he has done a kindness to me, but because he has done it to a human
being Godwin.
.'

'But if what my parents request is for my own advantage, surely there can be
no crime in obeying?'

'Of that you are the best judge: if the action be good, it should be done
because it is so, and not because certain persons have requested or commanded
you to do it. But even this you ought to doubt: to doubt is the first step to
be a great philosopher, and the more you doubt the more real knowledge you are
possessed of. For instance, you will call that an apple lying on your table,
because it appears so: but you must doubt it; your eyes, your taste is fallible
-- it may be an orange, or it may be nothing -- it may be any thing.'

'It may not be a church, or the Alpine mountains,' said I.

'But you must not believe it to be neither, for those who believe any thing,
certainly are fools. Hume on Human Nature, vol. i. page 168.


'I am convinced,' said I. 'I doubt whether I ever had a father, or ever was
born: I will no longer be held in the leading-strings of obedience.'

Youth has a natural passion for entertainment; and having now cast off the
trammels of parental admonition, I determined to enjoy those moments which my
dear Stupeo taught me would never return. 'How few are our years, and of those
years, how few are allowed to pleasure!' would he say. 'Grasp then, my pupil,
the moments as they fly, for all beyond this life is annihilation and
nonentity: dry and barren study is well enough for muddy souls, but not for
those who know how to live.'

It is surprising with what conviction truth flashes upon the mind: -- Stupeo's
axioms were unrefutable, and I found the superiority of pleasure over all the
laborious and musty researches of learning, which never satisfy a doubting
philosophic mind.

I confess I ran into a few eccentricities, such as breaking the leg of a
waiter in a drunken frolic -- getting a fever by a surfeit -- and spending my
salary before it became due; but these are the necessary attendants on this
miserable system of things. We are so enervated, with drinking tea, that we
cannot withstand the power of fixed air in fluids: and the monopoly of property
prevents our spending more than we can acquire.

These reflections naturally led me to abhor tyranny of every kind. It is
singular how we imbibe great truths, when once the mind doubts of every thing.
The genius of liberty shone resplendent in mine eyes, and I groaned at the
sufferings of my fellow men. I saw that no possible right could bind any man in
slavery. What power had any generation of men to fell their posterity (no
matter who bought them)? When had I given my consent to the government I lived
under? Never; and therefore to me it was as absolute a despotism as any under
the sun Pain.
. It was no consequence to me that it might be just and well administered; to
me it was a tyranny. I confess there seemed a trifling argument against this
new truth; for it seemed a matter of difficulty, that the government should be
sending to every individual, as he attained certain years, to know if he
approved their establishment. But in the best of systems there is always some
little defect; and surely Voltaire, Rousseau, Tom Pain, and the metaphysician
Stupeo, knew which was for the best. 'I even doubt,' said the latter, 'whether
the very article of our birth be not a great breach of political justice, since
our consent was not required.'

He was a most exquisite reasoner; I remember him expatiating one day on the
happiness of natural liberty: he kindled into enthusiasm on the subject. 'War,'
cried he, 'that destroys our vitals, and in one moment silences eloquence,
genius, and every virtue, with the howlings of misery, murder and despair,
would never exist but for the machinations of monarchs. When did you ever hear
of republics going to war? what have they to fight about It may not be unworthy
observation, that the French Republic has conquered all the little republics
round them, and only the two monarchies of Sardinia and Naples.
?'

'Did the Tyrians, the Grecians, the Romans, the Carthaginians never go to
war?' said I. But Stupeo knew his ground too well to be stopped by so trifling
a question: he continued -- 'The reciprocal relations of mankind, while living
together in their primitive independence, were not sufficiently durable to
constitute a state, either of peace or war, so that men cannot be naturally
enemies. It is the relation subsisting between things, and not between men,
that gives rise to war; which arising not from personal but real relations,
cannot subsist between man and man, either in a state of nature or in a state
of society, in which every thing is secured by the Laws This inconsistent
sentence makes a brilliant figure in the Social Contract. The reader is not to
be surprised if he finds these great men contradict themselves in the course of
the work; if they did not, they would not be modern philosophers.
. Thus it being evident, that as men never can be at variance with men, for as
much as no savages in a state of nature ever fight; it follows, that war never
could happen, but for the quarrels of a set of tyrants, who lead men into the
field of battle to butcher each other with their eyes shut.'

'Then man becomes a mere machine?' said I.

'Man a machine!' said he, with ardour: 'man is a sublime animal; the great
lord of creation* it is true his soul is nothing but an heap or collection of
different perceptions, or objects, united together by certain relations, and
supposed, though falsely, to be endowed with perfect simplicity and identity.
If any one, upon serious and unprejudiced reflection, thinks he has a different
notion of him self, I must confess I can reason with him no longer: he may
perhaps perceive something simple, and continued, which he calls himself,
though I am certain there is no such principle in me. But setting aside some
metaphysicians of this kind (who believe they have a soul), I may venture to
affirm, of the rest of mankind, that they are nothing but a bundle or
collection of different perceptions, which succeed each other with
inconceivable rapidity, and are in a perpetual flux and movement Hume on Human
Nature, vol. i. page 361 and 438.
.

'But,' said I, 'you tell me you are certain you have no soul, and yet you lay
it down as a maxim, that we are not to be certain of any thing. This is sure a
contradiction. Beside, if this bundle of ideas is always changing, and never
the same, what is memory? How am I conscious that I ate my breakfast this
morning, and got drunk last night?'

'It is merely in idea,' replied he; 'you cannot be certain you did either. All
ideas are only slighter impressions than realities, and there is no other
difference between reality and idea Hume on Human Nature, vol. i. page 361 and
438.
.

'Then,' said I, 'the idea of an inch must be an inch long, and of a mile a
mile long. If I have an idea of a roaring lion, or a thunder storm, I shall
hear the sounds, only in a smaller degree. I have an idea of two bottles of
brandy, and the impression will surely equal the effect of two bottles of wine;
but do I feel any actual difference between an idea of the frozen pole or the
bowels of Mount Etna? Am I colder or warmer for either? Does the idea of a
bombardment lay me dead upon the plain; which it must do, if it were, as you
say, that reality and idea are in every respect the same, except that the
former strikes with more force than the latter See Beattie's excellent Treatise
on Truth.
.

'You will believe every thing I have said,' he answered, 'if you doubt your
own understanding; and nothing is more fallible than human reason, or more
certain than immutable truth.'

In this new path of philosophy, I made so much progress, that I soon ceased to
trouble myself with the jargon of the schools: Aristotle, Grotius, and
Puffendorf, appeared as so many children, and even the great Lock, but an
infant in science. Latin and Greek became the most insipid of studies; and in
fact, my moments were too precious to be wasted on such trifles.

My father wrote me several letters, expressive of his grief at my change of
principles, and hinting, that he would discharge Stupeo, if I attended to his
infernal doctrines.

'And so,' cried the great logical metaphysician, 'you will stoop to the
domination of this man, who wishes to cramp the divine impulses of your soul,
to torpedo your faculties! Other tyrants would be content with governing your
body; but this man, who calls himself your father, would depress the energies
of your so^ring spirit, and tear it down from beholding the splendid sun of
reason and truth, to walk in the common track of plodding men.'

What reasoning could be more just, or delivered in more eloquent terms? I
wrote in reply that my mind was free, that I detested control, and would not
submit to the directions of any tyrant, however distinguished by name.

My father returned me an answer in the mildest terms: he requested me to
consider how much attention he had bestowed upon me in my early years. He asked
how I should think of the man, who should return any favor I did him, with
equal neglect and contempt. He entreated me to consider if any of his former
advice had been in any ways detrimental to my own welfare; and to reflect, that
no possible advantage could arise to him from my proceeding in a virtuous life,
except that of beholding one, whom he had been a mean of bringing into the
world, an honor to his country, to human nature, and to himself. He concluded
with entreating me to meet him at a certain house upon the road, where he would
communicate to me matters of great importance; and should set out from home
(though very unwell) the moment he received my promise to meet him.

Stupeo was on a party of pleasure when I received this letter. I am almost
ashamed to own the impression it made upon me, though it is all in the
old-fashioned style; but we cannot at once wholly overcome every prejudice of
education.

I wrote immediately, that I would attend at the place appointed. I delayed
till Stupeo arrived. He was surprised to find me ready for a journey, and more
so when I informed him of the particulars.

'Weak, puerile, and inconstant man,' cried he, 'you resolve in one hour what
you undo the next. It was either fitting that you should yesterday have bowed
to the commands of your father, or it is not fitting today: time cannot change
a moral action. What is it he requires? To bend you to his will -- to make you
the passive tool of his power: He would persuade you all he has done was for
your sake. Who are you? an individual! his property? -- A master gives physic
to his slave, and pretends he has no interest in doing so. Nonsense! it is the
good of the whole he should seek.'

'But I have promised to meet him; and I would not willingly forfeit my word.'

'All promises are morally wrong, and ought not to be kept. The action to be
done, is either right, or it is wrong. If it is right, it should be done
without an eye to a promise; and if it is wrong, no promise can make it right.
For instance, I send word to a merchant I shall meet him on 'Change, and I find
more pleasure in some other excursion, or some action of greater good (in my
mind) appears for me to do. I ought not to meet the merchant; -- his
inconvenience I am ignorant of, and I can no more be said to be accountable for
any thing he shall suffer from the disappointment, than I am guilty of murder
for not being on a trial at Newcastle, when I knew of no such trial, though my
evidence should have saved the man. All that can be said is, that people would
then in these cases depend more upon themselves, and less upon others Political
Justice.
.'

'But,' said I, 'how is business to be done, if no man has a certainty of
meeting with those he has to transact some concern of the first importance
with?'

'What is business, what is commerce, when compared with moral virtue and
political justice? It is the good of the whole, my dear Frederick, and not the
petty interest of individuals, we are to consider. We ought never to do an
action without first calculating the resulting good, and considering if some
greater good may not be done. -- You are dressed, and to tell you the truth,
for we ought always, and in all instances, to speak truth, I this night am
going to Mrs. Ell's, where you will see a charming girl: she has not been
introduced a month, and you will not regret the loss of --. Come, my dear
fellow, shake off all these superstitious notions, and taste real and genuine
liberty.'

CHAPTER III. The new morality of Friendship, Honor, and Philanthropy.
SOME days after, I received a letter from my father, informing me, that the
disappointment he had received, with the fatigue of the journey, in his weak
state of health, had so much raised his fever, that he had little hopes of
recovering his health; and that if I yet retained the smallest spark of filial
piety, I would instantly hasten to him.

I was at first shocked with the event, but it was evidently not owing to me,
but the improper journey he had taken; for to say the disappointment could have
such an effect, was talking like a nervous old woman. I was easily convinced by
Stupeo that it was all a trick: and indeed I was in no condition to undertake a
journey into Kent; the charming girl who had not been a month introduced,
having given me sufficient reason to remember her innocence.

'What a shocking effect!' said Stupeo; 'but you ought to doubt its reality.'

'To doubt it?' cried I: 'No, no, I have no reason to doubt.'

'But it may only exist in your idea, and that idea affects you.'

'Affects me! How,' said I. 'What, if I have an idea that my throat is cut,
shall I find the blood streaming about me?'

'It all arises from the present miserable system of things, said Stupeo; 'a
despotism is the very worst of governments.'

'But what has despotism to do with it?' cried I peevishly; 'am not I burning
with all the flames of a volcano? and should I not have been well at this
moment if I had attended my father? Pray how does this rise from the
government?'

'I will maintain,' said Stupeo, with metaphysical coolness, 'this, and every
thing else that is bad, arises from it. If genuine liberty were established,
all the female sex would be within our choice; we should not have to venture --
What business has one man to monopolize a woman to himself? Affection and love
is as various as any other passion. What are the names of mother, and wife, and
daughter, and sister? In a state of nature men pursue their own inclinations,
and not each grasp a female being to himself, the slave of his caprice, and the
object of his disgust. -- Over this imaginary prize, men watch with perpetual
jealousy; and one man will find his desires and his capacity to circumvent as
much excited, as the other is excited to traverse him: -- as long as this state
of society continues, philanthropy will be crossed and checked in a thousand
ways Political Justice.
.'

'That must be a very admirable state of things,' I replied; 'but at present,
what are we to do, when our philanthropy must be practiced in private? for it
is a very dear article at Westminster Hall. I am almost tempted to think it is
a judgment of Providence upon illicit connection.

'Providence!' repeated he; 'is it possible you can really be such a child in
science? In the eighteenth century to talk of Providence, is a mark of the
profoundest ignorance. Do you think then that there is a great and omnipotent
Being, who cares for such a bundle of atoms as you are? All priestcraft and
lies. Does any thing tell you that you shall live hereafter?'

'I have an idea that I shall; and all ideas must be realities, only in a
slighter degree, if the doctrine of the fashionable Hume be true.'

'Not in this case. Your existence will terminate when the lobes of the lungs
are no longer inflated, and the blood ceases to beat in the arteries. The union
of the spirit with the body, is a mere fortuitous connection, happened wholly by
chance, and will terminate in like manner.'

'But,' returned I, 'nature seems embellished with a thousand beauties, that
surely are not the result of chance. In the formation of one single flower, how
insensibly does the stem increase, the leaves unfold, and the flowers expand!
Were those the effects of chance, we ought to see the particles which form the
component parts, settling from the air into the shapes of plants, trees,
horses, and geese; nor should we ever see two animals or plants of the same
species.'

Stupeo paused a moment, but he never wanted resources in the extensive stores
of his mind. 'All this,' said he, 'proceeds from physical necessity, and the
nature of things; you impel a ball along a smooth surface, and it must proceed
in a fixed progress; so nature has given to all things an impulse, which never
ceases to act. The same quantity of matter and spirit exists now that did exist
at the first, though it is ever varying in form. In the first kernel, in the
first egg, was contained the germ of all other kernels and eggs, of all the
plants, and all the chickens, requiring only the progress of time to unfold
them; and the first man contained in him all the men that ever did, or ever
will exist Busson.
.'

'But how that first could ever exist without a creating power, is to me
incomprehensible. We do not see new species of animals produced by nature in
our time; we never find men with their heads just rising above ground, like the
children of Deucalion and Pyrrha, or the teeth which Cadmus set in the mud. It
would be a convincing argument, if we were ever to find the horns of animals
rising like plants before us in our walks. Indeed, my dear Stupeo, you must
allow a great first cause.'

'Nature is all powerful,' said Stupeo.

'But what is nature? To be a powerful cause, it must have will: it must be a
Deity; and I care not whether you call this mighty being Nature, Providence, or
God.'

'Those who believe any thing are fools,' replied he: 'matter and motion may be
regarded as the cause of thought Hume on Human Nature, vol. i. page 468 and 434.
: every thing arises from matter and motion.'

'But what is motion? And what is the cause of motion?' said I.

'Priests,' he replied, 'have led the mind through their knowledge of its
passions. They have introduced Hell to control us by the horrors of future
punishment. But the burning-glass of truth has struck the temple of prejudice
and priestcraft; the fabric totters to the base, it will shortly fall, and
crush all tyrants in its ruins.'

I could not but observe, that he had evaded my questions; but that was an
effort of his exquisite wit and talent for disputation. It was impossible any
one could resist the torrent of his eloquence; and my imagination was warmed by
the glorious and brilliant idea of the temple of superstition tumbling down,
and crushing tyranny in its ruins. I forgot my sufferings in the prospect,
sighing alone in the fear that mankind were not yet sufficiently enlightened.
Indeed I have to lament, that I find too many self-interested people, who
prefer the misanthropic way of living in families, watching their wives and
daughters like so many dragons guarding the Hesperian fruit, and hoarding up
that wealth which thousands would be rejoiced to share. But the time will come,
when knowledge is disseminated in all ranks; when the ploughman shall sit on
his plough reading the Rights of Man, and all books of law and religion shall
be burnt by the magistrates. Then, then, my dear sir, liberty shall triumph!
and aristocracy and property vanish together!

It was a long time before I recovered my health and strength; and my father
finding he could not bully me into his narrow principles, sent a dismissal to
Stupeo. That great and good man could not bear to take a personal farewell of
his pupil, but departed in the evening, two days after his discharge, taking
with him a gold repeater of mine, which his delicacy would not let him ask as a
memorial. -- The loss of my dear Stupeo would have been dreadful, had I not
imbibed sufficient knowledge to proceed without a guide; the light of nature
being sufficient for those who will follow her impulses, unbiassed by vulgar
errors.

I endeavored to spread the truth A cant phrase of all Reformers.
with all my powers; but the old fellows thinking their places in danger, and
alarmed at the thunders of reason, and the fulminations of science, expelled me
the college, and I returned to my father's house.

There I resolved to live as much as possible in conformity to reason, without
stooping to the forms of custom. Nature is the best regulator, and I was not
obliged to eat and drink because the hand of the clock pointed to such a set of
figures; or to eat pork, when my appetite preferred mutton.

My mother, who was a weak, silly old woman, was always crying at my whims (as
my father called them); and if I had not steeled my heart against that foolish
failing, pity, I could not have persisted in the line of truth.

Vernon, the friend of my youth, resided at this time at our house, having
finished the studies necessary to a mercantile education; and he now only
waited for a vacancy, to go abroad on some adventure.

I endeavored in vain to open the eyes of this bigoted youth, who was nearly
my own age. I put into his hands books of religious controversy, in hopes of
catching his mind by some insoluble question. I demanded of him frequently an
explanation of all the articles of religious belief. I read to him the
admirable writings of Voltaire and Hume: but he had the impudence to say, they
contradicted each other; that Voltaire frequently asserted falsehoods as
certainties, which three fourths of his readers had not means to detect; and
that Hume was so contradictory and unintelligible, that the reader was lost in
a jargon of words.

He had taken a strong fancy to a very elegant girl, the daughter of a farmer
in our neighborhood, and was never happy but when writing verses in her
praise, or teaching her what he called, the Christian virtues. He was so
jealous of this fancied property, that he was for excluding all others from
their natural right. Had I attended to the old-fashioned doctrine of honor, I
might have refrained from desiring the girl myself; but our enjoyments are very
transient in this world, and none but fools will think of the next.

Your church people, who believe that they have souls, might indeed be deterred
from violating innocence, and plundering the weak: but I rejoice to think these
notions are growing obsolete; and not being troubled with such qualms myself, I
resolved to gratify the pure and natural desire I had, at least to divide with
Vernon the affections of Amelia.

The girl herself soon perceived the difference; for, having a quick
understanding, she became enamoured of the new doctrines I daily discoursed
upon, for they carried self-evident proofs in the latitude they allowed for the
passions and weakness of human nature.

Vernon was of too jealous a disposition not to perceive her growing coolness
toward himself, and that all his sanctified religious notions were unattended
to. His vigilance was roused, and he soon discovered that I had not only
supplanted him, but even gained those favors he durst not in idea think of: a
glorious proof of the superiority of truth, and the new morality.

In the narrow spirit of self-love, and the old times of chivalry, he sent me a
challenge with all the fire of a madman, and all the reproaches he could have
uttered had I injured him in the most infamous manner.

Determined to preserve the dignity of conscious innocence, I replied to him in
a letter, 'That it was the offspring of despotism, to bring any argument to the
sword! -- that his appeal to force was palpably wrong, as he should have
convinced me, by rational tenets, that I was not right. I also begged him to
reflect, that my mind, being infinitely more illumined, and more liberal than
his, I was so much more valuable in the scale of moral virtue. That his death
would, in the eye of political justice, be a matter of insignificance, but that
mine would be a great detriment to society in general, for whose benefit I even
durst not use the self-command of my person, by risking it against his. The
modern doctrine of Godwin and Co.


I happened to meet him the same evening, on my way to Amelia. His eye kindled
the moment he saw me; and standing firmly in my way, he waited my arrival.

'Execrable coward I have been accused of pleading for duelling. Let any man,
who calls himself a gentleman judge.
!' cried he, 'monster of human depravity! you have forever ruined the
tranquillity of my existence, and you deny me the honorable satisfaction of a
gentleman. Were there not others less worthy than Amelia, whom you might have
contaminated with your detestable maxims? But none other than the beloved
darling of the soul of your friend, the girl whom he had doated on from
infancy, you must defame!'

' Friendship!' said I, when his passion allowed him to pause; 'we ought never
to form particular friendships with any one, to the exclusion of the whole
species: every man ought to be our friend; but before we enter into confidence,
we ought to inquire carefully into the worth of our object, that we may not
bestow upon him a regard which his abilities do not deserve, or we shall act
unjustly. We ought to be sure, after a certain allowance for the fallibility of
the human judgment Political Justice, page 86.
.'

'Perish such infernal doctrines!' cried he, interrupting me: 'such
cold-hearted and diabolical systems would unhinge all society in the universe!'

'True,' cried I, 'true, most true,' raising my voice, determined to be heard
in the cause of truth. 'It were well for mankind, if society were this moment
abolished: we should then be free from its vices; virtue would spread her
celestial banner over the children of men; science would dart the rays of its
fecundating beams to the bosoms of all men; and liberty would spread her reign
from zone to zone, and from one pole to the other.'

'What is this jargon!' said he, with a look of calm contempt: 'Is the liberty
you wish, the right of ravishing your friend's mistress? Is this virtue you
blaze forth -- the committal of outrage, and slinking from the punishment? And
what is your state of nature, but a state of anarchy and bloodshed?'

'You misname every thing,' said I. 'If the great metaphysician Stupeo were
here, he would soon convince you. As it is, I would ask how I have injured you?
Is Amelia any way injured but in your romantic fancy? What claim had you to her
more than I? Should I at this moment oppose you, if you were to supplant me, or
even divide with me her affections? No; so much philanthropy, so much
friendship do I feel, that though I was now going to her, you shall go in my
place.'

'Villain! monster!' cried he, nearly choking with passion; 'this moment I
would tear your soul from your body, did not gratitude for your father prevent
me. Live then! live to be a curse to yourself and society!'

'Do you not know,' said I, 'that gratitude is a crime? because -- '

'Because, d -- n -- n!' vociferated he. 'Begone, monster! The man without
gratitude is a companion alone for the blackest fiends of hell. The affections
of angelic minds are lost on his callous soul. He may talk as he will of
benevolence, but self is the center of all his actions; and because he will not
return a favor, he would meanly seek to destroy the obligation. Frederick,
Frederick,' continued he, in a voice supernaturally solemn, ^remember this.
Nothing can be more fallacious than the philanthropic principles held out by
modern philosophers: they paint themselves as the most benevolent of the human
race; they lament the horrors of West-Indian slavery; they groan at the
sufferings of mankind* which arise from the nature of man and mortal existence.
But look yourself, and let others dispassionately look into the conduct of
these worthy patriots, and I challenge you, or them, to bring me one man in an
hundred, who will, or who has bestowed one single shilling voluntarily, either
to relieve the distresses of the poor, or to aid the support of their country.
In the one case, they shuffle off, by saying, the poor have a right to demand
the property of the rich; we are determined not to give a penny to a set of
cowards, who will not rise and cut the throats of aristocrats and placemen. In
the other case, they exclaim, I give any thing to support a set of ministerial
minion^! No, it is contrary to my principles, I will oppose them in every
measure; and if a foreign enemy should come, I will either be neutral, or
rejoice to see the day that shall make us free. What is the meaning of this
cant, let your own sense dictate. Were these men to come forward and pay the
regular taxes, there would not require above half that are now ostensibly
demanded, the burden would be more equal, and the honest part of society would
not be crushed with more than their portion. This, Frederick, is probably the
last time I shall converse with you: it is gratitude which impels me to desire
your reform; and I would have you look at those men, who have always the word
morality in their mouth: look at the private life of any one of them, and you
will find the liberty they seek to be no other than the right to practice every
licentiousness unchecked by the law, and unstigmatised by sober and religious
men.'

I was going to repeat some of the arguments of the profound metaphysical
Stupeo. I was going to prove, that we ought to doubt whether two and two made
four, or the greater was larger than the less: but he turned from me with a
look of superiority, and I could not for my soul but muse over his sermon,
which was sacrilege against the cause of reason and truth; it being well known
that our political demagogues, our brethren in the cause of universal man, live
in the most abst^mious manner, that they may give the surplus to the poor. Will
they not with true patriotism make the meanest subterfuges to evade a tax, by
which means a double burden is thrown upon those who cannot flinch, and mankind
are forced to open their eyes? Do they not print cheap books to enlighten their
understanding, and let them see how they are plundered and robbed It is to be
lamented that the Government party do not endeavor to counteract this method
of propagating French principles, by distributing books of religious and moral
duty
? For it is no argument to say, that from those who have not, nor ever had any
thing, nothing can be taken; -- for what is more clear, than that I commit a
robbery on a man if I withhold his just demands? and the rich have no more real
claim to their wealth, than the farmer has to the product of the ground he has
cultivated; and which ought to be divided equally to all the people on the
surface. No man has a right to monopolize the fruits of the earth.

The arguments of Vernon might have weight on some minds; and I trembled to
think that he was counteracting all the good which I hoped to produce in the
vicinity. So dangerous an enemy to liberty and reason ought to be removed; and
when I returned home, I immediately went to my father, desiring him to withdraw
his countenance from Vernon, who was a man that abused his generosity.

'I can hardly believe him capable,' said my father; 'and even if he were so,
the hopes I have inspired him with, render it in me a sacred duty to provide
for him. I have educated him superior to his fortune; I have given him, as I
may say, a mind equal to a great employ; and I should deem it injustice to cast
him down, and to destroy all the talents he has acquired, and the schemes he
has indulged, beneath my influence.'

'But,' cried I, 'your influence may be employed to better purpose, and it is
the greater good we ought to prefer. What is the tenderness to which you are
bound? This expectation you dare not disappoint. Has his expectation altered
the original purpose of his life, engaged him in undertakings from which he
would otherwise have abstained? Be it so: he and all other men would be taught
to depend more on their own exertions: Political Justice, vol. i. page 156 to
160.
they would be taught never to rely on vain expectations, but act from the
noble energies of independence.'

'What language is this?' cried my father. 'What would society become, if no
human being could depend on the promise or the protection of another? And what
is this greatest good? A term without meaning, a cant phrase to avoid a duty.
The greatest good is, to be upright and sincere before God and man; and not,
because my present convenience may suit, to turn the whole life of a dependant
into a different channel; break all his connexions, and dissolve his plans at
my will. This indeed is despotism with a power superior to the mandates of
Persian plenipotence.'

'I wish,' said I, 'the divine, mythologistical, metaphysical Stupeo were here:
he would shortly convince you that you are in a palpable error.'

'He could never,' replied my father, 'sophisticate the common-sense dictates
of a mind wishing to do right.'

We were interrupted by the entrance of Vernon, who paused, and trembled at
seeing me. I did not wish wholly to confound and embarrass him with my
presence, and therefore withdrew.

I know not what passed between him and my father: but the next morning he
departed by break of day, and my father shut himself up in his closet, in a
gloomy fit.

CHAPTER IV. The greatest Good fully illustrated by a strange accident --
anecdotes of Patriotism.
I CONTINUED my connection with Amelia, and had the satisfaction to perceive
that another human being would be added to the race of men. My father, by some
means, became acquainted with the circumstance; and I was catechized for having
followed the dictates of nature. Family pride did not permit his requesting me
to marry her, though he pretended that his only objection was, that no union
could be happy after so great a lapse of discretion. He proposed that I should,
for some time, quit the country; and he would provide for Amelia and the child,
when it should be born.

'Let the parish provide for it,' said I: 'all children ought to belong to the
public. The great, the immortal, the virtuous, and illustrious Rousseau sent
his children to be maintained by the Foundling Hospital at Paris Rousseau's
Confessions.
: and shall I be ashamed of copying so great a master, whose actions were all
sublime?'

'And how do you reconcile those principles with morality?' said my father.

'Morality,' I replied, 'is political justice, which prefers the good of the
whole to the good of a part; suffering partial evil, that the great work of
truth may go forward, and liberty and reason be paramount over selfishness,
pride, superstition, and priestcraft.'

'Excellent! cried my father, breaking into a loud laugh: 'a speech worthy the
humble copier of Rousseau, and the great metaphysician Stupeo. Let me ask you
one question, Frederick -- Do you understand yourself?'

'Do I understand myself? Yes; and what I say is as legible as the broad beams
of the sun at noon day: it is written in the great book of Nature.'

It was evening when this conversation took place: and we were startled by a
sudden blaze of light, which darted across the hemisphere; at the same moment
the servants cried out, Fire! and we could perceive the farm in a blaze.

My father and I, together with the servants, hastened to the spot, where we
found a scene of deplorable distress. The farmer had forgot his children in his
endeavors to save his property, which he threw out at the window.

His wife had fainted away; and the younger children were screaming in an upper
story. My father, without any reflection, darted up the flaming stairs, and
descended with the two little boys in his arms; in doing which, he was
considerably scorched. Meanwhile, I snatched a ladder from one of the men, with
intention to rescue Amelia, who had been sleeping in her room, and now appeared
terrified at the window. I was going to apply the ladder, when part of the roof
fell into the room where her father was employed, and drove him to the window
in danger of suffocation.

In this dilemma it was impossible to save both: -- 'Were Stupeo here,' cried
I, 'he would tell which is the most deserving of life; but I shall commit some
injustice, if I save the life of the one with the lesser merit, ('Let go the
ladder,' cried several; 'why do you keep it useless?') I, at that moment,
remembered a parallel case, quoted by the excellent philosopher, Stupeo, in
support of the new political justice. -- 'Suppose,' said he, 'the Archbishop of
Cambray and his maid are both in danger of perishing in flames, which ought I
to save? The maid, a stupid creature, little better than a brute; -- the
archbishop, a man of eminent virtue and learning, and the author of Telemachus.
Godwin's Political Justice, page 84.
To save the one, at the hazard of my own life, is scarce more virtue than to
save a dog; but to save the Archbishop, is an act of the highest virtue;
because all actions are to be es^eemed in exact proportion to the merit of the
person receiving the benefit. Now the difficulty is, in the present case, to
know whether the farmer or his daughter is of most value to mankind. The farmer
cultivates the earth, and provides for his family in a gross kind of way: the
daughter is young, and may add many to the human species: but then -- '

I was calmly proceeding, in spite of the struggles of the men to wrest the
ladder from me, when a tremendous crash, and a large column of flame, ended my
discussion, and I had the horror to see the farmer and his daughter both
overwhelmed in the burning ruins. I was shocked at so dreadful an accident,
which would not have happened had Stupeo been there: but in this present
rascally system of government and society, virtue will not always succeed; and
no man can be condemned, if evil should result from a good intention.

It was, however, a very deplorable circumstance, and I regretted deeply that I
was not better versed in the great book of Nature and Man, as I should then
have known instantly how to appreciate the several degrees of merit.

Another unpleasant circumstance resulted. The common people, who are like a
swinish multitude, and cannot perceive reason, (how indeed should they, when
they are held in profound ignorance?) insisted upon it, that I had retained the
ladder purposely to suffer them to perish: by which I expected to avoid the
consequences of my connection with Amelia. My father himself was inclined to
believe the report; and unless I had the logic of Stupeo, and the effrontery of
Voltaire, (who being asked how he could insert falsehoods so glaring in his
history, replied, 'To one half of the present generation they ^ill be facts,
and the next will not possess the mea^ ^f detection.') I should have found it
impossible to prevent their reproaches.

A committee of stupid farmers met to inquire into the cause of the fire. It
began in a back stable, where I had been on some business in the course of the
day: their suspicions appeared facts, and a warrant was sent for to apprehend
me.

I was very much astonished when my father mentioned this with tears in his
eyes, and told me the corroborating circumstances were in every point against
me: that my retention of the ladder was too evidently to prevent the rescue of
two wretched persons whom I had in fact murdered: that he shuddered at being
the father of so profligate a son; but that his consideration for my mother
prevented his assisting to detain me himself, as I should most assurdly be
hanged, unless I possessed incontrovertible proofs in my favor.

'I maintain it,' cried I, 'that in a state of nature the fire could not have
happened: I even doubt that it has now happened. Did you ever read the great,
the fashionable Hume, in his Treatise on Human Nature? In all incidents of
life, we ought still to preserve our skepticism. If we believe that fire warms,
or water refreshes, it is only because it costs us too much pains to think
otherwise: nay, if we are philosophers, it ought only to be on skeptical
principles Vol. i. page 469.
.'

'You will believe,' said he, 'when the rope is tightened round your neck.'

'I know not whether there be reality in that,' said I, 'it may be only an
idea: we cannot be certain that any man was ever hanged; because, if we proceed
upon hearsay ^vidence, upon tradition, ever varying; upon chronicles and
annals, which are half int^ations; I say, if we believe all those so^
testimonies, we may as well believe the authenticity of our bibles; for, in
fact, we have as little real proof of the burning of the farm-house, the
hanging of John the painter, the revolution of Massanielo, and the existence of
Alexander, as we have of a book, which is merely the laws and history of
people, preserved in their synagogues by themselves: our senses are the most
deceiving things in nature.'

'You speak lightly,' said my father with a deep sigh: 'had you the common
feelings of a man, the loss of Amelia would rend your heart; but you are
callous to the ties of nature: if, however, you cannot prove your innocence,
you would do well to fly; and this purse will supply you the means.'

'Give me a few moments,' said I, 'to deliberate, I would march rejoicing, with
a firm step and steady countenance, to meet the axe of the executioner, if it
would promote the cause of truth: but I have yet to consider how my death will
benefit mankind, whether it will impress a conviction of the omnipotent power
of truth, or whether -- '

'Are you indeed mad? said my father, gazing at me sorrowfully.

'Mad!' cried I. 'No; I repeat the sentiments of all enlightened men: I have
the power to escape, and the power to march to the gibbet, and I only balance
between the resulting good of either action.'

'You are not fit to be a member of civil society.'

'I know it; I glory in the idea: were I fit to live in society, I should be no
real and genuine philosopher. Society is a fungus, reared in the hot bed of
luxury.'

'Fly!' cried he: 'the mob is coming across the green -- it is dark, haste
through the garden!'

I really did not see that any good would result from my being hanged; for how
could I know what yet remained for me to perform on the great stage of life?
and accordingly I hastened from the house.

I continued to cross the country, chagrined at the effect of consideration. I
must confess, the new philosophy involves one in situations that require all
the energies of the human mind; and indeed it would be almost impracticable,
were it not for that fundamental and happy maxim of disbelieving every thing
past, present, and to come.

I detested disguise, because it is inconsistent with the spirit of truth; and
I know not but all sorts of stratagem are blots on the dignity of virtue. It
was, however, very awkward, that a philosopher should be hanged for such a
trifle as the death of a farmer and his daughter.

I proceeded forward the whole of that night, and the next day I remained to
rest at a farm-house, again setting out at the commencement of evening. I had
not advanced above seven miles, when I heard a considerable noise in a barn,
like a tumult of applause, which again subsided into a calm; and I could hear a
voice pronouncing a declamatory speech. I hastened to the door, which was
guarded by some ill-looking fellows, and, having paid sixpence, was ushered
into a crowd of gaping farmers and cottagers. A little dark complexioned man,
with a most hypocritical countenance, and a grin of self-applause mingled with
contempt, was instructing the clowns in their rights. His voice was elevated to
the pitch of raving, and the idea of liberty gave volubility to his tongue,
which he rolled about with the energy of enthusiasm.

'Citizens,' cried he, 'citizens and fellow brethren of the human race, this is
a glorious sight, this is a display that shall strike terror into tyrants. The
prisoners rattle their chains, and will soon dash them in pieces on the heads
of their jailors. -- Germ^ of my love! how it gives satisfaction to my soul, to
see you assembled and determined in the good cause! What shall we do? Shall we
pray, like a set of canting methodists; No, we will do something better. (Here
he made signs of fighting.) Yes, citizens, we will rally round our rights; we
will claim something else besides moldy parchments and rotten charters; we
will demand the Rights of Man! (Can any citizen furnish me with a morsel of
fruit, for I am exceeding thirsty?) Well, brethren, let us reflect upon the
horrid times we live in; I don't mean to say this country, and I don't care how
many government spies there may be amongst us; I am speaking as if I was in
Rome. Let us remember the times of our forefathers: -- hear it, citizens! In
the time of good Queen Bess, every ploughman could, with his day's wages, carry
home a sucking pig, or a turkey, to his family at night This very assertion,
among many others, was made to a London audience by a London Political Lecturer.
: which of you can do so? Will Not you believe now that the times are bad? that
you are slaves? that Old England (mind I mean Old Rome) is ruined, and that,
without some energetic exertion, we shall never redeem ourselves from
perdition? Brethren! germs of my love! this is a meeting for the cause of
universal man: no real citizen would refuse to give -- What! slinking away
through the gate when we talk of giving? Aye, aye, the minister has drained
your pockets, not left you a farthing: -- however, the box is held at the gate
Meeting at Chalk Farm.
. Well, citizens, I am the man that stands forward to defend your rights -- and
what do you think the government will do with me? I will tell you: they will
put me in a dungeon, where I shall look through the grating at you; or they will
hang me on a gibbet, where I shall dingle dangle before you like a scarecrow.
But let them -- I am willing to suffer for your sake Meeting at Copenhagen
House.
.'

Here he descended from the rostrum, amidst the loud applauses of the
multitude; and I pressed eagerly forward to get a sight of a man laboring in
the cause of philosophy and truth.

'Citizen,' said I, seizing his hand, were the great, the metaphysical, the
oratorical Stupeo here, he would honor you for your noble speech.'

'Which of my speeches?' said he. 'You may get the last phillipic of the
doorkeeper for a shilling.'

'My dear friend,' said I, 'I am a disciple of the wonderful Stupeo, whom you
must have heard of. Tell me how I may be of service in the cause of human
nature.'

'Have you subscribed?' demanded he: 'Are you a member?'

'I am a stranger, but I pretend to some little philosophy.' He gazed upon me;
and some friend stepping up, I was parted from him by the crowd.

He is too much a philosopher, thought I, to have his reflections interrupted
by idle curiosity: he will now retire to meditate on the subject of his
undertaking, and I will endeavor to see him in the morning.

I proceeded toward the next village across some fields, and, as I went
slowly, was overtaken by two countrymen, who were in high argument. -- 'I tell
thee,' said one, 'it be's a thing impossible as a laboring body should yearn a
pig in yan day. Why, doan't I know as how, thof we pays dearer for an article
in name, we do have more money in proposition, as our parson say.'

'He say!' cried the other: 'he's a right to stand up for himself, and make
folks believe any thing. Why, I tell thee now, atween mon and mon, that Old
England be gone to the dogs, as we heard Citizon Ego say; and it will never be
as it ought to be, till we have another Aldermon Cromwell, and no tithes.'

'Alderman Cromwell!' repeated the first. 'Why, thee be's an arrant ninny
hammer: he were Oliver Cromwell, an our Parson did tell us about him last
Sunday, as how he did tax the people, when he got fixed, as much or more than
they were before.'

'I will be stringed up,' cried the other, 'if it were not Aldermon Cromwell
now. Why, I (...) hear a deel about un from a paper Citizon Ego did give away
for nothing.'

'Like a montabank to catch fools,' said the other 'You'd a deel better go and
mind your master's business, and not trouble your thick head about nation
affairs.'

My blood began to rise in the cause of truth. -- 'What,' cried I, 'would you
have the human soul bound down and settered in bonds of superstition and
ignorance? Give the intellectual faculties play, and then the great day of
universal emancipation will soon arrive.'

'Mensuration!' cried the first: 'who be you, to talk of mensuration? Ayn't the
country divided enough, without more mensuration?'

'My good friend,' said I, 'learn that emancipation is the freeing of all
mankind from their chains; when neither priests, nor kings, nor Oliver
Cromwells will be wanted.'

'Thee lies,' cried one in anger: 'Alderman Cromwell were the only good man in
the land, and I wish we had an hundred at this present.'

'Who are you,' said the other, 'that abuse your betters? You shall go to the
stocks if you talk treason.'

'The stocks!' cried I: 'you would do well both of you to go there, and learn
your alphabet; then you would know a little more.'

The champion of Alderman Cromwell was too much irritated at this reply to
enter deeper into the argument; and being also in a quarrelling disposition
from the speeches of his adversary, he instantly struck me over the head a blow
which nearly brought me to the ground. I returned it in an instant with a good
cudgel, and he fell at his length before me. His antagonist attempted to collar
me; but; darting my fist in his mouth, he stuck up to me in a more scientific
way; and though I beat him black and blue in about six rounds, I was myself so
bruised, that I crawled with difficulty to the next inn.

Having procured some vinegar, or rather sour beer, I retired to the chamber
allotted me, which was in the upper story, the roof admitting the sparkling of
the stars as they passed over. I lay down on a dirty piece of a bed, which the
maid told me was all they had to spare, the rest of the house being engaged by
the London gentlemen.

I was grieved at so fair an opportunity being lost; but my bruises paining me,
I found little inclination to enter into political discussion.

I endeavored to sleep, but a loud noise in the room beneath effectually
prevented me. I arose, after some time, and through a chink in the floor could
perceive the same little dark citizen Ego, and two others, the one in
green-and-buff, and the other in black.

'We shall make a decent harvest, citizens,' said Ego; 'the germ of freedom
begins to shoot, and we shall reap the benefit.'

'How much,' said Green-and-buff* 'shall we divide tonight? This is but a poor
place. I am about a work that shall bring more money, and set the nation more
together by the ears than all your lectures and debates. I shall demonstrate by
a ratio, clear as the angles of a triangle, that the whole kingdom is beggared;
and every man will buy the book to see how: it will be torn from the press; the
very government will buy it up. I shall prove to every man, if he has any
common sense, that all the property in his warehouse will not fetch him
half-a-crown in the pound.'

'Drink about, my boys,' said the man in black. 'If we had but three nice
pretty little rogues here, I would recite my ode to the best of kings -- it is a
d -- d clever thing, citizens; Pepper's book will be nothing to mine: I make
out every man to be a rascal or a fool; there is nothing like it: the more you
abuse people, the more eager they are to buy. I Have found out the secret, and I
take care to lay it on thick enough? true or false, it is no matter to me, not
a pin. -- There was the other night I was at the Opera, and there was my Lady
--. Oho! here comes the supper.'

The papers before them were rolled into their pockets. Roast fowls, and other
articles of equal luxury, attracted their attention; and jests at the folly of
mankind filled the intervals. 'Damn it,' said Ego, 'do you know I had a
devilish difficulty to get on tonight! I thought I was a little too far out;
but I thundered it away, and they gulped it all down for gospel. If I mention a
government spy, I always set the room in a roar.'

Having eat till they could eat no more, they were again left to themselves
over a bowl of punch. -- 'Here's,' cried Ego, grasping the bowl, and lifting it
to his mouth, 'here's the dignity of human nature, and may the blood of
ruthless tyrants flow like this punch!'

'Bravo! citizen,' roared out the man in black* 'down your throat you mean.
Well, but now we must to business.'

'We have letters to write,' said Ego, 'from Edinburgh, from Liverpool, and
from Portsmouth. Our club in London is grown so fearful, that we shall not keep
them together without some flaming correspondence from some of the large towns.
Which will you take, Pepper? will you write from Liverpool? Talk a great deal
about virtuous poverty, the dignity of human (...) of knowledge; tell them of
the converts my speeches daily procure: and you, citizen, you write from
Edinburgh; talk about the Scotch tree of liberty The conductors of the
Co^responding Society will perfectly remember the genuine le^ (...) to the
society from places where no clubs existed. But these are secrets in all trades.
: for myself, do you know I Am assassinated?'

'Ha! ha! ha! how, pray?'

'Why, the enemies of liberty, the hirelings of government, have stabbed me at
Portsmouth. D -- n it, citizens, it will be a blow-up, better than a mine in a
counterscarp: when I get back to London, I may show myself for a wild beast.'

'But it will not do,' cried Pepper; 'John Bull will not be gulled so. D -- n it,
keep the broad way; tell him that there is a mine of dormant good sense in him,
which, if not brought into action, will die with him. Rights of Man.
Talk about revolutions, taxes, ropes, and axes, till you set his brains
a-whirling, and then you may pick his pocket with all the ease in nature.'

'Right, right, right!' shouted Ego, 'But what are all these ^rifles* When our
clubs are properly established we shall govern the nation, we shall ride upon
the heads of the people, superior to law or human control No man who has the
smallest affection for genuine liberty would for a moment wish the
establishment of affiliated clubs, under whatever pretense. The Jacobine club
has deluged France with blood. But not to mention what every one knows, and to
suppose that their ostensible motives were good, still they have no right to
dictate to the nation at large: and it is well known that a few daring and
needy men may by this coalition domineer over a whole people. The words of the
Emperor Trajan to Pliny may here be applied. When the latter requested
permission to institute a company of firemen, the former consented with these
words: "But it is to be remembered, that this sort of societies have greatly
disturbed the peace of that province in general, and of those cities in
particular. Whatever name we give them, and for whatever purposes they may be
founded, they will not fail to form themselves into assemblies, however short
their meetings may be." So political clubs for whatever purpose instituted,
will not fall in the end to produce anarchy, and take the reins of government
into their own hands.
.'

I was so agitated with this dialogue between the pretended friends of liberty,
that I started up, and cried aloud, 'Hypocrites! will you sully the beauty of
truth by such actions? Will you bring her into disgrace with mankind?'

'Blood and murder!' roared out Citizen Ego, 'where are my pistols? Citizens,
we are betrayed* Let us fly! The spies of government are come upon us, thick as
the locusts of Egypt.'

'A despotism,' cried Pepper, 'is the worst of all governments; no man is safe
in his own house; formerly, an Englishman's house was his castle; but since we
have opened the eyes of mankind, we are daily more and more restrained.'

'Sit down, citizens,' said the man in black. 'Drink away, and laugh at the
devil: it was only a false alarm.'

'I will not stay another hour in the house,' cried Pepper; 'I will be off through
this window.'

'Who is to pay the reckoning?' said Ego.

'Pugh! what is the reckoning to us?' said Pepper. 'We will tell the world that
we were pursued by the bloodhounds of government, and somebody else will pay
the score. We have been here more than a week, and the bill will be some
pounds.' So saying, he gently opened the window. I stamped aloud with my foot
upon the floor; they were again alarmed; and not waiting to look behind them,
all three descended into the lane.

I raved about the room, lamenting the depravity of mankind, and almost afraid
that some of the principles of the new philosophy were erroneous: but I
remembered that truth could not be injured by the abuses of some of its
professors, except they were hypocritical priests; there being a wide
difference between religion and politics.

In the morning I found myself too stiff to remove with pleasure. The whole inn
was in an uproar about the fugitives; and the landlord consigned all
politicians pell mell to the devil. To refresh my spirits, I walked down into
the garden* where I had not stayed long before I was alarmed by the cries of a
lad, and, hastening to inquire the accident, found it the son of the
innkeeper, who was suffering a severe flagellation with an horse-whip, his
father seemed to lay on in vexation for his late loss.

'What,' cried I, seizing him by the arm, 'what are you doing? What has the
poor lad done?'

'What I Will murder him for if he repeats,' answered the angry innkeeper: 'he
has been robbing an orchard, and will bring himself to the gallows.'

'But you should advise him -- you should convince him of his error by reason
and argument, and not use coercion.'

'I don't know what you mean by coercion?' said he: but I have already
sufficiently talked to him, and now his hide shall suffer.'

'You are wrong; all coercion is wrong,' cried I: 'at this moment your son
feels a sense of insult and injury; he feels himself right, and that you are a
tyrant Political Justice.
.'

'Who are you?' demanded the innkeeper. 'D -- n me if I don't think you are a
partner with those that bilked the reckoning, and go about the country teaching
children disobedience, and the poor people to knock the rich on the head for
feeding them.'

'Softly,' said I: 'if you had ever heard the mythological Stupeo, you would
have thought differently. The rich plunder you, tax you, and drive you.'

'That's as bouncing a lie as ever was uttered,' said he bluntly: 'we don't
plunder them to be sure, because its all in the way of business, but we tax
them pretty soundly, and my ostler drives them.'

'You don't comprehend,' said I: 'I speak of political evils.'

'What have I to do with politics?' said he. 'Let every man mind his own
business, and I Will be bound for it the nation will run very well. Why now,
there is a canting set of mealy-mouthed vagabonds, preaching up rebellion, and
setting people by the ears, and what good comes on it? Why, the minister, to
keep his seat, pulls the reins the tighter, and the steady horse is pin^ for
(...) restiveness of his companion.'

'But,' said I, 'these are only partial evils: we ought to consider the good of
the whole, and the benefit mankind will receive.'

'Benefit! what, to talk politics when their families are starving, and about
the Rights of Man when they are drinking their children's maintenance, and
about clothing the negroes of Africa, when their own family is in rags. I tell
ye, master, I Have seen enough of these here rotten politics in my ale-room.'

I found his concep^ons so gross and stupid, that I determined to remain no
longer under his roof; and, though I could scarcely walk, I took a place in a
stage-coach for London.

CHAPTER V. The Vagabond meets with various Adventures -- a Duel in the
republican style.
IN the stage were two female passengers, a young man well dressed, and two
persons with the appearance of substantial tradesmen.

'Well, Mr. Adams,' said one of the tradesmen, as soon as the stage had cleared
the town, 'is there any news from London? have the rioters in St. George's
Fields dispersed yet?'

'Dispersed! No,' cried Adams, 'nor I hope ever will (...) they have cut up
popery root and branch, and established liberty.'

'So you would establish liberty by religious persecution? That would be like
the Americans fighting for freedom with one hand, and rattling the whip over
their slaves with the other.'

'You and I never agree, Master Ketchup; you have read so little, that you are
quite ignorant of all the wheels within wheels that set the great crane of
government in motion.'

'I never heard that government was like a crane,' said the young gentleman,
'pray, how may that be?'

'Why, it lifts heavy brains into the cockloft of honor,' retorted Adams, with
a loud laugh. 'You thought, I suppose, you had caught a green one: it is not
for ignorant people to talk politics.'

'You are right, my friend,' replied the young gentleman; 'and I can give you
another simile: -- government is like a crane, because it lifts all the rascals
it catches out of this world.'

'Gentlemen,' said I, 'this is idle punning, and beneath the discussion of men
who think on the glorious dawn of liberty that is breaking from the shores of
America.'

'And blazing in the destruction of houses in London,' said Ketchup, 'I have
however little doubt yet, but we shall be able to reduce the Americans to
obedience.'

'Never,' cried Adams, 'never: the French will pour in troops upon Canada from
the Baltic; and I had it as a private fact, that they were at this moment
marching from the Spanish settlements in South America, and intended to take
our Hudson's Bay factory in their route, and to ruin our Newfoundland fishery A
post-master's son at Louvain, of the name of Wolf, whose intellects were
deranged, had for many years imagined himself to be a prince. As his madness
was harmless, his friends did not confine him, and he used to sign his name the
Prince de Wolf, and to wear stars and ribbons of different orders. This Prince
wrote a letter to the Assembly, testifying his admiration of the wisdom and
philosophy of their decrees, and promising to imitate so great and good an
example in his own territories, -- The letter was received, and read with
enthusiasm in the Assembly and the President was ordered to write an answer to
the Prince de Wolf.
. Then, what shall we do for whalebone and lamp oil? The streets of London will
be involved in darkness, and I shall never go to club without loaded pistols.'

'Be not alarmed,' said the young gentleman, laughing at the geographical
error, which was a mere trifle: 'they never will do it. There is news arrived
within the last twenty-four hours, that the whole expedition has been wrecked
upon the flats off the coast of Hanover.

'Indeed,' cried Adams, 'I lament it from my soul; but I hope yet that liberty
will prosper. If they would take my way, they would run no danger of these
horrid tempests. But people in office are always too proud to take advice from
those who are in low situations, or they might listen and learn.'

'Well,' said the youth, 'let us hear your advice, if it be no great secret.'

'Why, now, this is it, and can any thing be clearer? -- Is not France a
continent? and is not America a continent? and is not a continent, as Johnson's
Dictionary says, land not disjoined by the sea from other lands? What then
should prevent them marching over land to the relief of the Americans? We hear
every day of journies by land to the East Indies, and America is not half so
far.

'Did you ever look at the map of the world?' said the youth: 'you would then
see a trifling objection.'

'I'll bet you a bottle,' cried Adams, 'it is so in Johnson's Dictionary, and
that is the best book of the sort.'

I sat in some little pain for the well-meaning Adams, who seemed to have a
clear sense of truth One would be apt to think the ignorance of the twelfth
century was returned, when the geography of Brabant was unknown in France.

PLAY ^'s History of Jac^binism, page 346.
and reason; and what after all does it signify to know the relative situation
of countries; it only conduces to extend oppression. Had Alexander known of
China, he would not have lamented the want of other worlds to destroy.

'Mr. Adams,' said I, 'you seem a man of a true mind, and so far as you wish
the Americans success in the cause of universal man, I honor you; and were the
profound politician Stupeo here, he would press you to his bosom as a brother
of the human race. But, my dear friend, when shall we see an end of this
detestable butchery of our species? When shall we cease to worry and devour
each other?'

'In a republic,' said Adams, 'no man has an inclination to quarrel -- war
always originates from kings. If there were no kings, there would be no wars.'

'I am tired of this eternal babble,' said the young gentleman. 'I abhor war
from my soul as much as any man; but is it possible mankind can be dupes to so
glaring a lie? What were the republics of Greece and Rome, but a company of
banditti, who overrun all the countries which could not oppose them? These
very Romans pretended to emancipate the people they went to conquer; yet, when
they had reduced them to the state of dependant provinces, so heavy were the
taxes they imposed, that Rollin informs us, in the tenth volume of his history,
page 136, that the people of Asia frequently sold their children of both sexes
to pay these republicans for procuring them freedom. What were the so much
boasted Spartans? who were too imperious to till the ground, and had all things
in equality. Were they not worse than the most cruel despot that ever breathed,
to a whole people, whom they compelled to every servile employ? What were the
refined Athenians, but a company of boxers and prize-fighters, on a par with
our porters and draymen? But let us look coolly into the subject, and we shall
find, whatever be the ostensible reason, all sorts of governments, and all the
tribes of the earth have ever engaged in war.

'You are right,' returned I. 'Mankind has hitherto been in a state of
childhood, but the new philosophy will teach them to go without
leading-strings. Stupeo has demonstrated, that when men are sufficiently
enlightened, their chains will drop off as by magic; every man will hail his
fellow as his brother, and the copper-coloured Indian will clasp in his arms
the white European. Can any heart not beat with rapture at the idea? Can any
mind resist the torrent of omnipotent truth?

'Your ideas are very strange, I must confess,' said he, 'but they are morally
impracticable. If you destroy the arts, and return to pure nature, how will you
teach men the new philosophy? How will you prevent them from sinking into
barbarous ignorance?

'That is not my business,' said I, 'it is the greatest good we are to prefer,
and not to be staggered by apparent and trifling evils.'

'You are as far wrong, my dear Sir,' said he, 'in true maxims of political
jurisprudence, as this learned gentleman is in his knowledge of geography. One
thing let me however observe, and I have done. When we see the infinitude of
principles and ideas on subjects of religion and politics, ought we not to be
careful how we destroy all the establishments which time has sanctified?'

'Truth,' cried I, 'cannot admit of error: alter it, and transform it as you
will, it is still in its essence the same; and the divine Stupeo -- '

'Was for aught I see,' interrupted he, peevishly, 'an arrant fool.'

I saw it was in vain to attempt reclaiming bigotry and prejudice so firmly
established, and I attached myself to Adams, who seemed to have made some
progress in real knowledge.

After dinner, we were proceeding over a fine cultivated track of country, and
passed by several weather-beaten and aged countrymen, who were mending an hedge.

'See,' cried Adams, 'the effects of aristocracy and luxury. It is from thence
all the miseries of the poor arise. Why is one man to wallow in wealth, while
another is laboring in an hedge for a scanty subsistence? No man can give a
reason for this.'

'Would reasons convince you,' said the young man, 'I would endeavor to give
you them, for I am grieved to see any man entertain such strange doctrines.
Luxury is a vulgar phrase for every thing possessed by another of which we
could make use; but in reality is is like the manure to the ground, which
causes every thing to bring forth double increase; it gives invention to the
ingenious, it fosters arts and sciences, it employs the mechanic, the
shopkeeper, and the merchant^ without luxury, none of these could meet employ.'

'But the lands would feed all who dwelt upon them; mechanics would not waste
their health in the noxious fumes of various processes, and the poor would have
less to do.'

'It is true, the ground would feed all who cultivated it: but if we infer from
facts, we shall universally find agriculture keeping pace with what we call
luxury. You will find, that though on calculating upon paper, this country of
England, if cultivated like a garden, would feed thrice the number of
inhabitants it contains; yet unfortunately for political romances, the people
would inevitably diminish, and a poor half-starved system of husbandry
infallibly ensue. It is by calling forth variety of inventions, giving
employment to all kinds of genius, that every thing is urged to perfection, and
the multiplication of mankind forwarded.'

'But virtue and talents,' said I, 'do not meet their rewards, while vice rides
triumphant: you surely cannot say that is politically right? Why should a man
be despised because in a mean garb? And why are riches alone honored?

'For this reason: -- riches are only the means of gratifying our desires, and
increasing our conveniences. A wise man, and a man of genius will endeavor to
do so by laudable means. In the present constitution of society, it is in the
power of every man possessing real abilities to rise to a station equal to
those abilities; and therefore we reveren^e the exteriors of wealth, tacitly
bestowing it upon all the possessors, because indiscriminate intercourse will
not admit of time to distinguish the truly worthy. It is rare, very rare, to
find a man of genius in a wretched situation, without having brought himself so
by imprudence; but it is by no means rare to find those, whose self-love has
taught them to set a wrong value on their abilities, and who, therefore, repine
at the success of others, and their own failure, as the greatest injustice; and
originating in a depraved government, and a profligate generation.'

I was extremely chagrined that the sophisms of this youth should pass
unrefuted, for his arguments and volubility had so confused my senses, that I
did not recollect any retort, and nothing can be more shocking than to lose the
last reply in an argument.

The fineness of the road invited the coachman to drive forward with celerity.
'The poor beasts,' said the gentleman, 'feel for our riding at our ease. I am
astonished that any of our modern nervous philosophers make use of carriages.'

'Why,' cried Adams, 'what are the beasts to us? They want human understanding
to free themselves. Let us first emancipate man, and then we shall not need the
aid of animals.'

At that moment the coach overset in a wagon rut; and several countrymen came
from their labor, in the neighboring field, to assist to right it.
Fortunately none were hurt; but Adams snatching up a whip, made at the
coachman, cursing him for a careless scoundrel. 'Who the devil are you,' cried
the coachman, 'that give yourself such airs?' -- 'And who are you,' cried
Adams, 'a lousy, stupid, drunken coachman, with not half the sense of your
beasts. I Will enter an action against you, s^rah. What! am I a gentleman, a
citizen, and housekeeper, to run the danger of having my neck broken by you?"

'Peace, friend,' said the youth, 'you have forgot that you are usurping all
the airs of imperious aristocracy: come, and help to right the carriage!'

'I help to right the coach! dirty my clothes, and work like a porter! Sir, you
mistake me.'

'I do, indeed,' said the youth. 'But what right have you to be exempted more
than your fellow men? If there was a revolution tomorrow, your lot would be a
ploughman.' So saying, he turned indignantly away, and helped the peasants to
replace the coach, I being engaged in comforting the women, who were very much
frightened.

It was discovered that one of the wheels were broken, and the next inn at the
distance of some miles. The countrymen finding they could render us no more
service, begged something to drink. -- 'Come,' said the youth to Adams, 'you
would not work yourself, let us see your generosity in rewarding the labor of
others.'

'For what?' said Adams. 'It is the duty of every man to help his fellow-men;
in fact, those in distress have a right to demand it. To reward a man for doing
his duty is unjust, because it is a bribe to do what ought to be done: beside,
the money may be wanted for some act of charity, and the greatest good is
always to be preferred.'

'You are right,' said I, 'in theory, but the present state of things
frequently infringe upon political justice: for instance, I employ a workman to
make me a set of chairs, for which I appropriate ten pounds; this man is rich,
and another who is poor, comes and tells me his case; political justice
commands me to give the ten pounds to the poor man, and let the other go
without.'

*I profess,' said the youth, 'that is a most admirable argument; no wonder so
many are enamoured of the new political justice.'

The affair of the countrymen being settled, by the youth giving them a crown
to drink his health, we were proceeding toward the inn in full cavalcade, when
a post-chaise driving up with a single gentleman, he ordered the driver to
stop, and calling to the youth -- 'My Lord,' said he, 'is it you? What in the
world are you now upon? Some frolic, I suppose?'

'My dear friend,' replied the young gentleman, 'this is a fortunate meeting, a
little accident has happened to our vehicle, and I will trouble you for a lift.'

'Upon my soul,' said Adams, bowing profoundly, 'I humbly beg your pardon, my
Lord, I hope nothing I have said will prejudice your Lordship; and if you will
honor me by taking one of my cards, no man in the trade shall use you better.'

I was confounded at this abjection of soul, and walked forward without taking
the smallest notice of the young nobl^man. -- This is a strange world, said I
to myself; and it is plain, as Stupeo, said, that half mankind are fools and
slaves to commerce, with all its train of selfish affections. Poor Adams has a
weak soul, he sees clearly what is right, he feels the invigorating rays of
truth, but his habits of trade drag him from the daring height, and sink him
again into all the prejudices attached to property.

The inn where the stage was to stop was not the general rout for the stages;
and it being only three in the afternoon, I determined to proceed on foot
without waiting for the coachman, whom I had not paid for my journey, (but that
was nothing); I was not to be prevented by prejudice and commonplace rules
from following that free will, which I possessed in my breast, for the
direction of my actions.

I still felt the pains of my bruises, and walked forward slowly, admiring the
beauty of the country, and reading the great book of Nature. I fell into a
profound trance, and began to doubt my own existence, which is very necessary,
according to all philosophers, as we thence proceed in synthetic order to erect
hypothesis as upon a base. The fashionable Hume doubted whether he thought he
existed; but I went further, I doubted whether I doubted that I thought I did
not exist, and from thence proceeding to establish the axiom, Cogitas ergo sum,
I think therefore I am. I began to think that I did not think, that I thought
at all, when I was awakened by the sound of several voices; and looking up, I
perceived coming along the road a man on horseback, with several people
surrounding him; one held the re^ns, and the two others, with constables
staves, held him on each side.

A sight so shockingly shameful to human nature, and the natural freedom of
man, aroused me to attempt some noble exploit. I darted forward, and brandished
my cudgel -- 'What right,' cried I 'have you to imprison your fellow man? This
is a shameful abuse of power, it is all society hunting down an unfortunate
individual, who has ten thousand chances against him, especially if brought to
trial.' Godwin.


'He is an highwayman, and a murderer,' replied several, 'and you look like a
madman.'

'That is nothing to the purpose,' cried I, kindling into patriotic frenzy, at
recollecting some of the arguments of the great Stupeo, and the maxims of
political justice. 'The man who professes himself ready to commit murder, seems
to be scarcely a less dangerous member of society than he, who having already
committed murder, has no apparent intention to repeat his offense. Godwin's
Political Justice, page 761.
-- Unless this man appeared ready, and in a situation to repeat his offense,
political justice requires him to be left at his own discretion. He is no more
likely to repeat the crime than any man here, for ought you can tell; and no
man ought to be deprived of his liberty on presumption.'

'Pelt the madman,' cried several clowns, 'who ever heard such nonsense? A
murderer is not to be punished for committing the crime, but appearing ready to
commit it.'

'Certainly,' cried I, 'could you hear the mythological, metaphysical,
philosophical Stupeo, you would not hesitate a moment bowing before almighty
truth and moral light; but if you are like stupid beasts, deaf to the voice of
reason, I insist that you liberate the prisoner.'

So saying, I seized the bridle from the man who held it, and the highwayman
sticking his spurs in the beast, rode over the constable, and would have gained
his liberty, had not a sturdy clown levelled a stone at his head, which brought
him over his horse; I was seized by several at once, and notwithstanding a
stout resistance, I was dragged like a slave, and forced against my will into
an inn upon the road.

Are these the laws, the detestable maxims of society? cried I. Am I to be
confined here as a prisoner of state, for attempting to rescue an injured man
from the tyranny of the law? O that the glorious day were come, when every man
shall act from the divine impulses of his will, and reason and liberty be
acknowledged as the presiding deities.

While I was exclaiming to myself, a constable entered, and informed me, that
as I was deemed either intoxicated or touched in the head, it had been agreed
that on my paying five pounds as a compensation to those I had wounded, they
would not enter an action against me, otherwise I should be sent to the country
gaol for attempting a rescue.

'Society,' cried I, 'I detest thy barbarous maxims and rights: what times!
what country is this! where a man shall be imprisoned for an act of moral
virtue in the eye of political justice, and be obliged to pay for his liberty?
Dear, dear liberty! what are five pounds to thee? Here, take the money, and
permit me to fly from the whole herd of mankind. O, my dear Stupeo, would that
I could discover thy retreat; some philosophic retirement conceals the
brightness of thy genius from mankind.'

'There is a return chaise for London at the door,' said one of the waiters,
'are you going that way?'

'Any way,' said I! and following him, I entered the chaise, and was driven
rapidly toward London.

I always make it a rule to read the great book of Nature, and philosophise as
I go along the road; and I could not but be delighted to see the great book
bound in green, with variegated edges of trees and flowers. Now, thought I, is
this chaise an idea or a reality; I cannot prove it by argument to be real, it
is therefore an idea, a whirling idea: now I have a very strong impression of
this whirling idea; I wonder if I was to step out into what seems an highway to
my eyes (but which may be in fact the Red Sea), I should still continue
whirling to London. This was a very metaphysical problem, which nobody but the
fashionable Hume, the conundrumic Berkely, or the great Stupeo could resolve.

The cries of No Popery roused my attention, and I perceived we were entering
the metropolis. No Popery was written upon every house, and a parcel of ragged
fellows, with No Popery chalked upon their hats, stopped the chaise, and
demanded money*

'For what?' said I, 'I don't care any thing about Popery; a wise man will have
no religion at all, because the prejudices and narrow principles of religious
sects will prevent his mind expanding to the broad beams of truth.'

'No gammon! -- Tip us the grub!' cried several greasy fellows. 'He's a Popery
man! a Roman Catholic! and an enemy to the Church!' roared out others, while
the words 'Go it! go it!' sounded around me, and a shower of mud and stones
nearly overwhelmed me, smashing the glass of the chaise, and almost knocking
down the driver.

'You are a set of rascally cowards,' cried I: 'will any man of you fight me: I
will die in the cause of freedom.' -- A ring! a ring! was shouted and formed;
and stripping off my coat and hat, I threw them into the chaise, which drove
away from the fury of the mob.

There is something generous in a mob; we there see the first germ of justice,
generosity, and magnanimity; we see that a giant of a man shall not be allowed
to annihilate a little one. It is true, that the love of novelty often inclines
them to promote a quarrel where it might be reconciled: but no man should be
ashamed to box in a just cause, especially if he remembers the value of the
pugilistic science at Athens and Sparta: and why, because I am better dressed
should I refuse to enter the ring with a dirty antagonist, whom I may have
injured? Whoever has read the novels of a very great dramatist, must be struck
with the beauties of boxing; an art, which I hope will supersede the use of
pistols between jealous lovers and injured husbands.

A champion being found, he came forward with an aspect horridly ferocious. He
was a great-boned Irishman, and all the vile passions of human nature were
written in his countenance. His savage appearance inclined the mob in my
favor, who uttered a long roar of applause when I intrepidly determined to
st^d the contest. I had taken several lessons at College, and knew the most
scientific motions, so that the difference was not very great, and we
immediately fell to. See the elegant reasons for boxing in Anna St. Ives and
Hugh Trevor: two Novels, which the Democratic Reviews hold up as samples of
virtue and morality. It is true, if blasphemy and curses are virtue and
morality, these offsprings of the new school have an ample claim.


After six or seven rounds, I marked an opening in his right guard, and with a
well-placed side stroke, cut a long rip in his forehead, from whence the blood
streamed into his eyes, nearly blinding him, at which the mob (who are always
generous) roared with a tumult of admiration and pleasure. I now had
considerable advantage, and though I had three teeth jammed into my mouth, I
broke one of his ribs, and levelled him with a full blow upon the ground, where
he turned black in the face, and was left for dead.

A hackney coach was instantly pressed into my service, and I was conducted by
the mob in triumph to a public house, where they drank themselves half drunk in
the joy of my having conquered.

Though I had at first been in considerable danger of being murdered, yet my
subsequent valor had rendered me dear to them all: so true is it, that pure
human nature can discern truth when it descends to the level of their own ideas.

I was here cleared of gore, and refreshed with some cordials. I had lost my
coat and hat, and had not paid the chaise, which I knew not where to find; but
these were mere partial evils. A generous blacksmith accommodated me with a
coat, and a butcher insisted I should take his red and blue cap for love, for
he had never seen a better cock in his life* as tough as bull-beef. My dress
was completed by a pair of trowsers, and a large cockade of blue ribbon.

It was now near eight o'clock. The mob who were drinking in the street were
more ^n a thousand strong, and the shouts and vociferations of No Popery! Lord
George Gordon for ever! rent the air.

A man, dressed like a chimney-sweeper, with No Popery gilt on a blue ribbon
round his hat, came familiarly up to me, and taking me by the hand, led me into
a corner of the room. -- 'Are you engaged?' said he -- 'No,' I replied, 'I know
of no engagement.' -- 'I beg pardon,' he returned, 'I thought, by the clothes
you wear underneath, you were one of us.'

'I am always for the greatest good,' I replied; 'in seeking a magnificent
object, we are not to regard the means.'

At these words he clasped his arms round me, nearly smothering me with soot.
-- 'I know,' said he, 'you are a man of education -- all London will shortly be
in flames, and the cause of mankind will be successful. We have cast aside
prejudices and human frailties; it is necessary in the great labor of a
revolution. We have at our command some thousand insurgents, who, with a little
more discipline may be brought to face the regulars, and then despotism will
tumble with a tremendous crash; the very earth will be split by its fall, and
the gulf of hell yawn and swallow it up.'

'O glorious!' said I, 'then the great day is dawning. But what are those cries
of No Popery?'

'It is our watchword. The ignorant believe they are fighting for religion,
but we guide them, and direct where the storm shall fall. The passions of men
must be raised, their rational senses must be confounded with terrific reports,
before the mass can be roused; but there are always a sufficient number of
profligates and vagabonds to join in with any thing. -- You appear one of the
true men; you will be a great man in the new system of things. At this moment
the mob are plundering Newgate; I am wanted in another place; I beg you will
direct the mob to Snowhill, for I am certain you may lead them any where. I
have studied the mobs of different nations, and they are all alike. Go then and
prosper.'

I was on fire at the glorious idea of emancipating the victims of tyranny and
oppression, of opening the cells to the heart-sick offender, who could not hope
any redress from those laws which condemned him.

CHAPTER VI. The Vagabond achieves several noble exploits -- an unexpected
meeting in the cells of Newgate -- a slight idea of a Revolution.
I DESCENDED amongst the mob, and grasping a pole with blue colors, and the
words No Popery inscribed upon it -- 'Let us go,' cried I, 'my dear boys. No
Popery! Lord George Gordon forever!' A loud and repeated huzza rent the air,
and the prodigious mass of people pressed after me toward Newgate. I was
astonished in myself at the change of my fortune: I had but an hour before been
in danger of being stoned by the very mob that, under my commands, would have
made no scruple of setting London on fire. But such is always the reward of
great talents in moments of popular commotion; it is then great men are brought
forward from obscurity.

Thousands were already assembled before the august deposit of trembling
victims: our reinforcement was received with the triumphant shouting of the
patriotic bands, who felt the energy of liberty pulsating in every artery. The
air was crimsoned with the flames of the gaoler's house, and his furniture was
cast into a bonfire, which sparkled in my eyes like an offering to the Goddess
of Reason, or like that glorious flame which consumed all bonds and engagements
when equality was established by Lycurgus at Sparta.

I hastened to second the attack upon this grand fortress, by leading my
followers into Newgate-street, where, with sledge-hammers, crows, and
iron-pallisadoes, we soon broke an entrance into these detestable abodes, where
the poor criminals were panting for freedom. With a high ladder, and in the
sight of thousands, I scaled the lofty walls, exulting as I rose at the
glorious prospect before us, and waving my colors as a trophy of conquest.

We soon penetrated into the wards of this almost impenetrable building, which
short-sighted politicians might have supposed capable of repulsing an invading
army; but the energies of the people are irresistible when determined on
emancipation, and unopposed.

Fireballs and firebrarnds soon set the timbers in flames. I ran from one ward
to the next, and from cell to cell, sounding the tidings of liberty, and
receiving a thousand blessings from those tongues which had too often been
turned to curses and execrations. Pick-pockets, cut-purses, shop-lifters, and
felons of every denomination, hailed the dawn of returning freedom, and sprung
forward to a glorious consummation, helping us to destroy this dreadful tomb to
all who despise the laws, and claim the natural privilege of dividing property.

The flames raged and run with rapidity among the thick oak planking, which
cracked with the noise of thunder; the smoke and heat was nearly suffocating,
and many in their over eagerness to clear the dungeons, fell martyrs in the
glorious cause. In a cell which I had nearly overlooked, I found a miserable
wretch half naked upon the ground. I had broke open his door with an iron crow,
and the first object that he saw was a tremendous blaze of light, which
proceeded from the opposite wainscot on fire. He had long heard the shouts of
exulting thousands, and the burstings of the fire. 'Heaven and earth,' cried
he, 'is the day of judgment come? or have I sunk alive into hell? Are you a
fiend?' said he, staring wildly, and starting from me. 'Are you come to pitch
me into everlasting flames?'

To say truth, my figure was not a little hideous, for I was covered with all
sorts of dirt, swelled in my face from the different bruises I had received,
and streaked with blood from a cut in my head by the falling of a plank: but
how was I astonished to perceive, by the light of the fire, the great Stupeo,
the wonderful philosopher, in chains.

'Exult,' cried I, 'you are revenged, my master, my tutor, liberty has reared
her standard on these walls, and the fabric of selfish tyranny is tumbling
about our ears. Haste, get these irons off, and join in the noble cause of
liberty and man.'

Stupeo immediately started up, uttering incoherent expressions of joy. I
hurried him from the chamber of his studies into the press-yard, where his
detestable fetters were knocked off, and being refreshed with a large goblet of
wine from the cellars of the jailer, we went into the street to enjoy the
exultation of the surrounding multitude, and the most tremendous sight that can
well be conceived; a sight which awed the military into inaction, and struck
the magistrates into a panic of the most pusillanimous nature: but cowardice is
ever allied to terror, and I stood considering how best to exert the force now
in action, that the greatest blow might be struck to the present detestable
system of monopolized property.

Part of the army of patriots remained upon the walls, and dancing round the
ruins to prevent every attempt at extinguishing the flames: the rest followed
Stupeo and myself, who encouraged them to persevere and be free. The crowd
would have destroyed Langdale's, a large distillers, in Holborn, but I
represented that this was a paltry business, when we had yet to open the doors
of so many gaols to the liberation of our brethren; besides, we had already
near four hundred felons amongst us, and the augmentation of this force was a
grand point, for who could fight for freedom like those who had experienced its
loss? or who would level property like those who had nothing to lose, and all
to gain.

As we proceeded, every passenger was stopped and plundered, and from every
house was collected, two or three times over, considerable contributions. I
would have remonstrated, but a fellow, who had been confined on a charge of
murder, and whom I had liberated, swore he would rip me up alive if I attempted
to prevent it; and indeed, though his argument was not in the line of reason,
Stupeo reconciled me to the practice.

'In revolutions and public commotions,' said he, 'no man in Athens was allowed
to be neutral: every man who does not fight for us, ought to be considered as
against us and if we follow the new philosophy, we should show no mercy to
those who support the system of despotism.' An article in the Jacobin Creed.


Having liberated the prisoners in Clerkenwell, our forces were divided to
objects of less moment. That division under our direction proceeded to Lord
Mansfield's; and there liberty and rational principles received a complete
triumph over all regular order. The musty records of precedents, cases and law,
made a fire to warm the people they had so long enslaved: I own I wished to
have preserved several works of curiosity and art, but Stupeo would not suffer
a thing to be taken -- 'Let them all perish together,' said he, 'we have yet
remaining too much of art to be happy; let us not stain the cause with the
appearance of selfishness.'

'But why then,' said I, 'are we to plunder the poor inhabitants? Surely it
were better to supply ourselves from stores like these?'

'No,' answered he, 'can you not perceive that the destruction of property must
be the grand aim; from those who have little we must take that little, and the
hoards of affluence must be utterly destroyed. As long as one single cart-load
of property remains in any country, there will be no genuine equality.'

From these ever-memorable exploits, I and Stupeo, with several select leaders,
retired to an obscure public-house, to contrive and arrange the undertakings of
the ensuing night. I already fancied myself as great as the immortal John the
Painter.

At our meeting, several foreigners of liberal principles The cant word for no
principles but those of profligacy, irreligion, etc.
were present. A plan was proposed for organizing the body of the people, and
urging them to throw off the yoke of dependence, and declare themselves free. A
paper, entitled The Thunderer See the Political Magazine for 1780.
, was drawn up by Stupeo, which he hoped would kindle the glow of enthusiasm,
and awake the people to their rights.

The prisons were condemned to destruction, that none of our brave followers
might be deprived of their liberty. The New-river water was to be cut off, that
we might have the town effectually at command, and compel those weak and
obstinate people who were afraid of joining our standard. The Museum we fixed
upon as a good deposit for stores, after all that trumpery should be burnt,
which gives edge to a childish employment of time. The toll-houses on the
bridge we condemned, because bridges ought to be built without subjecting
individuals to expense. The East India warehouses and the Custom-house we
considered as large lumber rooms for monopolizing property that belonged to
every body.

The Tower and the Bank were two grand objects, behind which we could entrench
in defiance of the troops which were drawing toward the town from every
quarter; and indeed our plans were too extensive and grand for me to detail in
minutiae.

In the attack upon the Bank I was severely wounded in the hand by a musket
bullet, for there the soldiers recovered their thirst for blood, and fired upon
the innocent people, who were gloriously fighting for liberty. We determined
there to conquer or die, being strongly reinforced by the Borough patriots, who
had burnt the toll-houses on the bridge in their rout. To place a just sense of
our cause before them, an horse loaded with the chains of Newgate, was driven
through the crowd in place of colors, and every breast beat with throbs of
vengeance at the sight.

A body of savages on horseback cut down seveveral with their swords, and the
infantry made use of their infernal muskets, which severely galled the ^narmed
patriots. It was shocking to hear the tremendous roar of exulting rage sink
after every platoon, as if it was exhausted.

Poor Stupeo, who stood beside me encouraging a band of those, whom the
ignorant call felons, to an attack on the infantry with iron spikes and
bottles, received a shot that laid him dead beside me. The mob, who now began
to faint from the unequal contest, trampled over him, and hurried me along with
them. I endeavored to rally them, and one of them dashed a link into my face,
which I returned by shooting him with a pistol, for I had found a very good
pair in an house we had gutted, and nothing could be more proper than turning
the weapons of tyrants against themselves.

I was confounded at the fickle disposition of a mob, which can only arise from
their want of instruction; and so long as what is called civil order and police
exists, I very much fear the people will never unanimously rise: but, however,
truth is making a rapid progress, and it must irresistibly break forth into a
glorious day.

The mob would have executed summary justice upon me for the murder of the
lint-bearer, had I not escaped through the narrow streets into Holborn, where
Langdal^ (the distiller) was on fire. Torrents of spirits ran in the streets,
and being played upon the neighboring houses for water, augmented the danger
and the flames.

Here the military destroyed a great number of patriots, who were dancing round
the fire, or ^umbling the furniture out at the windows; while many others fell
victims to the half rectified spirits which ran in torrents through the streets.

I saw clearly it was a lost cause, for want of a more regular organization,
and I lamented that we had not made better use of the time allowed by the
timidity (they called it humanity) of the government; we should then have
reduced the whole city to an heap of ashes, from which liberty, like a phoenix,
would have arisen in ten-fold splendor: the mass of luxury and of wealth would
have been annihilated, and the partial injury individuals might have received
would have been amply compensated by the new order of things which must have
arisen.

It would have been, as Stupeo often said, talking of revolutions, like the
fermentation of anarchy, which from all the rage of lust, of revenge, of
murder, of cruelty, of rapine, and unheard of distress, sinks into a glorious
and heart-soothing calm Pain and Godwin on Revolutions and Anarchy.
.

Indeed nothing could be more dreadfully great than the appearance of London on
that glorious night. The large body of fire issuing from the different
conflagrations of the Fleet Prison, King's Bench, Toll-houses on
Blackfriar's-bridge, Mr. Langdale's two immense warehouses full of spirits,
and a vast number of small fires, together with the illuminations, which of
themselves would have rendered the streets as light as day, all ascending into
the air, and consolidating together, formed an atmosphere of flames, impressing
the mind of the spectator with an idea, as if not only the whole metropolis was
burning, but all nations yielding to the final consummation of all things. But
how much greater must have been the sight, amidst which even the soul of a
modern philosopher might tremble, would it have been to see the flames chasing
the distracted people from street to street; to see the enemies of liberty
perishing in heaps before the burning sword of retributive justice; to see the
rage of lust despoiling those disdainful beauties, whose love heretofore was
only to be won by cringing; to see trembling tyrants biting the dust, and
drinking their own blood as it mingled in the kennels; to hear amidst all this
uproar the thunder of cannons, the whistling of bullets, the clashing of
swords, the tumbling of houses, the groans of the wounded, the cries of the
conquerors; and see, amidst the blazing and red-hot ruins, the sons of Freedom
and Liberty waving the three-coloured banners dropping with the blood of their
enemies, and hailing the everlasting Rights of Man!!!

Ah! how dear must such a scene be to the friends of liberty and universal man;
nor should the paltry consideration of two or three thousand being massacred,
to satiate private revenge, be taken into the account of so great, so immortal
a consideration.

CHAPTER VII. Humanity of a mob -- the Vagabond is unfortunately prevented
attaining a martyrdom -- Gaming demonstrated to be the only liberal science.
I WAS so agitated by the failure of our glorious cause, that I was nearly
putting a period to my existence, especially when I recollected the shocking
and infamous system of a constitution, which none but fools can see any one
virtue in; and this was, that every man who had suffered by this effervescence
of liberty, would receive satisfaction for his losses, and thus the people
would be made to pay for what they had destroyed; so that our failing in the
ultimatum was worse than if nothing had been done, and we had in fact been
strengthening the lash for ourselves. To be sure, there was this alleviating
reflection, that the cowardly and selfish citizens would have to contribute
equally with the patriots.

I wished myself away from such a detestable country as England, where property
is guarded with as much vigilance as if it were a deity; and no man, however
obnoxious, can be plundered, without a right of retribution from the parish or
county, a thing totally unknown in other countries, and quite inimical to
genuine liberty.

My wound, my bruises, and fatigue had nearly exhausted my strength; for till
mind shall overcome matter, the human frame stands in need of repose and
cessation from action, though it is astonishing what exertions we are capable
of, when the mind is engaged in great exploits; and I have little doubt, but
when the new system is established, we shall have no need of what is called
sleep, nor shall we require food, both of these being superfluous to spiritual
substance. In fact, as my dear Stupeo says, why may we not one day become
immortal One would be tempted to suppose the man insane, who should maintain
that the human soul was a material substance, and had no existence after death,
but that he had no doubt when we had east away our prejudices, we should become
immortal in this present world. Such consistency is the doctrine of Godwin,
Holcrost, etc. etc.
?

I did not regret the loss of this prodigious great man any other than as
society lost an invaluable member, for I had strengthened my mind to the case,
and should, with the immortal Brutus, have looked with indifference on the
death of any relation or friend, these being mere partial evils, and not to be
separated from extensive designs.

It is not politically just that a wise man should expose himself carelessly to
martyrdom for the sake or liberty, till he has well weighed whether the human
species will be most benefited by his life or death. To run rashly on the point
of a bayonet was wrong, because I might yet live to illumine the world, and
catch some glorious crisis -- while truth would not receive any promotion by my
death at the present instance: I therefore retired unnoticed amidst the
universal alarm.

I was very little acquainted with the town, having been there only upon one or
two vacations; but the light of the fires, and the brilliance of the
illuminations were sufficient guides. Several watchmen looked as if they
intended to stop me, but awed by the dignity of my countenance, though covered
with blood and dirt, they all slunk away, so powerful is the effect of
innocence and impressive resolution.

I arrived opposite a bonfire, where the furniture of a Roman Catholic milliner
was blazing; it made but a paltry light, compared with the many others that
gleamed in the air; and the noble band that danced around it being ashamed to
be outdone in their patriotic exertions, in the goodness of their hearts
dragged the bed from beneath two infants Political Magazine, 1780.
and a woman in labor, which gave a great, but transient addition to the fire.
To be sure, the poor woman died of fright, but that could not be helped in such
a case; and it is the ill-education of women which introduces all sorts of
nervous affections.

In a little back alley I met an old woman carrying something in her apron; at
my approach she appeared very much frightened. 'What have you got there?' said
I. She replied, trembling, 'only some trifles, your honor, that I have
preserved from fire.' I required to see those trifles. Accordingly she opened
her apron, displaying some gold fringe, a silver censer, and two cups, which
she had taken from a Romish chapel. 'You are heartily welcome,' said I, 'to
these spoils of superstition; I wish you had as many more; but now, can you
tell me where I may sleep securely from unwelcome intruders?'

'Aye, and that I will: come to my little lodging, my dear babe, you need not
be frighted at nobody there.'

Accordingly I followed her into a miserable house, up three pair of stairs,
into a back garret. A crucifix stood on a chimney-piece, and a string of beads
hung upon a nail, by which I soon discovered that this good lady, who had been
plundering a chapel, was a Romanist; and I rejoiced to find that knowledge had
reached even into a back garret, and taught an old woman to discern the cause
of mankind from the bigotry of priestcraft

With this hospitable creature, who was an Irish woman, I determined to reside.
Being extremely jaded and pained by my bruises, I went immediately to bed, and
she hastened to procure me some refreshment. She would have fetched a surgeon,
but I utterly detested the whole crew of leeches, who deal in a cant jargon
(like the priests of Cybelle) which nobody understands.

When the fermentation of my spirits began to cool, in spite of all my efforts,
I became nearly distracted. I had lost three of my teeth, and my whole body was
bruised: the cut in my head, to be sure, was only an inch and half long, and a
finger deep; but I had a musket wound in my hand, which had taken off half my
little finger, and grazed the rest, so that I was not in the most comfortable
situation. I raved like a madman at the loss of the noble opportunity, which
might not occur in a whole generation.

Before morning I became wholly delirious, burning with a violent fever; and
now it was the old woman introduced a lame apothecary from the neighborhood. I
was tortured, blistered, and blooded, and underwent worse than a thousand
deaths in the course of three weeks, when I recovered my senses, and awoke as
from a dream. I then learnt, to my infinite regret, that the kind old woman had
been taken up and hanged, adding another to the long list of victims to
despotism. The apothecary pretended that the old woman had attempted to
criminate me respecting the stolen articles, and that I should have been taken
up had he not sworn I had been under his care prior to the riots; and it turned
out, on the trial of the old woman, that she had been seen alone entering the
chapel.

I reproved him severely for his falsification of truth. -- 'Truth,' said I,
'ought at all times, and in every situation, to be spoken. Friendship -- every
thing should bend to omnipotent truth. Stratagems of all kinds are detestable,
even in war they are unjustifiable; and I hope tactics will be so simplified,
that they will be reduced to a few general maxims, and the no man will need the
experience of a long life to become a general; it will then become a generous,
manly, and open system See Godwin's Political Justice. In one page he declaims
against war, with all the fire of words, and in another he tells us he hopes it
will one day become a generous, manly, and open system. So much for
consistency. -- It may not be unworthy to remark the eternal babble kept up by
the new philosophers concerning war. War is savage, war is inhuman, war is
despotic, etc. etc. Granted. Who does not know this. But there are wars which
are inevitable, in which, to be passive, would be came submission to
destruction. The people fortunately begin to open their eyes, and see into the
hypocrisy of these friends to the human race. They see that a republic can
outstretch the farthest stride of kingly ambition, and grasp at universal
dominion.
. Beside, in concealing the truth, you have done me an irreparable injury, you
have sunk my name in obscurity, you have deprived me of the honor of a public
death.'

'It is not too late yet,' replied he, 'if you have an ardent desire to swing,
but I thought you had the appearance of a gentleman.'

To this observation I made no reply, being agitated with the loss I had
suffered. -- All mankind,' cried I, 'would have seen an example of magnanimity
in the cause of freedom. Oh, my beloved Stupeo! had you been alive, you would
have gloried in hearing the name of your pupil in the same sentence with
Massienello, William Tell, Oliver Cromwell, Cato, Leonidas, Juffer, and Judas
Maccabaeus.'

'We must take at least three ounces more of blood,' muttered the apothecary,
and went out of the room.

I now plainly perceived that I had a rascally, ignorant, aristocratical
apothecary, who meant to bleed me to death out of spite, that my name might
forever be lost to mankind. I therefore searched for my pistols, which I had
thrust under the bed; and that never having been disturbed since I laid down
upon it, I had the satisfaction to find them. The apothecary soon after
entered, with a ragged attendant, and made preparations to tie my arm, when
grasping one of my pistols, I drew the trigger, and should have terminated his
practice had the piece been loaded.

'Do you mean to murder me,' said I, with all this bleeding? Does nature ever
bleed her patien^? and her you ought to follow in all things. You think I am
mad, but I have sense enough to tell you never again to come in my sight.'

'Who is to pay my bill?' said the frightened dealer in drugs. 'I saved you
from the gallows, and from dying raving mad.'

'How could I have died both ways?' said I. 'As to your bill, I have more need
of the money myself, and the greatest good is always to be preferred.'

'But my attendance and medicine must be paid for.'

'What is your attendance? Ought not every man to labor for the good of his
fellow men? I should be guilty of political injustice were I to reward you for
doing your duty.'

'But Sir, I have dedicated my life to the practice of medicine: I have no
other means of gaining a living, and cannot afford to practice for nothing.'

'That is not my fault, it is the ill-construction of society. In a state well
ordered, no man would receive wages, but every one would do what he esteemed
the greatest general good. Had you ever listened to the lessons of the great,
the immortal Stupeo, you would have been convinced of what I say, and would
have disdained a bribe to perform a duty.'

'Sir,' said he, humbly, in a vile depending tone, 'when you reflect, you must
observe that you only exchange one benefit for another. In society all must
mutually hang together, and if any part be disordered, the whole organization
must suffer. Men have a variety of genius, and what would become of the world
if those who were willing to work gave all their labor for the benefit of the
idle? All human genius would then be cramped, and directed merely to the
providing of food.'

'Peace, peace,' cried I, 'will you, an ignorant apothecary, a pounder of
drugs, pretend to talk philosophy with a disciple of the everlasting Stupeo? --
Why, Sir, I could talk with you on this subject for seven years, and in five
minutes you would not have a word more to say. Is it not, therefore,
demonstrable that you are in the wrong?'

'Well, Sir, pay me the trifle I require; it is only three guineas, and I have
a numerous family.'

'A family!' replied I, with indignation, 'and what business has such fellows
as you to get families? In the present system, it is only bringing into the
world a parcel of slaves.'

'But population is the riches of a country.'

'Granted,' cried I, 'in a good government, where the children are public
property, and no one knows his relations; but in our system children introduce
all the infamous train of selfish and family connexions and shut up the bowels
of compassion against the dear suffering Chinese, who eat rotten meat and
pounded rice.'

'Sir,' said he, 'give me leave to say you talk in a very singular manner; your
sentiments would unhinge the universe.'

'Come here,' cried I with transport, 'you own then the power of my arguments;
I knew they must carry conviction; I should die contented if I could only
unhinge society. I detest a claim, but you are a man of understanding, and in
want. At present, I do not know on whom I could bestow five guineas to do a
greater good; take them -- but remember, that I shall always regret your having
prevented my execution.'

'A very singular gentleman,' exclaimed he, overjoyed, 'give me leave to attend
you in future for nothing.'

'As long as you please,' said I, 'that is the natural way, but I will not be
blooded. The art of medicine is to follow nature. If the patient is sick, it is
a sign nature wants to discharge, and you should dose him with emetics: if he
is delirious, you should apply strong stimulants to increase the frenzy, as the
sooner it arises to the height, the sooner a calm will ensue.'

I continued to take his drugs by way of experiment; but I am satisfied I owed
my recovery alone to the natural strength of my constitution. I had daily
accounts of the sufferings of the persecuted patriots; and I debated with
myself what line of life I should pursue as the most rational, and in harmony
with my principles.

I resolved not to stoop to my father; I could as ill cringe to any man in
power, and I detested every thing in alliance with trade as a debasement of the
human soul. Surely, thought I, I am born for something more noble than to
measure goods, or sort the articles of commercial exchange: low and base minds
may find satisfaction in such employ, but the intelligence which learned to
soar into the realms of science, must not be chained down to such grovelling
undertakings.

To amuse my mind, I visited a billiard-table which was at no great distance
from my lodging, and I found some entertainment from the exertions of skill. I
there became acquainted with the most good natured man in the world, whose name
was Williams. I soon discovered that he was an advocate for the new philosophy;
and he protested that he could not in conscience accept a living in the present
system of things in any other way than by gaming. 'It is true,' said he, 'the
prejudices of mankind have stigmatized it as ignoble, but it is of all sciences
the most natural; it brings lords, and all those titled trumpery, down to a
level with the most insignificant of men: it introduces a freedom of discourse,
it detaches the mind from all those bigoted notions called religion: it
equalizes property, by taking from the rich to give to the poor; and in one
word, it is the most eligible way of living with honor and independence.'

'You charm me,' said I, 'I once thought gaming was a foolish method of
spending time, and calculated merely for the introduction of vice and
dissipation; I now see better, and it is to me singular how naturally the mind
transides from one truth to another: but so it is with human nature. The
progression of knowledge is going forward with rapidity, and the wisdom and
experience of ages is discovered to be nothing at all in the eighteenth
century.'

Williams proposed, that as I was what he called new to the town, we should
divide our gains, to which I readily agreed, and we were for several nights
very successful, so that I had to my share near two hundred pounds. The
transient state of human existence loudly urged me to grasp at the present; and
my college habits returning with force, I frequently spent whole nights with
drinking parties.

CHAPTER VIII. Mr. Hume's arguments for Adultery, with practical consequences
-- the new mode of Benevolence.
I WAS charmed one evening at the play, by a beautiful young woman, who was in
company with an ill-humoured, jealous-looking, illiberal man. I attempted
several times to address myself to the lady, but his severe looks and lowering
frowns compelled her to restraint, and I did not wish to be the cause of
increased domination.

I was extremely well dressed, for in these trifles one may as well appear like
the rest of the world, though I had more than once an intention to adopt the
Roman Toga, on purpose to attract attention, for these matters go a great way
with little men. I found that I gained the attention of the lady, who appeared
uneasy under her restraint, and I made a secret vow, to emancipate her from the
bondage under which she groaned.

I discovered, on further enquiry, that she was the wife of a citizen, who had
married her when she was extremely young, and extremely giddy; that they had
two children, and were as happy as a tyrant and a coquet can be in wedlock.

I read over the Essays of the fashionable Hume, where I found that adultery
was one of the moral virtues, and perfectly agreeable to political justice. In
volume 2, page 409, of his Essays, edition 1767, are these admirable words,
which, singly, and unconnected with his other excellent principles, would be
sufficient to raise the book into public notice. -- 'Adultery,' says he, 'must
be practiced, if men would obtain all the advantages of life, if generally
practiced, it would soon cease to be scandalous; and if practiced secretly and
frequently, it would, by degrees, come to be thought no crime at all.' --
'Immortal Hume,' cried I, though thou doubtest whether thou had a soul, I
doubt whether it be possible to doubt that thou had a body.'

I determined to follow so great an idea, and it was not long before I
contrived an interview. It is needless to say the lady soon became a convert to
the prevailing principles of reason and nature; she was disgusted with her
slavery, and wanted only an opportunity to exert the inborn freedom of her sex.
I engaged very neat lodgings for her, and began to enter into that state, so
congenial to the feelings of human nature and rational being. I found her a
very singular character, within a truly feminine form; she had a soul of
masculine energy; every thought of her mind seemed received by intuition. She
was often right by this means, only in matters of mere speculation; she adopted
one and rejected another, by a sort of tact, and the force of a cultivated
imagination; and yet, though upon the whole she reasoned little, it is
surprising what degree of soundness was in all her determination The reader may
find many of these sentiments in the Life of Mrs. Wolstonecraft.
. My disposition frequently led me to waver in the practice I had adopted: I
doubted, and I sometimes feared; but my oscillations and skepticism were fixed
by her boldness. When a true opinion emanated in this way from another mind,
the conviction produced in my own, assumed a singular character. She did not
descend to all the frivolous softness of her sex, which custom has rendered
general. She saw in woman, a being in no point inferior to man, except in
personal prowess; and she disdained all those attractions, which poets and
mankind have generally combined in perfecting the female character.

Our connection was that of friendship; we only met when mutual inclinations
prompted; and she has frequently lamented, that the customs of the world
prevented her mingling in all the pursuits and undertakings of men. -- 'Is
there any sex in soul?' she would say, 'if not, what right have those tyrants,
the men, to exclude us from the senate, the bar, and the army? Do we not pay
taxes in every article we consume? -- And who are our representatives in
Parliament? -- It is an outrage against the inborn Rights of Women.' -- 'Why,'
I would ask, 'may not a woman be as capable of leading troops into the field as
a general? Are they not perpetually playing cunning tricks? Soldiers and women
I maintain to be equally alike: the officers are perpetually attentive to their
persons, fond of dancing, crowded rooms, adventures, and ridicule: like the
fair sex, the business of their lives is gallantry: they are taught to please,
and they live only to please; yet they do not lose their rank in the
distinction of sexes, for they are still reckoned superior to women, though in
what their superiority exists, beyond what I have just mentioned, it is
difficult to discover Rights of Women. Part I.
.'

A woman of these sentiments was congenial to my soul; our discourses were a
feast to the mind, in which the senses had no share. She frequently lamented
the evils to which nature had necessitated her sex in the article of children;
a subject which she never could discuss with patience, it being an evil to
which man was not subjected, and a badge of bondage not to be overthrown.

'Oh! cried she, one day to me, in a fit of enthusiasm, 'what signifies all the
freedom of our souls, all the exaltations of our intellects, if we are to be
confined for months to carry a burden which we have no means to lay down, and
when the little wretch appears in the world, what a dreadful idea: -- with
intellects that soar beyond the firmament, are we to be confined to swaddle and
dandle an animal that has no ideas, and must at every moment destroy itself if
we do not preserve it? Oh horrid! that Nature did not provide some middle, some
stupid, lumpish being, to rear and take care of the human progeny: why not make
man an oviparous animal? Then we might have hatched the eggs in tempered
stoves, as they do chickens in Egypt.'

I could not but admire this flash of idea, which was bold and grand, and new;
indeed, all her speculations were sublime, though she reasoned little. We are
told in the Life of Mrs. Wolstonecraft, that she reasoned little; those who
reason much will easily believe the fact.
I had nearly overlooked an unpleasant incident, which would have very much
grieved me, had it been occasioned by me; but it was another dreadful
consequence of the present organization of society, and gave me an additional
reason to execrate the prejudices of mankind.

The husband of my Mary had expected to find in her that softness, complacency,
and modesty, which none but idiots ought to require, and which are merely
calculated to fit a woman for a seraglio, or a play-thing to a voluptuary. He
had taught himself to desire a female, who might solace him after his business,
with the endearments of a mind that had no will but his own, and sought to
oblige the man who preferred her to all her sex. But Mary was of a different
nature -- her soul was not to be confined in a gilded cage, and she would not
bow to the bashaw dictates of a master.

The poor wretch became distracted at her loss. In place of taking another, he
was perpetually raving about conjugal affection, the claims of children, the
duties of wives, and such ignorant prejudices, till his senses sailed him, and
his friends sent him to Bethlem Hospital. The children who had none to provide
for them, were sent to the workhouse, to be educated by the public, where they
caught the smallpox, and died; an event, which ought naturally to have been
expected, when they had not been inoculated, and could not throw any blame upon
the conduct of their mother.

After this incident we continued on the most harmonious footing, for though
Mary allowed herself the conversation of many of the opposite sex, I did not
experience the smallest uneasiness, for she had as much right as myself to all
the excentricities of fancy; and I never thought her the worse for having
contributed to the happiness of other human beings.

About a month after this, the poor husband died delirious, one of the most
stupid deaths a man could die, for the loss of a woman: and Mary, thus freed
from the shadow of a tie, appeared with me openly in public. Our neighbors
made their usual rude comments upon our intercourse; and because several
gentlemen pressed some handsome presents upon Mary, they circulated the
calumny, that I kept my wife as a prostitute.

I despised all this; I was not to be frightened into any act because of
scandal, and I had long regarded marriage with so well grounded an
apprehension, that, notwithstanding the partiality for Mary that had taken
possession of my soul, I should have felt it very difficult, at least in the
present stage of our intercourse, to have resolved on such a ^^easuse; thus,
partly from similar, and partly from different motives, we felt alike in this,
as we did perhaps in every other circumstance that related to our intercourse.

The human mind delights in variety. It is impossible we should be forever
attached to one particular object. This change Mary experienced before myself;
and she parted from me for the prot^tion of my friend Williams, who certainly
possessed very powerful attractions, and was an athletic figure.

I regretted this separation, but was not fool enough to repine; and I
determined, according to the maxims of the great Stupeo, instantly to select
some other; though it was difficult to find one with such an understanding as
to march forward to the high gaol of reason, trampling down prejudice,
superstition, and character, in its career.

While I was in search of such a female, I wrote, by way of amusement, a little
tract, proving that girls ought to receive the same education as boys; that the
same exercises ought to be pursued by each, and that beauty was not of the
smallest value, when compared to a robust constitution, that feared neither
wind nor weather. I proved, beyond contradiction, that every thing called the
graces, such as music, singing, dancing, timidity, delicacy, and bashfulness,
ought to be exploded.

I know not how it was, but my book was only bought by a few; and the
aristocratic critics condemned it, as the work of a man who paid no regard to
truth, provided he made himself singular: which was an absolute libel, for I
had lost in the cause of truth, three teeth and half my little finger.

I confess I did not understand the subject. When a man writes a book of
methodical information, he does not write because he understands the subject,
but he understands the subject because he has written. He was an uninstructed
Tyro, exposed to a thousand foolish and miserable mistakes when he began his
work, compared with the degree of proficiency to which he has attained, when he
has finished it. Godwin's Enquirer, page 27.
In like manner, no man understands poetry or architecture, till he has written
a poem or built a house.

Frequently, by way of amusement, I attended the six-penny debating societies,
where truth is propagated in every branch, and religion and government attacked
from behind a masked battery. A debate on the beauty of a coquet, or the merits
of a beau, was sufficient to introduce annotations on despotism, and satires on
nobility, to the edification of the ignorant and young, who are thus prepared
to receive all the enlightened principles of the new school. It is astonishing
what energy reason possesses, when adorned with all the flowers of oratory: and
it was in vain that a man of narrow opinions should endeavor to be heard; for
let him say what he would, he was unattended to. I was, however, disgusted at a
little trifle, for I could not endure the smallest duplicity, which is beneath
the dignity of man, and ought not to be permitted even in the promotion of
general knowledge. This trifle was a quarrel between Citizen Cow and Citizen
Calf, about which side of the question they should take: the one insisting that
he could declaim best on the side of liberty, and the other declaring his own
talent lay in discovering faults. I was ashamed that such great men should
wrangle about the parts they were to act, like the performers of a country
barn; and I could not but consider, that the cause of liberty must suffer, when
garbled by the palsied efforts of men, whose object was a dividend of
six-pences, to be spent the same evening in a debauch.

One evening, at the hazard-table, a young man, who had been sitting near six
and thirty hours, attracted universal attention by the extravagant execrations
he uttered, and the agitation of his mind. He protested that he was ruined and
undone to all perdition.

My feelings are ever peculiarly alive to the sufferings of my fellows, and
though I endeavored to guard against false pity, I am frequently melting at
the distresses of my fellow mortals. I followed the poor wretch home at a
distance, and entering his room abruptly, I found him sitting in a chair, with
a fine young woman hanging on his shoulder weeping, and a child sleeping in a
cradle.

He started up confused at my entrance, and would have made an apology, but I
soon tranquilized him, and pressing him with the irresistible arguments of
truth to rely on my services, he confessed that he had wronged an excellent
master to a considerable amount, under the fallacious hope, that by hazarding
it at the gaming-table, he might acquire an independence, his salary being too
small to enable him to keep a family and appear as he must; that he had now
lost the means of concealing his crime, and should bring shame on his wife and
his relations by a public death.

I was affected at the dreadful situation, for though his feelings were false,
he having a just claim on his master's property, yet, in the present system of
things he would have all mankind against him; I therefore determined to let him
have two hundred pounds, the whole amount of my cash, which would cover his
affairs for the present.

Returning home, I met with Williams at the door of a tavern, and acquainted
him with my purpose, -- 'You know my sentiments,' said I, 'and you know of what
little value I esteem property when it is conducive to good. I have not
promised Jackson, because promises are criminal, but I think at present it is
the greatest good I can do, and I have raised his hopes from the edge of
despair, by my assurances of succor.'

'But shall you not want it yourself, and how shall he repay it?'

'Hear,' cried I, 'the profound sentiments of the insallible Stupeo, that most
exalted of philosophers. -- My neighbor is in want of ten pounds which I can
spare: there is no law to transfer my property to him, but in the eye of simple
justice, unless it can be shown that the money can be more beneficially
employed, his claim is as complete as if he had my bond in his possession, or
had supplied me with goods to the amount. If two persons should offer, I must
balance between them; it is therefore impossible for me to confer upon any man
a FAVOR, I only do him a right Godwin's Political Justice, page 89
^'

'Stupeo,' said he, solemnly, 'was a man of the most exalted intellect, he was
a prodigy amongst men, a meteor in the path of science, which blazed for a
time, but was too brilliant to be permanent. His language was superior to all
the grovelling maxims of men, and his eloquence must have rivalled the
persuasion of Cicero,'

'I might say,' answered I, 'as Aeschines said of Demosthenes, if such be the
effects of mere repetition, what would you have said had you heard himself?'

'We regret,' replied he, 'the decease of great men; but when their principles
are practiced by their pupils, we ought to be content. At this moment I was
searching for you, to throw myself into your protection, well assured that the
justice of my claim will convince you. I have lost this night every farthing I
possessed, and I am now under immediate apprehension of an arrest for two
hundred and fifty pounds: I am even told the bailiffs have been after me. To be
deprived of liberty, is more dreadful to me than death; I never will support
it; I am determined in my purpose, and it remains for you to consider whether
the saving of a rational being is worth two hundred pounds.'

I felt myself in a distressing situation, and pressed on both sides by very
urgent claims, the merit of which required reflection. -- 'My dear Williams,'
said I, 'more than ever I lament the death of the illuminated Stupeo; he would
with one word have relieved our embarrassment; but, tell me yourself, without
any bias of prejudice or weakness, which will be the greatest resulting good.'

We walked several paces in silence. 'At length,' said he, 'I would not appear
selfish. I swear it by my love of truth and political justice, that both these
cases are severe, but I do think that mine has the greatest claim upon you.'

'It is sufficient,' said I, 'you are right.' He accompanied me home, where I
delivered him, within a guinea, of all I possessed. It was useless to visit the
young man when I could not relieve him, and I had no inclination to insult
distress. I was happy in having saved Williams from imprisonment, though the
disappointment Jackson must endure in the failure of my offers now and then
intervened, but I remembered that no man ought to place dependence upon any but
himself.

I cannot remember the conclusion of this incident without regret, and the
reflection that philosophy cannot always direct us amongst the doublings and
mazes of human affairs. The young man was apprehended the next day, and his
wife running forward to the most sinister conclusions, cast herself in the
Thames, where she was unfortunately drowned.

I grieved, but grief was useless, after the event; I execrated the customs of
mankind, and drew some comfort in remembering that I had probably saved
Williams from equal calamity. -- I hastened to his lodgings, to pour out to him
and Mary the tumults of an agitated soul, but I was informed that they had
departed, before break of day, nobody knew where; and that a warrant was out
against him for having cheated a gentleman with cogged dice.

I was struck dumb at this account, which informed me that I was a beggar; and
the woman of the house hinted that I was implicated in the business. My mind
was, however, clear of this aspersion; it was too manly to descend to other
finesse than that of skill; but I could not reconcile the behavior of Williams
to any maxim of truth or political justice; for if there be not common honesty
amongst those the vulgar call rogues, how are the affairs of life to be
conducted?

The accidents I had witnessed resulting from gaming, had startled my mind, yet
I preferred it to binding myself a slave to the caprices of any man. This
resource was now become dangerous. No man from persuasion, would render me a
portion of the superfluities he enjoyed, and in the midst of society which
calls itself polished, I must either labor in employ, beneath the dignity of a
rational being, or perish unpitied or unrelieved.

Occupied with these reflections, I returned to my lodgings, absorbed in a
gloomy melancholy. Mankind appeared to me a set of selfish, solitary animals in
the midst of society, and so far from being associated for mutual protection,
they seem only to live for themselves.

I remembered, in all its brilliance, the state of nature, described by
Rousseau, and enlarged by Stupeo. I repeated again and again Il return chez
ses Ega^z; and I determined to make the wilds of America my asylum. In this
intention I sold every article of value, and changed my dress to that of which
you see the remains, the better to pass unmolested, having many reasons to fear
personal detection, for no man can be truly great, till he is become an object
of hatred to nine-tenths of mankind.

CHAPTER IX. The omnipotence of modern Truth -- meditations on a Gibbet -- and
the consequences.
I DETERMINED to cross the country of England to the North-West, and proposed
to make observations upon man in my journey; for, as some writer has said, that
ought to be the object of all voyages and travels; and, as Pope says, "The
proper study of mankind is man." Indeed, man may be said to compose the first
chapter of the great book of Nature: and before we pretend to a knowledge of
all the chapters of that large book, we ought surely to be masters of the first.

On the sixth day of my journey, for I walked on foot, toward evening I
arrived on the borders of an extensive waste; a large crowd of country people
were assembled, and in deep debate about some new enclosures, which had
shamefully infringed upon the common right. Some gentlemen were endeavoring to
persuade them, that by cultivating the useless ground, larger crops would be
produced, which would create greater plenty, and render the articles of life
cheaper.

All my patriotism was roused at the glaring imposition, and taking advantage
of a mound of earth, I requested to be heard.

'Can you listen patiently, citizens,' cried I, 'to this detestable doctrine?
Do you not know that the ground which now scarcely sustains a goose, will then
fatten an ox, and thus your oppressors will be enriched, and you will be
starved? You have an undoubted right to the whole surface of the earth, but if
the cultivation goes forward, you will he penned up in the highways: you will
not have so much as a path left through a meadow; your very highways will be
taken from you, and made into canals, by which every waggoner in the kingdom
will be ruined; and what will you get by this spirit of improvement, as they
call it? Will they give you the surplus of what they cannot devour? No, they
will pile it up in barns to rot, and make manure for a double crop. Open your
eyes, citizens, and you will see the falsity of their speeches: they tell you
provisions will be cheaper; I tell you they will not; and ask yourselves which
you are to believe, those intere^i^n, or I, whom you never saw before: I tell
you, you ought to have provisions for nothing. -- Awake, citizens! remember
that when you are driven from the highways, you will be like frogs in a gutter.
Now is the time; a moment's delay, and you will be too late. Unite and tear up
the fences, level the hedges before the cultivating spade has turned up the
sod. Would to heaven there was not a single acre cultivated, and the then
imperious rich would not monopolize provisions. I see impatience in your eyes
-- I see the rising flame of liberty and truth flash in your countenances. --
Come then, down with the boundaries, those badges of slavery, and tell all the
world that you have as much right to the surface of the earth as you have to
the air.'

This speech was like an electric shock, every man confessed its truth, and the
triumph of patriotism was complete. In vain the gentlemen endeavored to argue
down the storm; no one would hear them; a plain demonstration that their
arguments were false. I tore up, with my own hands, one of the stakes, and in
an instant the aristocratical enclosures were laid open again in a state of
nature. Oh, cried I to myself, Oh that Stupeo could witness this effusion of
reason, this march of philosophy. But, alas! the great mythological,
metaphysical patriot, was first killed by a musket bullet, and then trod to
death by his friends.

While I stood witnessing this transient start of energetic freedom, I was
suddenly seized by three of the gentlemen, and though I made a strenuous
resistance was soon overpowered. I called aloud for the country people to
rescue me (but the disposition of a mob is always fickle,) those who a few
minutes before hung with raptures on my words, now seemed to rejoice in the new
object raised to their attention.

I was chagrined, and as they led me on, I exclaimed aloud, 'Rascals and
cowards, is this the manner to treat a pupil of the great and immortal Stupeo?
Is this treachery to be reconciled with political justice? For myself, I am not
concerned, I glory in the martyrdom I shall suffer; but remember, that the axe
which sunders my head from my body, cuts at the same moment all your liberties.'

'Who in the world are you?' said one of the gentlemen; 'you surely are not in
your senses, or you would not utter such incoherent absurdities.'

'Did I not tell you,' said I, 'that I am a pupil of the great Stupeo, a man
who, if he had been here would have confounded you with his eloquence, and
shaken all the prejudices and habits of your mind like an earthquake, which, at
one trembling, overwhelms all the proud puny structures of ignorant and
tyrannical men.'

A gentleman on horseback advancing toward us, stopped at the sight of so
tumultuous a procession^ and I knew him to be the same I had met in the stage.
He recollected me, but seemed not to know me.

'How does your Lordship? said one of the gentlemen. 'We have here one of those
seditious impostors that go about the country destroying its peace, and telling
palpable lies in a flowery language, which warms the passions, and runs away
with sober reason.'

'My Lord,' said I, 'I am glad to see you, because you shall be a judge of the
subject in dispute, and for which I am dragged along the public road like a
traitor and a slave. What is truth? Can any circumstance change the
immutability of its nature? Is it not like those mathematical axioms, which we
only enquire to hear to understand? Think you that the senses of the people are
so dull, they do not comprehend the light of truth when it flashes in their
eyes? Or, as the sublime Stupeo would have said, when truth, like a volcano,
bursts forth on the darkness of night -- its thunderings shall awaken the
dormant senses of mankind -- its lightnings shall glitter in their eyes like
the brilliant morning of science -- its lava shall bear down all opposition,
overwhelming all the puny barriers of state -- its cinders will scatter
destruction upon its enemies, and the devastation it spreads (like a
revolution) shall be momentary, giving place to a tenfold fecundity.'

'But,' said his Lordship, 'not to question the truth of your bombastic
metaphor, you forget that this devastation would sweep away all the then
generation.'

'And what is one generation,' I returned, 'or what are ten generations to the
resulting good? Are we always to be as imbecile as infants? I have no doubt,
that when reason acts in all things, we shall live to the age of the primitive
parents of mankind, and then we shall not tremble at revolutions.'

'Oh that the glorious days were come!' said he with a sneer, 'when the dagger
and the rope shall lose their destructive qualities, when the musket, the
sword, and the pike shall rebound from the bosom of the patriot, and the cannon
ball, in place of flying onwards, winged with death, shall fall harmless to the
ground -- then, and not till then, ought we to rush into revolutions.'

'But truth,' cried I, 'truth is omnipotent, of which this very day is an
example.'

'Which way?' said he. 'I know you have sense, though at present it is warped.
You call by the name of truth that which stimulates ignorant people to outrage:
but you forget that all men are not cool philosophers, that the great mass of
mankind are enamoured of novelty. The very bustle of a riot or a revolution has
for them equal charms with a horse-race or a bull-baiting, and the merits of
the subject are never discussed till they smart under the consequences. What
can be more easy than to lead people to desire to live without labor, to
plunder the rich, and pay no regard to those laws which were made purposely to
restrain the passions? And because this is easy to be done, you call it truth
and liberty, and patriotism. But I would ask one sober question, and would to
God the whole world could hear me. If simple nature, poverty, and equality is
the natural state of man, why do reformers wish to deprive the rich of their
wealth, to render the poor unhappy? A plain argument that all they want is to
plunder the rich, and, under a mask of mock patriotism, destroy all those
sacred bonds which give energy to genius, and encouragement to virtue. If they
have the real welfare of mankind at heart, in the establishment of equality,
and detest (as they are always pretending) cruelty and bloodshed, it would be
very easy to establish themselves in America.'

'But monopolizers,' cried I; 'are they to be suffered to prey on the entrails
of society? What right has one man to eat a pineapple, for which he gave a
guinea, when another is starving for want of an halfpenny worth of bread?
Answer me this --.'

'Few things can be more easily done,' replied he. 'In the first place I would
observe, that the incident never happened but in imagination, drawn for the
purpose of casting an odium upon the rich, they do not in general deserve.
Secondly, the accumulation of individual property is the natural and certain
consequence of society. It is to be seen in the state of savageism, where an
industrious Indian shall possess good arms, while an idle one shall be almost
without. In the state of equality, that is, ignorant barbarism, no pine-apples
would be cultivated. How many depend for their share of the guinea paid for the
pineapple? The fruiterer, the gardner, the glazier, the carpenter, the
bricklayer, the smith, the coal-merchant, the mariner, the miner, with all the
crowd of others who supply each of those individuals with materials; and when
you shall have divided the guinea between all these, I think the gentleman may
eat his pineapple with a good conscience, unless you can prove that he ought
to give half of it to the vagabond, who will not work to provide himself food.
-- To state your question right, you should ask which is the greater good, to
aid all those tradesmen and their dependents, by encouraging the luxury, or to
give the superfluous guinea to the support of unproductive idleness? There is
another question frequently asked -- What right, say they, have the rich to tax
the poor? What right have they to live by the labor of the poor? The real fact
is, that they do not live by the labor of the poor, but vice versa; for were
there no high people to pay the poor for working, there would be no work done.
What bricklayer would build a house without being paid? What labourer would
work for him without hire? The benefit is reciprocal to both parties; but, to
speak a truth, the rich, wrapped as they are in ease and indolence, would do
much better without the poor, than the poor without them. As to taxes, the poor
in this country pay very few in proportion to the rich; their cottages are
exempt, they are not vassals who work without pay (as in most countries of the
world,) and those who wish to live in peace, may do it with as much security as
a lord; their persons and their little all are equally sacred in the eye of the
law, and except in the article of game, equally free. It is the drunken, the
idle, and the vicious, who have their families starving, and a burden to the
parish. But such is the singular constitution of the country, that no
Englishman can die of absolute want, if he will appeal to the charitable
institutions. In fact, it is the middle class of people who bear the great
burden of the state: the poor are exactly the same as they were a thousand
years ago, and were, and will be always the same under every form of
government, with the exception of personal freedom and protection. It is to be
remembered that taxes ought never to be murmured at, provided they are applied
to public affairs. I am, however, grieved when I reflect that the upright,
peaceable, and loyal citizen pays at least one third more than his just
portion, to make up the deficiency occasioned by the sneaking, miserly part of
the rich* and by the mock patriot evading every impost he can flinch from --
thus stabbing the country he pretends to weep over.'

'But,' replied I, 'it is a gross and ridiculous error, to suppose that the
rich pay for any thing: there is no wealth in the world except this -- the
labor of man, Enquirer, page 175.
so that when a man of property pretends he is rewarding the labourer, he is
cheating him, he is giving him a bauble, and cajoling him. If he employ them in
erecting palaces, in sinking canals, etc. it will be found he is their enemy;
he is adding to the weight of oppression, and the vast accumulation of labor,
by which they are already sunk beneath the level of brutes.'

'From this doctrine,' said Lord B --, 'it follows, that the less employ given
to mankind, the greater is their happiness, and the greater your benevolence;
and the Eastern Bashaw, who grasps every accumulation of property, destroys the
speculations of commerce, arts, sciences, and agriculture, reducing men to the
happy station of providing no more than just sufficient to support existence,
is, in your system, the benefactor of the human race.'

I know not how it was, I felt all my ideas unorganized, and I endeavored in
vain to reply: though what could be more trite, illiberal, and common place.
The country people who had listened to this discourse, one and all protested
they were grieved at their offense, declaring, that they now saw plainly how
much better it was to receive the wages for their labor in cultivating the
ground, than to keep it barren, and of use to nobody, at the same time
offering, the next day, to replace the hedges they had thrown down.

'And to conclude this adventure,' said the young nobleman, 'let this
unfortunate man be liberated; and I hope he will yet be convinced of the folly
of destroying one system, which has some faults, with many beauties, and in its
place proposing another, which has not one single practical beauty, but is
pregnant with the most detestable and dreadful evils.'

Being at liberty to proceed on my journey, I left Lord B -- and his train of
slaves. Continuing along the road by moonlight, and having leisure to
recollect the apothegms of Stupeo, I was angry with myself that I had not
contradicted every assertion made by Lord B --, and proved that his reasonings
were false in toto.

I was roused from these reflections by the creakings of a gibbet on the
highway, and could not avoid shuddering at the inhuman spectacle.

'O property!' said I, 'this is one of thy blessed effects -- what a dreadful
exhibition of injustice glares upon the thinking mind, that death shall be the
fate of the man who by force exerts the rights of nature. In the principles of
Penal Law, we are told near an hundred persons annually are executed. Oh ye
victims of this infernal monopolizing scheme, the whole amount of the goods
(vulgarly called stolen) is only threefourths per cent. upon moveable property,
yet they hang you up on the highway. Perhaps you were obliged to shoot somebody
in self-defence, and must ye die for that? Can we wonder at the miseries of
society, when luxury and trade are risen to so enormous an amount, that the
aggregate of property brought to the city of London, and moved in floating
bottoms only, is annually seventy millions, out of which only about four
millions are taken in plunder, only four millions reduced to the laws of
equality. There is, indeed, a bright gleam breaking through this dark picture,
which enables the private patriot to tax the property of these dealers in
wealth; this is the article of base coin, amounting, it is true, to no more
than one million a year See the excellent Treatise on the Police of the
Metropolis, which, though certainly exaggerated in some of the calculations,
deserves the attention of every man.
. Let us a moment contemplate this mighty Colossus of property, which threatens
to devour up the Rights of Man, and resist all the open and secret attacks of
philosophers, and we shall see how necessary it is by every means to render
property less secure. Let us reason calmly, and without prejudice, and to any
man of liberal ideas, what is the moral turpitude of robbery? It is no more
than taking by force what I have a natural right to: it is an heroic and
generous way of exerting the claims of nature and Agrarian justice; and the
hazard I run is the same as every patriot must lay open to, who excites
revolutions, and proclaims the glad tidings of universal emancipation. The one,
as well as the other, is detested by all men who are blinded by religion, and
the prejudices of the old school. It becomes, therefore, the part of every
patriot, who would nobly resist oppression, to begin by counteracting the
unjust distribution of property; and were they all to a man boldly and heroicly
to set out on the high road, they would soon render wealth less secure, and its
possessors less arrogant. It may be objected, that this would not be so manly
as at once throwing off the yoke of bondage: but till the march of sentiment
has proceeded to universal conviction, the next greatest good ought to be
preferred to listless inactivity.'

Such were my reflections while I stood gazing at the gibbet: I ridiculed the
idea that it would act as a restraint: it was in my eyes like the mangled body
of Caesar, which only stimulated to revenge. I considered the poor victim as
unjustly massacred by the iron-fisted law, for though he had committed murder,
that was no reason for coercion in the code of political justice.

My mind was impressed with a majestic and independent tone, resulting from
those ideas. I felt myself roused to some arduous exploit, and a postchaise
driving toward me, gave me an opportunity to emulate the valor of an
Alexander, or a Charles the Twelfth.

I drew out my pistols, and marched forward along the middle of the road, which
the postillion perceiving, spurred his horses, with an intention to ride over
me. With a stroke of my oak-stick I brought him down, and grasping the reins,
retained the horses. The gentleman immediately fired, and missing me, I
returned the shot, and a loud scream from a female caused me to think it took
place. The horses taking fright, tore away from my grasp, and rode over the
postilion, who was much bruised, and had one leg broke.

This unfortunate accident extremely chagrined me, but I consoled myself as
much as possible with remembering, that partial evil will ever attach to
general good. The immortal Stupeo, before he died, used to observe, that nature
in her fecundity, produced all things in superfluity, that much might be spared
for the destruction of accident, as in the produce of animals and vegetables;
and man, being nothing but a brute, was also supplied in greater numbers than
sufficient; in fact, that the death of two or three hundred thousand was a
matter of no moment, and absolutely unworthy to fill the mind's eye a second in
the contemplation of a great event.

These arguments were clear as the broad base of truth; for what man could walk
out on a summer's day, if he feared crushing the insects in his path? Or who
could look coolly upon a revolution, if they valued the lives of individuals,
who must be crushed by the ebullitions of the moment The reader must observe
the difference of the Vagabond's sentiments, which is the exact language of
modern Jacobins. If one of their own party suffers for his crimes, it is a
massacre, and must be revenged by the most sanguine examples; but if thousands
are murdered by their own party, it is then a petty ebullition of liberty --
nothing, compared to the great object they aim at.
.

I rejoiced that my mind was superior to prejudice, and continued forward,
after this little accident, with an high flow of spirits. I was on foot, and
walked slowly on, forgetting, that by this outrage (as it is vulgarly called) I
rendered myself liable to account, when I heard behind me the clattering of
horses. It was totally dark, and stepping a little from the road, that they
might not run over me, I stuck in a muddy ditch on one side.

The splashing I made to clear myself caught their ears, and they quickly
surrounded me ordering me to surrender. I was in no situation to contend, for I
could not extricate myself. I threw my pistols over the hedge into a thicket of
whins, and replied, that they might use me as they pleased, for death was
infinitely preferable to slavery.

I was conducted back on horseback several miles, to the nearest inn, where I
was ushered into a large kitchen. It was now very late being near three in the
morning, so that only two maidservants were there, with the three persons who
had caught me. One, who had the appearance of a gentleman, turned me to the
light to examine my features, when I instantly knew him to be my father.

'Great God!' exclaimed he, 'who do I see? What dreadful fate is this? Why did
I not die before I had beheld this hour? But for a trembling hand I should have
killed my son! and that son would have been spared the guilt of murdering his
mother!'

A cold damp sweat gathered on my brow. I was unmanned in a moment,
notwithstanding every effort I could make to preserve my resolution. -- 'Was it
not imprudent,' said I, 'to travel at this hour? What business had you upon the
road? And how could I know you in the dark from another?'

'Ill-starred boy,' said he, shedding tears; 'Providence directed your arm
against your parents, that you might behold, in full light, the horror of your
actions, and rep^t!'

'Nonsense,' cried ^overing at this impeachment of truth. 'Do^ ^t know that in
the eye of a man of sense, (...) no (...) connected than the greatest
strangers. Would Rome ever have been a republic (...) ^ile! from ordering his
own children to execution? Would Caesar have fallen, had the second Brutus been
tied by the name of friend? Or would any revolution happen, if brothers, and
fathers, and sons, feasted to plunge the dagger in each others bosom? The mind
which cannot leap over these paltry and prejudiced considerations, is not
inspired with genuine patriotism: we must learn only to appreciate persons by
their intrinsic value, and not by their titles, nominations, and connexions I
would observe, that I never personally knew a republican who did not support
this doctrine; there may be those who do not, but I never found them.
.

My father, during this speech, had thrown himself upon a chair, holding his
head in an agony of emotion, which I did not wonder at, considering his
prejudices; and I regretted myself, that so little good had been produced by an
action, which, had it occurred in full day, amidst a tumultuous people, and in
the bustle of a revolution, would have rendered me eternally immortal, and
handed my name down to the remotest posterity as a dread to tyrants, and a text
to all declaimers on the sufferings of human nature: as it was, it was only
like seed scattered in st^ ground, unproductive and obscure.

'What shall I do?' cried my father suddenly starting up. 'Shall I, for the
sake of severe, but immutable justice, become the instrument of vengeance on my
son? Shall I adopt his own maxims, and rend at once all the tender ties of
nature? shall I burst all those fine bands asunder, and consign him to public
execution? O Heaven! can such ^ sacrifice be required of me, for having given
^istence to such a monster? No, no, get from my sight! fly! fly to the deserts
of the world! beyond the boundaries of society, lest the earth open and swallow
you alive.'

'See,' said I, calmly, 'what it is to be agitated with all these puerile
feelings of kindred; they unman the soul, and when we should reason rationally,
overwhelm us in a vortex of passion* I am not so prejudiced as to refuse that
portion of liberty you offer me: I will go, because I do not think that I have
yet fulfilled the great mission I have undertaken. In the present instance, I
do not see how the good of mankind can be promoted by my death: till we can see
this, we ought never voluntarily to march to the scaffold, or as the immortal
Stupeo said -- '

'Perdition strike him to the center,' cried my father, flaming with fury.

It is a folly to attempt reasoning with madmen; and seeing the two countrymen
debating whether they should allow me to pass, I put on a determined air, and
walked calmly out of the house. There is something imposing and aweful in the
frown of a determined man, conscious of his innocence; and I have little doubt
but an hundred would have suffered me to pass with equal impunity.

I soon shook off the chagrin this little incident had occasioned, and having
recovered my pistols, I thought it a matter of common precaution to strike from
the high road.

CHAPTER X. The Vagabond concludes his Story -- the Effects of Reformation in a
country parish -- the Vagabond's reasons in favor of Seduction.
ON the following day I stopped a post-chaise in a cross road, which contained
two ladies, and was driven by a lad. One of the women fainted away, and the
other was excessively frightened. I took nothing but her purse, informing her,
that she mistook, if she supposed me a common robber; for, though I was willing
to equalize property, I did not wish to monopolize. So saying, I quitted her,
that she might assist her insensible companion.

I could not but execrate the whole system of female education, which thus
enervates the human body; it being an eternal fact, that were women educated to
all the exercises of men, and, as my dear Mary used to say, so mingled with the
world, that every action would he performed promiscuously, (sex out of the
question) we should not have women fainting on sudden emergencies, and as
imbecile as infants.

What a glorious thing would it be, if the whole female sex would emancipate
themselves from those tyrants the men, and enter equally into every concern of
life! We should then no longer admire a beautiful idiot, but value them
according to their mental charms and personal prowess. It would also be a very
great advantage in the article of love, it being no inconsiderable trouble to a
philosophical mind to bend to all the frivolities of declaring a passion.

By the exertions of my independent principles, I acquired a sufficient
subsistence; but I always made it a rule never to put in my claim to a part of
the universal stock, till necessity (which has no law) in some sort compelled
me. It was on one of those occasions I had the good fortune to meet with you,
and I only lament that the immortal Stupeo was killed with a musket bullet.

'I lament too,' said Doctor Alogos; 'I should have delighted in the
conversation of so great a man, who has introduced so enlightened a pupil to
the world. But let us now retire to rest; the clock has struck three, and
tomorrow we will discourse further.' So saying, they separated for the night:
Frederick rejoicing that he had at length found a man illuminated with the
irradiating principles of the new philosophy; which he the more wondered at,
considering the Doctor's property, for he had found the pupils of the new
school, in general, a little short in financial affairs.

The next morning the company met to breakfast. Laura was extremely lovely; and
the eyes of the philosopher frequently repeated the observation. Susan sat down
familiarly to breakfast with them; and the luxury of the times was ably
descanted upon.

Tea and chocolate, new bread and fresh butter, with a relish of cold ham and
eggs, composed the breakfast of these practical philosophers.

'Luxury,' cried Doctor Alogos at every mouthful, 'will be the bane of this
country; every thing rises to so enormous a price, that a poor man cannot
absolutely get an existence; we shall be starved!'

'It is a dreadful thing' to think of it,' said Frederick; 'I have often
considered what could occasion such a rise in meat, for instance; formerly we
used to have the best beef at one penny a pound, and now it is sixpence.'

'I apprehend,' said Laura, 'that there are two reasons: the increased
consumption, and the increased quantity of money. Formerly, a farmer, before he
killed an ox, had to contract with so many families as could purchase the
whole, not being able to place a dependence on chance custom; a fact that must
give the lie to the tales of some people, who would make us believe that day
laborers fed upon roasted beef.'

'You are a little perverse jade,' said the Doctor, 'to dare contradict a man
like me. Pray, how should you know what used to be, who have not yet seen
eighteen summers? -- You are a moth in the creation yet, I insist upon it that
our peasants are starved and famished: -- Are not potatoes and bacon half their
support? -- Answer that.'

The Doctor enjoyed the triumph of rhetoric over common sense; but Laura, with
becoming deference, replied, that it might be true, but that was even better
than skimmed milk and oatmeal cake, which was formerly the general food, with a
change of barley and rye. 'The people of England, then,' said she, 'were
subject to leprosy and cutaneous diseases, which have vanished since the
introduction of tea. I grant that they live hard, but it is what they have ever
done; and were it possible for them to see the peasants of other countries,
they would rejoice at being people of England. Not to mention the powers of
life and death, possessed by most landed gentlemen on the continent, let us
look at the eastern nations, whose lower orders live upon nothing but rice, and
particularly the Chinese, supposed, in the Annual Register for 1789, to contain
two hundred millions of people, whose lower orders, inland, taste nothing but
rice and water, and on the seacoast a little fish.'

'Rice and fish!' said the Doctor, 'I am persuaded they are both primitive
dishes. Rice is the food of more than half the human species, and savages on
the seacoasts universally eat fish. I am determined my table shall be
furnished with these productions of all-provident nature; and suppose, for the
second course, you give us a brace of roast capons and a few tartlets.'

'For my part,' said Frederick, laying a slice of ham on his bread and butter,
and putting three lumps of sugar into his cup of chocolate, 'it is to me a
matter of the greatest indifference what I eat; I eat merely because it is
right to eat for the keeping our bodies in order. A family physician proves,
that one half the necessity of eating is to distend the intestines; for which
purpose, any farinaceous paste is sufficient; and I have an intention to try a
pudding of marble flour; for, if this proves true, what great exploits may be
performed without the trouble of carrying bread!'

'For heaven's sake!' said Laura, laughing, 'forego the experiment, or the
images of Jupiter and Juno, in the garden, will be made into hastypudding; and
the arm of Venus will have as much temptation as an haunch of venison.'

After breakfast, the Doctor requested Frederick to walk in his garden, and
help him to weed some beds of herbs.

'Do you think,' said Frederick, 'after what I have told you, that I will
degrade my dignity by a menial employ? that I will become a slave to till the
ground?'

'No,' replied the Doctor; 'you are a philosopher; I do not propose to you any
such thing; but husbandry is a primitive art, and no disgrace when practiced
for exercise. I propose that we shall live together on a footing of equality,
and that we shall endeavor to enlighten the people in our neighborhood,
erecting to ourselves a little republic.'

'The idea is grand and noble,' cried Frederick: 'had we Stupeo here, his whole
soul would enter into the subject. Let us begin this very day -- only let me
observe, I will be entirely independent.'

'Of course,' said the Doctor. -- 'Though I very much fear we shall never bring
them to the standard of nature. This island is the sink of slavery. The very
elements will not let the people go naked like the Indians of America. What shall
we do first toward bringing about the freedom of man?'

'The first great action to be performed, is to convince them of their wrongs
-- to show them they ought to govern the state; and that, if they do not
recover their rights, they will be starved and enslaved; and that all
distinctions are badges of tyranny, and not rewards of merit.'

'But in that point,' said the Doctor, 'it appears to me cheaper to bestow
titles and ribbons than pensions -- if there were no titles, the pension-list
must increase.'

'And suppose it did,' cried Frederick, 'are we going to do away all profits
and rewards? Every man should labor for the resulting good.'

'Right, right,' answered the Doctor. 'But should we not say something on the
article of marriage? We shall never introduce real liberty till we can do away
that Gothic barbarity. There Is Susan, a good deserving creature, just such
another as Rousseau's Teresa: to own the truth, we, that is, she and I -- you
understand me -- but the opinions of the world have hitherto prevented my
living with her in a manner congenial to my wishes, and as nature and reason
point out.'

'Hear,' said Frederick, 'the sentiments of the great philosopher Stupeo: When
the distinctions of society shall be confounded, and men shall cease to
appropriate a whole female to themselves -- two men might easily enjoy one
woman, because it would be her company they desired, and the sensual
gratification would be considered as a trifle. Reasonable men will propagate
their species; not because a certain pleasure is annexed to this action, but
because it is right the species should be propagated, and the manner in which
they exercise this function will be regulated by the dictates of reason and
duty. It cannot definitively be affirmed, in such a state of society, who is
the father of the child; but it is of no consequence. I ought to prefer no
human being to another because that being is my father, my wife, or my son
Godwin's Political Justice, 410 page 852.
.'

'What a glorious doctrine!' cried Alogos: 'one might then have as many
concubines and children as they could procure. This very reason alone ought to
make us detest monarchical government, where what is called sacred engagements
are obliged to be in some sort preserved. I will, this very day, tell the world
that I disregard its prejudices, and Susan shall appear in her proper
character.'

Poor Susan, who was an ignorant, vulgar girl, was so intoxicated with the
elevation from the cookery, that she resolved to exert the inborn Rights of
Women, disdaining any longer to superintend the kitchen; and the Doctor
frequently cursed society, which had introduced luxurious dishes.

Meanwhile these two great men exerted their endeavors to reform the
parishioners, and it was not long before the excellent effects of their
doctrine became visible. The churches, those temples of priestcraft and
ignorance, were soon left without visitors; and even the elocution of a popular
preacher could not assemble an audience.

The two philosophers rejoiced at this dawn of reason, and, the better to
spread the truth, erected a large barn into a Hall of Reason, where they
undertook alternately to read moral lectures. -- Frederick there clearly
proved, that all religion was the offspring of ignorance, resulting from ideas,
mingled with impressions, mingled with realities; and that the first idea of a
Deity was taken from a howling wind on a stormy night; so that, if he did not
convince, he confounded his hearers. He, however, proved beyond a doubt, that
religion was not of the smallest benefit to mankind, 'It is true,' said he, in
one of his lectures, 'that architecture was first carried beyond the unpolished
beam, and the unshapen stone, by the enthusiasm of people to honor an unknown
Deity; but could any thing be more absurd than to raise great piles of
magnificence to nobody knew who? And what was the consequence? Why, the great
men then would have great houses, and no longer live, as they used to do, in
hovels of mud. It is true that astronomy was first studied for the sake of
tracing the power of God in the creation; but what has been the result? We have
learnt to traverse the ocean, and send people from Europe to tyrannize over the
people of Africa. Religion indeed gave birth to all the arts and sciences,
because it was supposed the Architect of worlds must delight in grandeur, and
every costly ornament was deemed too little an offering to his abode. But, in
my opinion, this would better have been given to the starving poor -- no doubt
the priests had their tithes out of it. (Here a loud burst of applause broke
forth.) It is in vain to say that monks have been the preservers of literature;
for, at the time they promoted it, they had no intention to benefit mankind,
and it is the intention which makes the merit. You are told that religion
teaches social duties; that it is wrong to injure your neighbor, for you shall
be hereafter punished. Who told you all this? A parcel of priests, whom you pay
to hold you in darkness. Are you to believe them, or I who instruct you for
nothing? I tell you then that there are no future rewards and punishments. I am
certain no man can prove that there are; and if you read the great book of
Nature, it does not say a word about it. That is the book you ought to study,
and burn your Bibles, if you would enjoy the world without those shocking
reflections about fire and brimstone.'

Moral lectures like these could not but influence the minds of the country
people, who wondered they had been so long imposed upon. The Curate was under
the necessity of suing for the tithes, and the parsonage was threatened with
destruction.

Corn had been dear and scarce, owing to a wet season; and to render it cheap,
a mob of patriots burnt down several stacks and barns, for which one was hanged
and three transported.

The Principles of Universal Equality, and The Catechism of Nature, the one
written by Frederick, and the other by Doctor Alogos, were printed and
distributed gratis. The public houses had each ^club, where the newspapers were
subscribed for, politics discussed, and ale consumed with genuine liberty; by
which means those heretofore ignorant people became warm advocates for freedom,
and declaimed about the inborn reason of the human soul, till all reason was
suspended in hilarity, and the whole company levelled to a state of swinish
equality.

They now clearly perceived that the times were the worst that ever Old England
had witnessed; for they every day found themselves less able to maintain their
families; and so far from being capable to pay their rents, they had scarcely
money sufficient to support the club, on which depended the salvation of their
country.

In vain the gentlemen of the parish endeavored to stay this torrent of
philosophy. Man only requires to be told his rights to know them. The young men
copying the example of Doctor Alogos, were not to be bubbled out of a fee by
the priests, and the wives became what is vulgarly called lazy and slovenly,
but which in the language of refined philosophy, is independent, and superior
to prejudice.

Things proceeded thus admirably in a parish, where, but a little time before,
all had gone on in the old track, where contented and ignorant families
depended on their own labor, and were so proud of the childish title of
Englishmen, that they detested a workhouse so long as health and strength
remained. But now they saw clearly, that, according to the Rights of Man, every
one had a just demand for support from the community, after a certain age, and
therefore to work for a rainy day was as absurd as it was old.

The poor rates multiplied so fast upon those who still continued to support
the Gothic prejudices of their ancestors, that several heretofore flourishing
families were obliged to quit the parish, and their farms remained unoccupied.

Frederick, in the mean time, had endeavored to cultivate the affections of
Laura; but though he gained upon her heart, her head resisted all the arguments
of his philosophy. It was in vain he traduced the custom of marriage; she
remained wedded to the blind principles in which she had been educated. 'For,'
said she, 'were I to become your companion, or that of any other man, when I
shall perhaps be surrounded with two or three children, a moment's disgust may
leave me without a partner. Till it is the fashion for men to maintain the
children of others, no woman in her senses would permit the passion of a man
unmarried, because, though he could range and select another, she must remain
forlorn and abandoned.'

'The supposition,' said Frederick, 'that I must have a companion for life, is
the result of a complication of vices: It is the dictate of cowardice, and not
of fortitude: It flows from a desire of being loved and esteemed for something
that is not desert. The institution of marriage is a system of fraud, and men
who carefully mislead their judgments in the daily affairs of their life, will
always have a crippled judgment in every other concern. -- Marriage is law, and
the worst of all laws. Whatever our understandings may tell us of the person
from whose connection we should derive the greatest improvement, of the worth of
one woman, and the demerits of another, we are obliged to consider what is law,
and not what is justice. So long as I seek to engross one woman to myself, and
prohibit my neighbor from proving his superior deserts, and reaping the fruits
of it, I am guilty of the most odious of all monopolies. After such a sentence
as this, which is in Godwin's Political Justice, 410. page 851, the reader will
not accuse the author of exaggerating facts.
'

'Do you wish me,' said Laura, 'to suppose you speak seriously? You are
dreaming, Frederick, or you are mad or worse. To say nothing of the moral
turpitude of such infamous and brothel doctrines, I should like to know if
there is one single republican in the kingdom, who, however he might wish to
indulge himself in such license, would permit his mother, his wife, his sister,
or his daughter to live promiscuously like beasts of the field?'

'And are men not by nature brutes, as the mighty Rousseau has proved to a
demonstration?'

'Let us take it so,' said Laura, with a sigh: 'what will be the result? We
should see half a dozen throats cut for a pretty woman, for then the law would
be no check on licentious appetites. But, Sir, reflect if what I say be not
true. Your reformers in general are men of broken fortune, fiery passions, or
e^entric dispositions. You would cast aside restrains, because you are too
great tyrants yourselves to submit to the government of others; as, for
instance, Doctor Alogos was one of the best tempered, humane men in the world,
till he took to these whims from the loss of a lawsuit; and now, though he is
always telling us we are slaves, and have as much right as the men to every
freedom, yet, if every article in the house, to the smallest trifle, is not in
exact order, we hear nothing but execrations, which once he was afraid to
utter. But, in the present case, I do sincerely believe, that those men who
preach up promiscuous intercourse of sex do it merely to cover their own
depraved desires, and avoid the stigma of the world by rendering it common.'

'I am very sorry,' said Frederick, 'that you argue as if you had never heard
the great doctrines of philosophy. Had you heard my Mary on this subject!
persuasion hung upon her tongue, and the self-demonstrated axioms of moral
science flowed from her lips. "It is difficult to recommend any thing to
indiscriminate adoption, contrary to the established rules and prejudices of
mankind; but certainly nothing can be so ridiculous upon the face of it, or so
contrary to the genuine march of sentiment, as to require the overflowing of
the soul to wait upon a ceremony, and that which, wherever delicacy and
imagination exist, is of all things most sacredly private, to blow a trumpet
before it, and to record the moment when it has arrived at its climax Memoirs
of Mrs. Woolstonecraft Godwin. A Democratic Review says, my treatment of Mrs.
Godwin, in these volumes, is brutal. If repeating verbatim her own sentiments
be brutality, then am I guilty. But if they mean that such sentiments brutalize
a woman, I cannot help that.
."

'Excellent!' cried Laura, breaking into a laugh; 'this is sheer bombast, and
putting into hyperbolic language what might have been said in simple words. Can
any thing be more impudent than for a woman to marry, because by marrying she
tells the world that she has conformed to its customs in following the purpose
of her creation? Whereas, if she despised all its rules, trampled down those
barriers to lust, modesty, and morality, and became a prostitute, she is modest
in extreme, because she did not tell the world beforehand she was going to be
ruined. With regard to the trumpet and the climax, it is not a practice in our
country, where marriages are frequently performed with that decent secrecy
which eludes even the questions of friendship.'

'There is no reasoning with women,' cried Frederick, in a pet; 'they have no
souls capable of receiving the new light of irradiating science, which is
breaking through the mists of superstition and ignorance. How few are like my
Mary, free in thought and in action! She was a wonderful woman, and despised
the jests of the world: she knew, that in reality there was no difference of
sex in souls, but that education made women fools and idiots.'

'You have often,' said Laura,' talked to me in this strain; you have told me
that women are no otherwise inferior to men than by education; but to me there
appears an humbling difference. -- Have they not to bear and bring children
into the world? Are they not then tied down to the routine of a nursery? Are
not all their employments necessarily domestic? And does not nature seem to
have pointed to this end in the disposition of their frame? -- Men, in all
countries, take upon them the ruder employments, and it is only an eccentric
soul that would wish, in the frenzy of imagination, to blend the sexes.'

'But women, with their present weakness of intellect, are not capable of
teaching children their duties, and rational philosophy.'

'I will quote you a passage,' said Laura, 'from a droll book at reveries my
uncle lately bought, called the Rights of Women. In page 148, I believe you
will find these words: -- "The management of the temper, the first and most
important branch of education, requires the sober, steady eye of reason: a plan
of conduct equally distant from tyranny and indulgence. I have followed this
train of reasoning much further, till I have concluded that a person of genius
is the most improper person to be employed in education, either private or
public."

From this quotation we may infer two conclusions: First, that a person of
genius possesses not the steady, sober eye of reason, and therefore all your
pretended philosophers, reformers, and men of profound genius, have not one jot
of reason, consequently are fools. Secondly, allowing women to he pretty
idiots, they are the most proper to give education, and the less genius they
possess, the greater is their qualification: and indeed I might draw a third
inference, that persons writing palpable contradictions are unworthy notice on
either side.'

'Oh!' cried Frederick, 'were the great Stupeo here, he would bring arguments
that would incontrovertibly prove -- '

'Prove what?' said Laura: 'prove himself a greater fool than his pupil.'

'No,' cried Frederick, 'prove that you are the charmingest pretty idiot in the
world.'

Thus the great copyist of one of the greatest philosophers that have glittered
in the eighteenth century, descended from the pinnacle of intellect to tell a
girl what her glass told her every morning. But, as Voltaire has admirably
proved, by a few arguments in about a hundred different places, and Rosseau
demonstrated by practice with the idiot Teresa, it is a fact, that great
heroes, great poets, great philosophers, metaphysicians, and ballad-makers,
have all become fools to please foolish women.

CHAPTER XI. Reasons for peopling the world -- specimen of the Sublime -- the
consolations of Philosophy in Disappointment -- the immutability of Truth.
FREDERICK was discomposed beyond the dignity of a philosopher at the
perverseness of Laura: he began almost to think that women were beings made
expressly for the pleasures of men, a gilded toy, which a great metaphysician
and philosopher might condescend to play with when he quitted the Hall of
Contemplation, and ventured from the paths of intellectual rambling to the
gross pavement of life.

His mind was perpetually bent upon the great work of reformation, and the
perfection of jurisprudence, except when he mused upon the pretty lip of Laura,
which frequently dimpled with an inimitable smile, and that smile was not the
vacant smile of childishness -- it was a smile of meaning, expressive of some
fine sensation of mind, brightening the whole countenance, and lightening the
eye with the intelligence of good sense.

'I know not,' said he to himself, as he rambled over the fields, 'what to make
of this girl; she reasons as if she had reason, but it is quite in the old
style. What is this love? What would my dear Stupeo define it? A passion, that,
like an optic glass, inverts its object. Ah! now I am satisfied she does not in
reality possess any good quality: it is my passion which deceives me, and she
is no more an angel than the rest of her sex. All her virtues are only like
colors in objects, merely rays pressed in different angles upon the eye. She
herself is a blank, a mere white sheet of paper, and it remains for me to stamp
upon her any character I please. As to beauty -- what is beauty? Ask a negro of
Guinea what is beauty, the supremely beautiful, the (...) (to kalon,) he will
answer you a greasy black skin, hollow eyes, and a flat nose. Consult the
philosophers, they will tell you some unintelligible jargon for answer -- they
must have something correspondent to beauty in the abstract.'

Having thus used the light of human reason in rational argument, Frederick
determined that Laura must and should be his, not for his own sake, but for the
promotion of freedom, and the spread of the truth.

'It is the universal good and greatest resulting benefit we are ever to have
in view,' continued he: 'all the great men of the eighteenth century tell us we
must not regard any contingencies, these being only partial and unavoidable
evils. It is plain the world must be peopled; for if it is not peopled, we
philosophers would have nobody to revolutionize, and reason and logic, and
ignorance, would be tantamount to the same. This then is the self-demonstrated
hypothesis: this then is the grand basis to build upon; and as all things
depend upon peopling the world, it follows, that to people the world is the
most meritorious action of life. But how am I to contribute to this greatest
good, if Laura persists in her notions of matrimony? It is impossible. I should
then surrender my freedom, and freedom is even a greater good than life itself.
Some middle way must be devised; and though I abhor giving pain to any creature
under the heavens, yet I must not be deterred from peopling the world, by the
tears, faintings, and frettings of a woman who even does not know the great
maxims of philosophy. What are tears? mere bubbles of water emitted from a
particular stimulus of the nerves of the eye: Women have weaker nerves than
men, therefore tears from them are more common. As to fainting, that also
depends on weak nerves: -- Some will faint at the sight of a rat. Well, I
cannot help the irritability of the nervous system: -- A charming idea indeed!
that, because women have weak nerves, the world is not to be peopled! Besides,
am I not a philosopher? Yes: I have, and I will rise far above human nature.
Have I not seduced the mistress of my friend? Have I not been the means of a
pretty girl and her father perishing in the flames? Have I not led a mob to
burn down the metropolis of Great Britain? Have I not induced a wife to betray
her husband, which caused his own and his children's death? Have I not lost
three teeth and half my little finger in the cause of liberty? Have I not
murdered my own mother? And shall the tears and lamentings of a girl prevent my
marching forward in the high road of all-irradiating science, and peopling the
world?

'O Philosophy! how few can contemplate thy sublime and terrific features: Thy
feet stand upon the poles of the world -- thy head is cinctured round with
nubilated exhalations, whose volcanic entrails emit thunderings and lightenings
that scatter all existence around thee, and hecatombs of infidels and surdous
men are reared or dispersed by the cataclysms of thy scientific fulminations.
When shall the catenas of mankind be decrepitated by the furnace of truth,
ignited by the bellows of reason? When shall the ingannations of prejudice be
delacerated, and the catachrestical reasonings of facinorous aristocrats be
dispanded by the zetetic spirit of the eighteenth century?' For the sake of the
English reader, these words may be found in Johnson's Dictionary.


From this prodigious flight of the true sublime and unintelligible, Frederick
suddenly descended to the consideration of more common action: simply, how he
might promote the increase of mankind. It appeared no very easy task to do away
the qualms of conscience in a modest girl, unless indeed he could prove to her
that there was no such thing as conscience, which was a task of no great
difficulty for a modern philosopher to undertake. Another small reflection
occupied him, for he saw that he must proceed upon the principles of deception,
and what then became of immutable truth? But on weighing over the maxims of
political justice, he found that deception was extremely moral in affairs of
love, and he was more than ever enamoured of the new philosophy, which seemed
calculated for the comfort of man.

He began with Doctor Alogos, whom he soon convinced of the nonentity of
conscience; that reason was the only guide to truth, and passion the index to
pleasure. Laura, the blind prejudiced Laura, was not to be wrought upon by the
profoundness of his reasonings and the subtilty of his logic. -- 'Though I feel
myself unequal to answer you,' said she, 'that by no means is an approval of
your arguments; for I well know that by argument we can neither prove nor
refute many things which yet we feel to be or not to be. For instance, you may
tell me I am ten feet or only ten inches high; that my sight deceives me; and
you may confound me with arguments to prove your assertion. But all those
arguments will not change my opinion that I am only five feet high, nor will
you persuade me that I have no conscience.'

One fine glowing evening, when the country was yellowed over with harvest, and
the birds chirped amongst the hedges, which were hung with stalks of loose
corn, Frederick and Laura took a walk to some distance, and, as it is very
natural, discoursed on love by the way.

Frederick exerted all his eloquence upon the usual subject; but seeing that he
made no impression, he transided into the more natural language of
commonplace, such as has been the practice of all lovers since the flood, and
such as will continue to win the hearts of the fair, till philosophy shall
introduce a new set of ideas and sensations. -- 'I will,' said he, 'charming
Laura, adopt your side of the question, for really metaphysics do not
altogether satisfy the heart.'

'Were you to forsake your wild opinions,' said Laura, 'you would become an
agreeable member of society.'

'It is you,' he replied, 'who must make, me so; it is you I shall look up to
for instruction; but remember the sentiments of Rousseau in his Emilius. If
woman be formed to please, and be subjected to man, it is her place doubtless
to render herself agreeable to him instead of challenging his passion: the
violence of his desires depends upon her charms; it is by means of these she
should urge him to the exertion of those powers nature has given him. The most
successful method of exciting is to render such exertion necessary by
resistance, as in that case selflove is added to desire, and the one triumphs
in the victory which the other is obliged to acquire.'

'These sentiments were worthy a voluptuary,' replied Laura: 'they came, no
doubt, warm from the heart of Rousseau.'

'Yes,' said Frederick, 'from the author of Eloisa we should expect strong
expressions, but they are nevertheless true. You have read, Laura, that
charming romance. What did you feel at the first kiss of love? In a word, did
not the whole performance set your soul on fire?'

'No,' replied Laura; 'I saw through the sophistical jargon of rhapsodic
language. I beheld only a man who kept a milliner, endeavoring to justify his
actions to the world by drawing a fiery picture totally untrue. Do you think
there is a man in the world like Wolmar? And what was St. Preux but a precious
sentimental rascal, who, under the sanction of the most sacred friendship,
plunders, a believing lovesick girl, and talks all the while about virtue and
celestial innocence?'

Frederick found by this discourse that he should not easily contaminate the
purity of her mind by the introduction of voluptuous subjects, for he knew of
no book more likely to introduce a desire of dissipation than the celebrated
Eloisa of Rousseau: To this may now be added the Monk.
he therefore resolved to supply his want of persuasion by violence, beginning
with those liberties often allowed, till his passions throwing him off his
guard, he exerted that prowess which men are endowed with for other purposes;
but here he was again deceived, Laura not being one of those puny slips of
fashion which shrink from the touch.

The philosopher was confounded at a resistance he had not expected from the
delicate figure of the maid. He hung down his head in silent vexation at her
keen reproaches; for shame he knew not, unless it was in stopping short of his
heroic and patriotic intentions. He proposed, in a tone of voice much beneath
the dignity of manhood to accompany her home, but she refused his offer with
superlative disdain.

He turned away to philosophise, and call to his aid the doctrines of Stupeo:
so chagrined was he at the disappointment, that he almost resolved never again
to present himself before Doctor Alogos -- but again he reflected, that it was
unworthy a great man to stoop to accidents, it being more in the order of
Nature that accidents should bend to them.

As he walked forward, wrapped in musing melancholy, a gleam of satisfaction
darted across his mind -- 'Why' said he, internally, 'am I so grieved at a
trifling disappointment: -- I, who am a being independent of the Universe, in
how few years will age destroy the appetite for pleasure, and I shall then
regret not having made more advantage of the fleeting moments. Did I bow down
to the idols of priestcraft, I might be deterred from many actions called
crimes, by the dread of future punishment; but it is the height of monkish
blindness to suppose there is any such thing as future punishment, and I am
persuaded, I am certain, half mankind do not give credit to such shocking
doctrines, or it would be impossible they could act as they do. -- What lawyer
would undertake a wrong cause? What guardian would ruin the orphan under his
care? What wife would betray her husband? What son would disobey his father?
What father would ruin his family with variety of excess? And what young man
would, for the pleasure of half an hour, cajole, with false oaths and
professions, a fair, believing-tender-hearted girl into a misery that can end
only with her life? -- No; I am certain, if people believed any thing of
revealed religion, none of this could happen. Then shall I be trammelled by
such considerations? O Philosophy! divine light of the soul I thy consolations
never fail in the hour of distress. Beware, says St. Paul, lest men spoil you
through philosophy and vain deceit; but Paul was an old woman, Paul knew
nothing of eternal steep.'

Having thus confirmed his mind in these delectable principles, he felt
re-assured to his purpose, and inclined his thoughts to suggest the means of
subduing Laura.

Laura informed her uncle of the great designs of the vagabond Philosopher; but
that disciple of the new school only cooly bid her be cautious, for nothing in
nature could be more natural.

Frederick was surprised to find the Doctor in good spirits; and no hint being
dropped concerning his recent attempt, he already concluded Laura in his
possession. He retired early to bed to digest his plan; and not being, able to
sleep, he tumbled about till midnight, when he was alarmed with a grating noise
at the window beneath him. He listened, and fancying he heard footsteps, arose,
and was proceeding down stairs with a poker in his hand, when two men
ascending, presented pistols at him, with threats of instant death, if he
alarmed the house.

'Am I to be deterred from speaking the truth?' said Frederick: 'a truly
virtuous man will proclaim the truth, amidst an host of foes.'

'D -- n my glims,' said one of the ruffians, 'you are a rum quiz; but I
suppose he is dreaming.'

'If you will tell truth,' said the other, 'tell u^ where the old codger hides
his cash.'

'Truth,' replied Frederick, 'is invariable: the great Stupeo declared that no
circumstance could change its effects, and that it must be spoken at all times.'

'Well, out with it then, and no qualms.'

'In love,' continued Frederick, with sang froid, 'we may conceal the truth
because it is an allowable deception to deceive a girl to her own benefit, and
the augmentation of mankind. But, for the sake of wealth, dross, trash, rubbish
-- '

'D -- e' cried the first, 'you are a devilish rum one: only tell us where we
may find the rubbish, and less of the gab.'

'This rabbish,' cried Frederick, 'the bane of society, the cause of all
unnatural accumulations, of all the miseries of suffering man; what is this to
truth, eternal and immutable truth?'

'Blow his brains out,' said the robber, 'if he don't instantly tell us where
the possibles be.'

'We are not to be compelled to speak truth,' said Frederick: 'we should speak
it for its own sake, and not to avoid any evil, or to promote any independent
good: for instance, I could now, to avoid the evil you threaten, tell you that
in the front parlour there are bank notes to the amount of fifty pounds, and
that would satisfy you; but that is an equivocation, because you ask where the
money is concealed, implying all. (Aye! aye! All! all!) Well, that being the
case, and an equivocation being a lie, according to Dr. Paley, I continue to
tell you, that under his bed in the back room, on the second floor, is an iron
chest, where you will find the remainder, and thus it is clearly demonstrated
that -- '

'Aye, aye, clear enough,' cried the thieves, 'don't say a word more -- go back
to your own bed and sleep in a sound skin.'

I am not obliged, said Frederick to himself, to run hazards in proclaiming
truth when it is not required. Perhaps these patriots intend to murder the old
Doctor: well, suppose they do, what will be the resulting consequences?
Ignorant, unillumined people, in stating this fine and metaphysical argument,
would talk about gratitude -- that is totally exploded in political justice. A
servant might urge his being obliged to serve his master, but I am no servant;
and a servant would be condemned if he did not assist to destroy his master in
the cause of truth, by the new system. But what possible good will result to
mankind by the death of the Doctor? Is he not one of us? Is he not an
enlightened philosopher of the eighteenth century? He has already created three
or four riots in the parish, and rendered the people so dissatisfied, that they
will neither work nor play. A revolution seems maturing in this little spot,
that shall light the torch of liberty all over Europe: and shall this man be
cut off by men who seem unorganized to systematic depredation -- men who do not
seem to plunder upon principle? No; the whole human race would suffer in his
loss.

These arguments were convincing, and he hastened with the poker in his hand to
the chamber. -- The robbers had drawn out the chest, and emptied its contents,
when Doctor Alogos awaking, began to call aloud for assistance, and the robbers
swore they would cut his throat if he was not silent. At that instant Frederick
burst into the room, and one of the thieves fired, but missed him. A blow of
the poker tore off the rascals car, and shook his arm so rudely, that the
pistol fell to the floor, and the Doctor having reached a blunderbuss, they
hurried away, carrying with them the notes and cash with which they filled
their pockets, swearing they would shoot whoever attempted to follow them.

'My dear Frederick,' cried the Doctor, embracing him, 'you are a brave fellow,
and this savor shall not go unrewarded: you may always rely on my friendship.'

'Friendship!' exclaimed Frederick. 'Has fear clouded your intellects?
Friendship is well enough for boarding-school girls, who are plotting
intrigues. You must esteem me for my intrinsic value, and not because I have
done you a service. No man ought to return favor for favor -- that is an old
obsolete doctrine, done away entirely by the new political justice. Hear the
great sentiments of the great Stupeo on favors: -- 'It may be objected,' said
he, 'that a mutual commerce of benefits tends to increase the mass (or cube
lump) of benevolent action, and that to increase the mass of benevolent action
is to contribute to the general good: indeed, is the general good promoted by
felsehood, by treating a man of one degree of worth, as if he had ten times
that worth? or, as if he were in any degree different from what he really is?
Would not the most beneficial consequences result from a different plan, from
my constantly and carefully inquiring into the deserts of all those with whom I
am connected, and from their being sure, after a certain allowance for the
infallibility of human judgment, of being treated by me exactly as they
deserved? Who can tell the effects of such a plan universally adopted?'
Godwin's Political Justice, page 36.


'Not even the profound Stupeo himself, 'said Doctor Alogos. 'I very much fear
we shall never arrive at that perfection of knowledge, so as to be sure and yet
uncertain of the quantity of merit: had that great man lived, he would, no
doubt, have made a barometer, which, upon being applied to the object, would
instantly settle to the exact degree of worth.'

'The idea is original,' cried Frederick, 'and I am persuaded he would have
attempted its completion, for mind in that case would overcome matter. Alas!
what has the world lost by the death of such a man, who only was rescued from
the gallows to be shot in a riot. O Fortune! what a jilt art thou to men of
genius and science.'

'Nothing more true,' said the Doctor, with a sigh. 'Here is an end of our
great projects of reformation, for my rents come in very slowly, the wretches
declaring they have a right to the ground rent free, and here I have lost five
hundred pounds.'

'It is the vile government we live under,' said Frederick; 'a monarchy is a
mere excrescence, and a disease in the body of society: the wars it occasions,
and the lavish revenues by which it is maintained, make it unbearable. Ah! if
we could fly from its evils and reassume the primitive simplicity of mankind;
if we could shake off all sorts of governments, and live to ourselves as
independent and rational beings, we should then pay no taxes: Laura should be
my companion, and Susan yours: -- there beneath vine trees of our own planting,
we should sit and talk of love: beneath the date tree and the olive we should
sing hymns of peace, and in the sylvan shades should we be united in harmony
and celestial affections. Our children would promiscuously grow up untainted by
the world, and no tyrant should violate the chastity of our daughters at his
imperious will.'

'Oh! charming,' cried the Doctor, dressing himself. 'Go and wake Laura
instantly, and before tomorrow's sun raises the blue mists of the lake, we
will be on our journey to this terrestial paradise.

Frederick, impressed with equal rapture at the romantic idea, and repeating to
himself anathemas against the tyrants who have debased unthinking innocence, he
hastened to the chamber of Laura. -- He found her half dressed, having been
alarmed at the cries of her uncle. She blushed at being thus exposed to the
eyes of so great a philosopher, and that blush drove all the tyrants from the
mind of Frederick. He clasped the fair maid in his arms, and at that moment
Doctor Alogos entered to tell his niece the service he had received from the
interposition of the virtuous hero.

Frederick, in such a situation, would have been confused if he had not been a
very great man: but he was arrived at so much perfection, that he could listen
to his own praise in the moment he wished to perpetrate what with half mankind
would have rendered him an object of detestation; but this attainment could
only be acquired by a steady attention to all the enlightened doctrines of the
eighteenth century, and is called the bold, unblushing front of manly truth.

Laura rejoiced at the escape of her uncle, for her bosom was only too
susceptible of gratitude, and she almost forgave the attack upon herself. She,
however, objected to the plan of emigration, as a wild-goose chase after
happiness; and the arguments she used almost convinced the Doctor that all
pleasure was ideal, for, as to dates and olives, not a single tree grows in all
North America, which obliged Frederick to own he meant only figurative
expression.

Frederick was too candid to conceal his discourse with the robbers, and Doctor
Alogos could not refrain observing, that, though truth ought to be spoken at
all times, yet, if it cost five hundred pounds, it was as well to be silent.

CHAPTER XII. The introduction of a very great Man -- Matter and Spirit
discussed -- the raising of the Dead by natural magic.
THE harmony of the family once more restored, the public good became again
their chief care, but an accident happened that very much checked their
proceedings. A countryman had been detected offering one of the notes which had
been stolen, and was carried before a Justice of the Peace, where he was
identified by Frederick and the Doctor. -- He pleaded very much in his own
favor, protesting that it was his first crime, and that his accomplice had
carried away the whole booty except that single note.

'And how,' said the Justice, 'could you be guilty of so great an offense when
you could not be ignorant of the law?'

'That be very true, your honor,' replied the man: 'but I did hear Doctor
Alogos in his pulpit reading a great book of political justice, which did say
as how no law ought to punish offenders for a crime that be done, because as
that it were not likely, please your worship, that any man should commit the
same again, and no man ever committed the same offense in all its
sarcumstances, as the law do mention. So, your honor, I thought that I did see
clear enough, that if I did not do the action as the law did forbid, I were not
guilty. Beside, and more your honor, I were near starving, having lost my
playse because I would not attend church on a Sunday, nor work like a neger, as
the Doctor did tell us we all were, as labored for the rich; and so, your
honor, I had nothing to do but to starve, and the day were once, when I would
have starved rather than do a dishonest act: but Doctor Alogos did tell us that
there were no such thing as dishonesty; that it were all a tale to cheat us out
of our right; and that the poor ought to have the lands of the rich divided:
so, playse your honor, I were in a strange quandary, and though my heart did
misgive me, I were persuaded to begin with the Doctor, as it were but proper he
should practice what he did preach.'

'Doctrines like these,' said the Justice, 'are certainly of the most
pernicious tendency, and, in fact, Doctor Alogos, this man appears to me less
guilty than yourself. You know I must commit him if you prosecute, but I should
suppose you would not wi^h to appear in such a situation; and I hope this will
be a warning to this simple man, and teach him to follow the track of his
forefathers.'

'Such,' cried Frederick, 'is the blessed effects of property! The great
philosopher Stupeo, used to say, that the fruitful source of crimes consists in
one man's possessing in abundance that of which another man is destitute. This
day gives us a proof of it; for this poor man would not have attempted the
robbery, notwithstanding the beam of truth which ^^ashed on the obscurity of
his mind, had it not been from want.'

'It is not my place,' said the Justice, mildly, 'to attend to arguments; my
business is with facts; but, for the good of my countrymen who are round me, I
will observe, that this is the general topic of modern reformers, but like most
other of their pernicious principles, it is erroneous. Thieves, ninety-nine out
of the hundred, are idle and dissipated, and in general possess that ingenuity,
which, rightly employed, would raise them to considerable eminence. Drunkenness
and lust are their great incentives to outrage, and not the want of food and
raiment, the latter being, with a very small exception, in the power of every
one who is willing and who has strength to work. It is likewise to be
remembered, that, in the professed system of equality and property, no man is
to enjoy or possess more than food and raiment, all else being luxury. It has
been urged, that some have been starved to death for want of encouragement, who
had genius and talents; but let this be remembered, that it was owing to their
employing those talents in a wrong way. Chatterton, for instance, starved as an
author, but he might have maintained himself well as a schoolmaster; but, you
will say, can any man of feeling speak so coldly of so great a genius? We will
not talk of feeling, but reason. When I speak of Chatterton, I mean it of all
others. Chatterton knew his abilities, and he wished to force the world to
acknowledge him at once -- but this must always be a work of time. Placing his
whole dependence on one foundation, he was too proud to stoop from the high
throne of poetic exaltation; whereas, had he become a schoolmaster, he might
have lived and watched the progress of his productions to the climax which
awaited them. Again I would seriously observe, and would to heaven I could be
heard by all mankind; this man here accused of robbery tells you one means of
losing his place was, disregard of Sundays -- mark with your own eyes the
difference of those who do attend the service of God, and those who do not* --
I will not mention sects of religion; but look at those who pay a reverence to
holy things. sobriety directs their way; they have no taste for profligacy, and
they rarely sink into ruin from their own vices. But let us see those men who
despise the formality of church, and spend the Sunday in drinking and gaming;
idleness and debauchery powerfully seize on the mind in these vacant moments,
and thus it is from the cottage to the mansion that we may in general draw a
man's moral character from his attention to Sunday; and we need none of us look
far round, without, as it were, perceiving that even in the transient
prosperity of this world, God has distinguished those who obey his
commandments.'

The attention of the numerous company assembled was arrested by the approach
of a crowd of people. The poor labourer was discharged (for in the interior of
the country, Justices of the Peace are extremely arbitrary.) Frederick hastened
into the yard, where* amongst a troop of wom^n and country people, appeared a
thin, sallow complexioned man, with one eye, and a large g^sh on one side of
his face, which added to the gloom of his countenance a trait of ferocity and
malignant expression.

Frederick gazed upon him a few (...) with a look of surprise. -- 'Is it
possible,' cried he, 'I behold the profound and immortal Stupeo? Are you
resuscitated, or were you not hanged nor murdered? -- Can I believe my eyes?'

'It is I,' cried the great philosopher himself: 'I have escaped these evils by
accident, but I have lost my eye in the cause of freedom. How, my dear
Frederick, are you here? How could you possibly escape the vengeance of that
glorious night?'

'Another time,' answered Frederick, 'I will tell you every thing; but, why are
you deprived of your liberty? -- Have you fallen at last under the gripe of
that many-fanged monster -- the Law?'

'This is a mere trifle,' said Stupeo: 'I am accused of marrying three wives,
and as it is not a criminal process, I shall escape with finding bail to
maintain them. So much for the glorious uncertainty of that profound abyss --
the Law.'

'But is it possible,' cried Doctor Alogos, 'that you, Sir, the great and
powerful opponent of matrimony, should be married to three at once? This
strikes me as a contradiction."

'That is, Sir,' replied Stupeo, with a look of superiority, 'because you are
but little versed in the sublime doctrine of political justice. Sir, you would
there find that contradictions are nothing in the way of truth; -- but here
there is no contradiction. The excess of an evil is always a remedy; as, for
instance, when the militia of Europe shall exceed the standing armies, and all
the citizens become soldiers, the evil of standing armies will cease, as the
power of directing them to the destruction of the people will be gone I believe
this is an observation of Hume, in his History of England, but only quoting
from memory cannot be certain.
. In like manner, a man who has three or more wives may live as free as though
unmarried, for he has only to go to the altar with any female whom he judges
capable of adding to the stock of general, or resulting good.'

Frederick was struck with this profound argument; and the company being now
ordered before the Justice, he paused to reflect whether, after all means were
tried of subduing Laura, he might not adopt this plan without infringing the
principles of liberty.

Doctor Alogos, who, had he not imbibed the new philosophy, would have been a
man of benevolence, agreed to pay a stipend for the maintenance of the young
woman at whose suit the great philosopher had been detained, and, proud of
having so celebrated a man for his guest, (though at present a little in
disorder) he invited him to the mansion house.

Laura started with surprise at the sight of so shocking a being in human form,
and not being able to discern the wondrous patriot beneath his unseemly habit
(for females are strangely impressed by exteriors,) she concluded it one of the
robbers of her uncle, and scarcely knew whether to run away or stay.

The name of Stupeo which she had often heard, arrested her attention, and when
she gazed more minutely on the master, she ceased to wonder at the
eccentricities of the scholar.

When they were seated and refreshed, the Doctor enquired in what state Stupeo
had found the people of England in his excursion? -- 'In what state!' cried he,
'why, absolutely starving and undone: the whole country is in a rapid
consumption, and no efforts of man can save it. I may say, without vanity, I
have done my endeavors. I have had twelve illegitimate children, but not one
of them could bear the air of this foggy climate. I have had three wives, but
still the people decrease -- population is rapidly declining. What with
emigration, and the prevailing taste for celibacy, I am convinced this island
will, in a very few years, become an howling wild, and its sea shores a place
for fishermens' nets. The sun of science is hastening westward from these
benighted lands, and it becomes every rational man to follow its beams.'

'I have long meditated on the subject,' said the Doctor: 'I would not proceed
rashly, but I find the people of this country so tenacious in their support of
an old rotten constitution, so wedded to old principles, that we are thwarted
at every motion by some cross accident, and they are such gross fools, that the
most palpable facts they invert to contrary tendencies.'

'I am on fire,' cried Frederick: 'I a^ determined to (...) a freer air; and
let me tell you, the man who remains voluntarily in a despotic country lends
his countenance and support to the measures of that country.'

In the evening Stupeo and Frederick took a walk, when the latter requested his
tutor to inform him of the accidents he had met with since their first
separation, their meeting in London having been so momentary, and their minds
so employed on great exploits, that they had no time for private relations.

'It would be impossible,' said Stupeo, 'to detail all the actions I have
engaged in; I must therefore briefly enumerate them in a sort of catalogue. The
life of a philosopher ought to be perpetually changing. First, then, I was
appointed tutor to some young ladies, one of whom I took a fancy to (for I am
not very difficult of choice), and the father having prevented me from
starving, it was impossible I could do less than instruct his daughter in the
new philosophy of political justice. He was, however, such a bigot to the old
school, that he kicked me out of his house, and I remained for some time nearly
starved, when I had an undeniable right to dine at the richest table in the
kingdom. A trifling forgery I had been induced to commit, not for any purpose
of self-interest, that would have been morally wrong, but merely to take a
little from the fortune of a man who wallowed in wealth he could not consume,
was the means of introducing me to the cells of Newgate: such is the present
detestable system, fencing round property with capital punishments, so that it
is next to impossible to reduce the horrid amassments of wealth into more equal
channels.

'After I was shot and trod down, I lay some time insensible, when a surgeon's
man dragged me into a bye alley, and whipping me into a sack, carried me to his
master's dissecting-room. Having prepared himself for a grand experiment, he
was surprised to find that I was not wholly dead, and applying some powerful
stimulants, I opened my eyes.

'I was astonished to see stooping over me, an haggard figure, dressed in a
brown stuff gown streaked with blood; in a belt hung a parcel of instruments,
and round the room were various preparations of anatomy, with saws and
skeletons hung upon nails. I inclined my eyes to see my own situation: -- a wet
cloth bound my head, and I found that I was lying naked upon a large table
clotted with morsels of skin and flesh. I fancied myself in the inquisition.

'Fiends!' said I, 'is this your way of promoting your superstitions? You would
make me believe in the immortality of the soul; but matter is eternal -- and as
to the soul, it is like the sap in vegetables, when it leaves one form, it goes
to impress motion on another: it is a bundle of ideas perpetually changing, and
never is the same two moments together; and yet this fleeting something you
would make me believe is immortal.'

'Are you an Atheist?' said the surgeon.

'No,' cried I, 'I am no Atheist, I am a new philosopher. Helvetius says, he is
no Atheist who says that motion is God, because, in fact, motion is
incomprehensible, as we have no clear idea of it, as it does not manifest
itself but by its effects, and lastly, because by it all things are performed
in the universe.'

'Then you call motion God?' -- 'Certainly,' said I, 'because it is
incomprehensible.'

'Then whatever is incomprehensible is God? -- But, what do you say of the
cause of motion?'

'That must be motion itself, because passive power cannot act, and active
power is action or motion.'

He took a lancet, and making a slight incision in my thigh, dropped upon the
part a few drops of elixir, which threw me into such intolerable pain, that I
started on my legs and made at him like a fury.

'Is it a Deity,' cried he, 'that acts on you? You are under some strange
impression. -- Do you comprehend the cause of your motion?'

'That fluid,' said I, 'has cut to my soul, and stimulated my nerves to a
convulsive motion.'

'How say you? What then is motion mechanical! If so, how is motion God? But,
do you comprehend the reason why this elixir ran like fire to your brains?' --
'No.' -- 'Not comprehend it? Why then this elixir is your God: It is an
incomprehensible cause of incomprehensible motion.'

'I might reply in the words of Mr. Hume,' said I: -- 'If you do not believe as
I do, I must confess I can reason with you no longer.' 'But, however,'
continued I, 'to give you a clear idea of this grand doctrine of motion: -- The
internal organization of abstract principles coming in contact with tangible
substances, forms a concatenation of resulting consequences, demonstrating the
powers of loco, impinging motion, resulting from the chance arrangement of
ponderous bodies, subsiding in concocted masses, and assuming a form in vac^.'

'My dear Sir,' cried the surgeon, 'I can form no clear idea of your
incomprehensible discourse, and yet I should not take you for a Deity -- at
least you must be one in disguise.'

'You must allow, however,' said I, 'that chance has produced every thing, and
directs every thing.'

'So far the contrary, that chance produces nothing, and cannot direct any
thing; this elixir acted on you as it would on a thousand others. What appears
chance to us is only an invisible cause, of which we see the effect. In some
cases we may trace up the effects to a great First Cause, who must, from our
very nature, be to us incomprehensible; but not for that reason non-existent,
or on the contrary, because many things possess this our attribute to us, are
we to call them Deities? For if so, every phenomanon of nature would become a
Deity, and the philosopher of the eighteenth century would have more Gods than
the ancient heathens.'

I saw by these arguments that he was so wrapped up in the mists of the old
school, that it was no use attempting his reformation, and finding I was not in
the Inquisition, I rejoiced at having escaped the muskets of the soldiers and
the fangs of Jack K^^ch, not for my own sake, that was out of the question, but
for the sake of universal man.

After my recovery, with the loss of an eye, I lived some time with this
anatomist, being frequently employed in raising the dead, which to me was a
matter of indifference, because I knew that all things in nature were merely
modifications of the same matter, there being no difference between a putrid
carcass and a bank of violets, except in the perception of our ideas.

The surgeon frequently lamented the necessity there was for this barbarous
practice, as he called it. -- 'Were we allowed,' said he, 'all unclaimed bodies
which die in hospitals, all malefactors, of every description, and all
suicides, we should not need to disturb the repose of sacred bodies, whose
place affection laments and visits, when perhaps they have been mangled to
pieces in our lecture-room, or sold piecemeal, at fixed prices, like butchers'
meat, to any person. It is a known fact, that every part of the human body has
a regular price. No person can deny the necessity of dissections, but as at
present conducted, they are a disgrace and an outrage on society; -- nor are
the jests and levity of some of the young surgeons becoming, over the body of
an human being.
The dissection of suicides would be a greater preventive to the action than
all the laws of felo de se, because the plea of insanity would not abrogate the
consequence.'

My practice of plundering the churchyards at the most solemn hours, under
danger of detection, and what was worse, under the fear of infection from
diseases nearly advanced to putrescence before the interment; to break open a
coffin, and carry in my arms a naked body, whose scent was sufficient to
ferment a plague, was an undertaking that required all the resolution of
philosophy, and fitted me for the event of any revolution or combustion of
nature.

One day I observed to Dr. Cuticle, that it was to me a plain demonstration
from the structure of the animal economy, and its tendency to putrescence,
that it was like every other material substance; that the derangement of any
one part affecting an immaterial, impalpable something, called the soul, was a
g^ bigotry; for, were the soul an immortal spirit, it could not be affected by
matter -- it could not feel pain in disease. -- He replied,

'Place a man in perfect health in a circular room, glazed round, some of the
windows shall be green, some red, and some blue: you will grant that in looking
through these windows he will see objects of different colors and shades, but
yet his own sight shall be clear and perfect. If the windows are dirty, he will
see objects obscure; and if they are painted black, the surrounding scenes will
to him be invisible; so the human soul, placed in the body, like the man in the
room, can receive no external impression but through that body. His reasonings
will take various shades, his passions and affections will be variously
combined; but this does not deduce from his perfection as a man, but proves
that the soul may be immortal, and yet obliged to partake of every accident
which touches or acts upon its habitation.'

To this I replied -- 'Modern philosophers define the soul to be an immaterial
substance, in the strict use of the term, signifying a substance that has no
extension of any kind, nor any thing of the vis inertia that belongs to matter:
it has neither length, breadth, nor thickness, so that it occupies no portion
of space; on which account the most rigorous metaphysicians say, that it bears
no sort of relation to space any more than sound does to the eye, or light to
the ear: in fact, that spirit and space have nothing to do with one another,
and it is even improper to say an immaterial being exists in space, or that it
resides in one place more than another, for, properly speaking, it is no where,
but has a mode of existence that cannot be expressed by phraseology
appropriated to the modes in which matter exists Priestly on Matter and Spirit,
vol. i. page 74.
.'

Cuticle bowed profoundly at this observation -- 'You have proved to a
demonstration in words,' said he, 'that we have no soul: to answer you in words
would be an easy matter. I must confess that modern philosophy has something in
it sublimely unintelligible: it is like the definition you have given, a
substance without substance, a cube, long, broad, and wide, but occupying no
place, and has no more relation to reason and sense, than nothing has to
something, and something to nothing. -- It is even improper to say philosophy
exists any where, or that it is here more than there, for, properly speaking,
it is no such thing: its mode of existence cannot be expressed in any language
utterable by the human tongue. Such an argument as this may be applied to any
thing, and would disprove the existence of the whole universe.'

So saying, he turned away to pursue some anatomical preparation, and I saw
clear enough that we have no souls at all. My present employ was not congenial
to my desire of benefiting mankind. I was like a gem hid in the mud, and I
resolved to quit my situation. Indeed, the house-maid had been a little
troublesome, for in teaching her some of Munro's anatomical comparisons, we
were naturally led from theory to practice, for she had so much of the modern
spirit of inquiry, that she frequently attended dissections promiscuously with
the other sex One of the pursuits pointed out to females; ^ide Rights of Women.
.'

I rambled over great part of the country under different professions, and
gained a great deal of money from a certain medicine that was an infallible
cure while I staid in the town. Wherever I went I disseminated the new doctrine
of universal emancipation; I made many converts from religion, and taught the
ignorant peasant to read the great book of Nature. I may say that mankind are
infinitely obliged to me for the knowledge of various grievances they never so
much as dreamed of till I pointed them out.

'My dear master,' said Frederick, 'you are a martyr to your virtues; but here
you may rest for a time.

CHAPTER XIII. The formation of the World -- a strange event results from a
political Lecture, which disgusts the philosophers with society.
THE following day, Frederick, in the garden, informed his tutor with his
passion for Laura; that he debated with himself as to the resulting good, and
found a sort of hesitation to use her with too much violence.

'I will let you into a mystery,' said Stupeo. 'The great mass of mankind are
fools, and no better than the callous sod on which we tread. It is the part of
the great men and philosophers to mould them as they please; and when we have
shaken off the influence of every thing called principle, are satisfied we have
no portion in eternity, and that the fable of an avenging Deity is an old
woman's tale, what power, I ask, can control us? We become almost too great
for the world; mind seems to rise superior to matter; crime becomes nothing;
all that men call murder, incest, lust, and cruelty, is trifling, not more, in
fact, than changing the form of passive matter, or cutting down the trees of
the forest: for, remember, we cannot destroy any thing, we only change its
form; and suppose a woman dies under our hands, her death makes room for
another; the same as plucking a turnip makes room for the planting of a
cabbage.'

'I feel,' cried Frederick, 'I feel I am now free. -- I shall render my name
immortal, for no human tie -- no moral check shall stay the purpose of my
power. But it seems true, after all, that a society of atheists could not
exist, they would murder and be murdered: no trust could be placed upon any
man; the king would assassinate the man who affronted him; the courtier would
assassinate the man who opposed him; the wife would assassinate her husband,
when disappointed in meeting her lover; no girl would arrive at the age of
maturity; and the human species would soon become extinct.'

'And what then?' said Stupeo. 'The same spirit which now actuates our bodies*
must then actuate something else: -- you cannot annihilate that subtle gas; and
if it does not give motion to men, it may to some new species: -- who knows but
it may animate the trees and plants with rational faculties Let the reader
reflect upon this. Nothing is annihilated, though the form may be changed. What
then becomes of the soul? -- Are the laws of nature suspended in this one
instance? If not, the soul must still exist -- it must be somewhere.
-- it would make this world a very different place.'

'I should like to see it,' said Frederick. 'Metaphysics are surely the most
useful of the sciences; but here comes Laura and the Doctor. We have been
discoursing,' continued he, 'on matter and spirit, and it appears plain that
matter is eternal, and spirit mere fermentation.'

'I wonder,' said the Doctor, 'how our world was so admirably formed, unless it
was by the power of an omnipotent Being.'

'Our earth,' cried Stupeo, 'was once a part of the sun, a molten mass, when a
large comet brushing too near that luminary, dashed off a considerable portion,
which flew till the natural motion formed it into a spheroid, and it began to
cool. The atmosphere round it formed the ocean, and the friction of this vast
body of waters upon the scoria and cinders, which composed the great skeleton
of the world, formed the sands of the sea, which subsided into large beds,
rising by degrees to the surface, where the action of the sun hardened the
superfices. The heat of this luminary upon the putrid particles of the sea
generated shellfish, which are evidently most allied to stone of any animal we
know. These possessed the whole of the ocean for some thousand ages, and being
by the gravitation of the earth, thrown into large chains of beds, in the
progress of time decaying and cementing together with the olaginous-substance
they contained* the shells became stones, forming mountains. -- Thus we always
find shells in every body of rock, and on the highest mountains. Every great
change produced a revolution, and from the soft ^lime of shelly mountains,
vegetables were produced. -- This new form of matter decaying and fermenting,
animals, such as lions, tigers, bulls and monkeys, were produced. The latter
was man in his original state. It was some thousand years before he learnt to
walk upon his hind legs, some thousand more before he pulled off his shaggy
coating; but it is not material for me to trace him in every improvement, till
he acquired a full face from the effects of a change of climate, and learnt the
articulation of sounds by imitating the babbling of a brook, for he is to this
day a creature imitating every other animal, and nothing is more clear than
that he was originally an Ouran-outang.'

'It strikes me,' said Laura, 'that your system is a little preposterous; and
one is led to inquire where you stood when the earth was a liquid stream of
melting fire? But, with regard to man, I would observe, that had he ever been a
mere brute animal, he never would have changed his nature; he never could have
acquired perfectability, for we never see the least progression in animals, nor
are monkeys, at this period, one single degree advanced beyond what they were
three thousand years ago; but, nevertheless,' said she, with a look of irony,
'when one sees some people, they are apt to acknowledge the relationship, and
when they hear the chatter of jingling, unmeaning sentences, they are apt to
cry out, that the Ouran-outang is the better man.'

Stupeo could not but feel this sally, but it was beneath his philosophical
metaphysical dignity to regard, or even reply to this reasoning of a woman, who
was not illuminated with the splendid rays of intellect.

Frederick often sought an opportunity to accomplish his schemes, but sought in
vain, the vigilance of Laura precluding a possibility of success. He more than
once attempted to infuse a drug into her drink; but whether she suspected him
or no, she always avoided any thing from his hands which would admit
adulteration.

Peace was about this time established with America, and the whole country rang
with exultation. -- During the war, no one had more execrated the system than
the Doctor, and every lecture concluded with an apostrophe to peace. He now
mounted the pulpit in the Hall of Science, (the name of the lecture barn) and
to prove that he was a very great philosopher could find fault with every
thing, and was staunch at all times and all seasons against government. He
declared that the peace was the most disgraceful that could possibly be made;
that it would not continue a twelvemonth before we should be driven from
Canada. He declared, that, like Milton's devils, mankind were only born for
rebellion and revolution, that all their joy was to riot in destruction,
murder, and violation.

A number of soldiers who were returning to their families, hearing these great
truths, swore the Doctor was insulting them. A sailor, with one leg, threw a
crab cudgel at the head of the Doctor, which narrowly escaped him. Frederick
leaped upon a bench, vociferating, 'Citizens! the cause of all mankind is
involved in this dispute: we ought to know whether these vagabonds are to
insult us in our halls, and in our temples. Truth is sacred, and I will speak
it, though a legion of spies were around me.'

'Citizens!' roared out Stupeo, 'you are under military government; the
Philistines are upon us; the freedom of speech has departed, and you are all
slaves bound in chains, and riveted by your own supineness.'

Anarchy and confusion now reigned in the Hall. The benches were broken in
pieces and served for clubs. A desperate battle ensued, as some few of the
country people stood by the Doctor; but they were soon completely drubbed, and
fled in different routes. Doctor Alogos and his two companions found a
temporary shelter in the mansion, and to their astonishment, saw their
principal hearers the most violent.

'What shall be done?' cried the Doctor, trembling most philosophically: 'This
enraged beast, this many-headed monster will devour us.'

'Reverence the divine majesty of a mob,' cried Stupeo; 'all their motions
possess energy, and all their actions justice. This is a mere momentary
fermentation, the effervescence of popular frenzy* and will subside into a
delightful calm.'

'But what are we to do in the mean time? We shall be murdered!'

'A mere trifle, my dear Doctor: -- a mere remodification of matter.'

'A remodification of the devil: I don't at all like this.'

'It is a d -- d aristocratical church-and-king mob,' cried Frederick. 'I have
been to talk to them, but they are deaf to the voice of reason; they are
increased by a number of market-women, who vow vengeance against Stupeo for his
three wives, and the Doctor for his kept mistress. This is no republican mob,
inspired with the divine frenzy of liberty and equality.'

'Oh! curse it,' cried Doctor Alogos, 'they seem to have liberty enough; they
are treading down my fine flower-garden like an herd of swine; there go all my
exotic shrubs! -- I believe they are a troop of Goths and Vandals, who pay no
regard to science.'

'There is your whole congregation!' cried Laura, weeping. 'My dear uncle, they
are all gone mad; they are talking about rights and liberties, and destroying
every thing before them.'

'Let us defend ourselves,' cried Frederick, running to the front window.
'Citizens!' cried he, 'is it thus you abuse your friends?'

'Friends!' shouted a countryman, 'there be no such thing as friendship.
Equality for ever! -- and down with the Doctor!' Frederick immediately fired a
fowling-piece, loaded with small shot. A volley of stones was returned, which
broke half the windows in front, and dashed out one of the orator's teeth.
Stupeo instantly advanced, with a blunderbuss, which he fired, and checked the
fury of the mob for an instant; but the soldiers leading the attack swore they
would murder man, woman and child, and burn the house to the ground.

Not a moment was to be lost in this case of extreme necessity; and Frederick
even debated whether the resulting good did not require him to join the mob,
and aid them in the destruction of property. All the Doctor's cabinet of
natural history was destroyed; his fine library made a bon-fire, and his
elegant mansion was reduced to ashes, amidst the shouts of liberty and equality.

The fugitives found shelter in the house of a neighboring gentleman, who
saved them from the madness of the mob. 'For me,' cried Frederick, 'I am
determined not to remain another week in this vile island, where there is not
one single spark of liberty and national spirit remaining.'

'What do you call this?' demanded the Doctor: 'I think it is liberty
sufficient to burn a man's house about his ears.'

'But that must have been a mob hired by the government,' said Stupeo: 'had it
been a republican mob, it would have been a different thing; we should then
have had a fine display of rational principles.'

'All mobs,' said the gentleman, 'are alike, whatever name you may give them.
Mischief is their only desire -- plunder the only object. To their leaders they
are a subject of perpetual dread. For my part, I would rather live under a
Turkish Bashaw, or in a country under martial law, than in a revolutionary
country governed by mobs.'

'For this reason,' said Stupeo, 'you are a man of property, but for a man
without any property, the latter is preferable, as it renders, in a summary
way, the accumulations of wealth.'

'But then,' answered the gentleman, 'you are not one moment sure of your
plunder; a stronger man may tear it from you, and, like a worm caught by a
chicken, the whole flock will in turn catch it from each other, till it is
either pulled in pieces, or gulphed down by some one at the hazard of choking.'

'But that has nothing to do with liberty,' cried Frederick. 'All riches, and
especially hereditary riches, are to be considered as the salary of a sinecure
office, where the labourer and the manufacturer perform the duties, and the
principal spends the income in luxury and idleness. Hereditary wealth is in
reality a premium paid to idleness, an immense annuity expended to retain
mankind in brutality and ignorance, by the want of leisure (or time to be
idle.) The rich are furnished indeed with the means of cultivation and
literature, but they are paid for being dissipated and indolent. The most
powerful means that malignity could have invented, are employed to prevent them
from improving their talents, and becoming useful to the public. Godwin's
Political Justice, page 804.
'

'You have made a very long speech,' said the gentleman, 'on a very short
subject: All you have said amounting to this, that the poor are ignorant,
because they have not leisure to be idle, and the rich are ignorant, because
they are paid to be idle; so that, in fact, all real knowledge centres in
yourself; and I have very little doubt, but, in your eyes, all the rest of
mankind are little more than ideas, or at best machines.'

'I will prove it by a demonstrable argument,' cried Stupeo.

'They are very destructive* ideas then,' said Doctor Alogos. 'To say the
truth, I am become quite sick of society, and all human nature together. I will
go and bury myself in the wilderness of America, where no mob will burn my
house and destroy my library.'

'Oh!' cried Frederick, 'there the people are free; -- there the spirit of
truth sought with irresistible energy: republicans always fight with double
ardour.'

'Enthusiasm,' said the gentleman, 'is no proof of either truth or justice; but
it is certain to inspire a desperate spirit in those who feel it, let the cause
be liberty, religion, rebellion, revenge, plunder, or what not; though it is
very well to ascribe to the justice of the cause what in fact is only due to
the intoxicating enthusiasm of attaining a point -- Revenge in general inspires
revolutions. The people feel the evils they suffer under; they forget that a
change most probably will be for the worse; and to be revenged on one set of
men, they become slaves of another. I believe there never yet happened a
revolution, where the then living generation did not feel accumulated ill, and
the benefit to the next is very doubtful. Time, and the natural improvement of
the human mind, gradually introduces reform, and in our own constitution we
find always some trifle to improve; and it is well known, that at this moment
we enjoy more real liberty than any of our ancestors; for in the days, called
the golden days of good Queen Bess, did not she grant so many monopolising
patents, that a gentleman demanded in the house, if there was not going to be a
patent for selling bread.'

The next day the Doctor began to arrange his plans of emigration, procuring
all the information he could of that delectable country, where poor people live
better than the rich; where provisions are so plentiful, you have money to take
them away; where more is paid to mechanics for their labor than the articles
sell for; where there are no taxes, and where the travelers bundle with the
daughters of the family.

Frederick felt his enthusiasm rise at this description, and determined to
accompany the Doctor to Philadelphia, one of the finest and most regular cities
in the world. -- 'It is there,' said he, 'we shall begin to breathe on the
broad basis of truth and reason; there all the puerile distinctions of religion
and country are unknown, and man is respected for his good qualities.'

Laura raised many objections to the scheme, and Susan absolutely, refused to
trust herself in a foreign country without being married. Thus the Doctor was
under a philosophical necessity of complying with a superstitious custom; and
he could not refrain observing, that if he would have submitted to matrimony
before, he might have married a lady of education and fortune, and not an
ignorant pert baggage, who assumed the airs of a lady, without the
qualifications.

The estate and ruins of the mansion being sold, the Doctor determined to set
out without putting in his claim to the damages he could demand from the county.

Frederick for a while suspended his designs upon Laura, foreseeing, that when
they should be settled in a wilderness, she must of necessity be either his or
Stupeo's, and he had no doubt but she would prefer the greater good.

CHAPTER XIV. Reflections in a storm -- the delights of Philadelphia -- the
Doctor purchases a large estate in Kentucky.
A PLEASANT gale wasted these adventurers from the detestable island, where
every thing was conducted in the worse manner possible, and where law and
religion influenced the majority of men. Their hopes were high, and they
discoursed and disputed with true metaphysical ardour. The rest of the
passengers were mechanics and countrymen, going over to make their fortunes,
and the praises of America bounded from one mouth to another.

'I am astonished,' said a man who had sold a very good trade to emigrate, 'I
am astonished that any man remains in Europe, when all the blessings of life
await him in America. I am going to purchase some lots of ground in the great
city of Washington, which will shortly be the most magnificent in the world.
All the houses will be polished freestone, the most narrow streets will be as
wide a Portland Place in London. Ships already arrive there, and the city will
be the emporium of commerce: I understand that it already makes a noble
appearance.'

'A very noble appearance indeed,' said the Captain: 'the streets are all laid
out in right angles, upon paper. The number of workmen and mechanics employed
in building this magnificent city is truly astonishing, they amount to nearly
one hundred and fifty. But the chief advantage attending this city is, that it
is contiguous to the estate of the President.'

'You speak,' said the passenger, 'as if you were an Englishman, and wished to
discourage new settlers. I suppose you are jealous of others partaking in the
pleasures of your country.'

'Very far from it,' said the Captain. 'I am amused with the golden dreams of
emigrants, who expect to find silver crows in America; and I can assure you
what I tell you of Washington is literally true, and more than that, it never
will be finished, on account of the local and multiplied inconveniences around
it.'

'But how comes it,' said the other, 'that such advertisements are inserted in
the newspapers?'

'How comes it,' said the Captain, 'you puff off any article you wish to
dispose of? -- Do you think it is natural for a man, who has discovered a
treasure, to call all the world to share it with him? This very reason ought to
deter people, if they were not mad; they might be certain, if America was that
happy land held out to them by designing men, all the vagabonds in Europe would
not be invited to its bowers.'

After they had sailed many days before a fair wind, the heavens became
suddenly obscured; black clouds embattled over the deep, which hissed in rising
breakers against the ship's side. Sudden squalls furrow the dark bosom of the
ocean, and threatened, to tear the sails from the yards. All hands were ordered
to work; the sails were furled, the yards struck, the pumps cleared, and every
preparation made for a storm.'

'My dear Doctor,' said Frederick, in the cabin, 'now we shall behold a grand
display of magnificent scenery; we shall see Nature in a rage, and admire the
terrific features of her countenance.

'I hope not,' said the Doctor: 'I have no curiosity to behold the bottom of
the terrible sea, to be hacked in pieces by the sword-fish, smothered in the
embraces of polypusses, or devoured by aligators.'

'A true philosopher,' cried Stupeo, 'will behold the combustion of elements
with tranquillity; he would not tremble were all the human race scattered
around his feet with a blaze of lightning; though the clouds were to become
ignited and flame around his head; though the concave vault of the heavens was
to become red hot; though the earth was to dissolve with fulminations beneath
his feet, and parting nature to mix in chaotic confusion, yet would he stand
firm and undismayed: Such are the effects of real philosophy.'

At that moment a loud crash of thunder burst over them, and rattled to a
distance invarious directions.

'The devil take it,' cried Stupeo, 'that is a horrid smash; the wind howls
like an hundred wolves in a forest hung with snow. The sea thumps against the
vessel as if it would break in the timbers. After all, men are very foolish to
trust themselves so far from land in an egg-shell.'

'It is nothing but an idea,' said Laura. 'What, are you frightened at your own
ideas?'

'I am fearful,' said the Doctor, 'that even Mr. Hume must al^ow this storm to
be something more than idea.'

'I shall go on deck,' said Frederick. 'I am like an Englishman so far, that I
am only afraid when I do not see the danger.'

'I will go with you,' said Laura; 'the ship trembles so much I cannot sit.'

It was with difficulty they could preserve themselves from falling, by
grasping the hatchway; but the scene that presented was the most terrible
sublime. One universal canopy of black clouds seemed to unite the ocean with
the heavens, and the rain poured down in such torrents, that they might be said
to be overwhelmed in water; through this, the vivid flashes of lightning played
at leisure, dancing on the mountainous billows, and giving to the ridges of
rolling waves, which tumbled over each other as if contending in a race, the
momentary appearance of melting gold. The thunder was so near, that it appeared
rather surrounding than above them, and the whole was a promiscuous confusion
of fire and water, the waves reflecting and refracting the variegated
lightnings in every direction.

'Oh! great Creator of the universe,' said Laura, a tear of piety starting from
her eye; 'Oh! that man would acknowledge thy power, for what prevents that thou
should at this moment destroy the whole earth, and expunge it from thy
presence for the crimes of its people!'

'Surely,' said Frederick, 'this is more than idea; -- there must be an
omnipotent Being, notwithstanding Mr. Hume and Stupeo. Were this storm the
production of chance, it might continue, it naturally would continue for ever,
and overwhelm creation.'

'Chance!' repeated Laura: 'How has it happened that this whole globe has never
deviated from its orb? Why do not the planets leave their harmonic circles, and
dash each other to pieces? -- Harmony is not an attribute of chance, for the
very word chance implies confusion. Surely, had not some infinite Being, whom
we should tremble to name, given them their motions, they never could have
continued within their orbit. But man, weak and silly man, denies Providence
and miracles, because Providence is not every day working miracles to provide
him a dinner.'

'That peal of thunder seemed to me to shake the foundations of the universe,'
said Frederick; -- 'but you look quite composed, Laura -- are you not
frightened?'

'I am indeed,' said she, 'very much frightened, but I am not dismayed. -- It
is true I am a weak woman, but I look beyond these heavy and sulphurious
clouds, to a Deity who knows the weakness of his creatures, and can, in his
omnipotence, as well protect me us a world.'

'But do you think,' said Frederick, 'that he regards at all the actions of
human beings? If he did* why in the shipwreck of a vessel shall perhaps every
man be drowned, except the most execrable villain amongst them?'

'Because that the good and the bad are so connected, that a storm cannot fall
upon one without touching the other, and to a good man drowning, is a very
trifling evil.'

'How so? You speak now like a philosopher. Is ^t a trifle to be annihilated to
self-consciousness, to lose all the pleasures of life, and become no more than
the stone or vegetating shrub?'

'Indeed,' answered Laura, 'if such are your sentiments, death is to you the
most tremendous of evils -- you must shudder at the idea, and to secure
yourself some paltry, transient gratifications, perpetrate unnumbered crimes.
But, amidst this storm, when the next moment may whelm us beneath the deep, see
how calm a woman can be, whose mind is acted upon by the cheering hopes of
religion* and who expects hereafter to live to a beatified eternity.'

'But I have no ideas of such a state, and we know that the vulgar notion of an
heaven above us cannot physically be true.'

'And why not?' said Laura; -- 'you will tell me perhaps, that beyond our
system there are other systems, and beyond these others, reaching to distances
surpassing comprehension. But, is space bounded by our imagination, or is all
space filled with systems? Beyond all these systems may there not be a
surrounding space, where every idea of heaven may be realized, where new
regions of inconceivable formation and glory may exist, for who shall limit the
Supreme? Even suppose all space to be filled with systems and worlds, may not
these stars be so many different paradises, fitting the disposition of
different spirits?'

'These things,' said Frederick, 'may not be impossible; but they are very
contrary to the doctrine of the great Stupeo. What a grand scene is he losing!
-- I will go and call him.'

The storm now raged with such violence, that the ship was given to the winds,
driving between the furrows of the rushing waves. The great Stupeo laid upon
the cabin floor, uttering the most horrid execrations -- swearing that all hell
was broke loose, and that the black demons of the air were running the ship
into the clouds.

'That is a very sublime idea,' said Frederick, 'but I hope not literal, for if
there be an hell, what will become of us?'

'O God!' cried Doctor Alogos, 'I do acknowledge thy power, I was a fool ever
to doubt it.'

Laura endeavored to comfort poor Susan and the rest of the passengers in the
cabin; and the better to prevent reflection, she desired them to sing some
psalms, setting the example by beginning the 104th. The novelty of such an
action in so despairing a situation gained their attention, and many joining
in, the terror of the danger was damped, and they felt a something of conscious
satisfaction, which is unknown to any but those who have been in some similar
situation, or have felt the tranquillity of a quiet conscience; -- even Stupeo
himself changed his execrations into groans, and Frederick hung down his head
in silent reflection.

The storm gradually subsiding by degrees, the several characters of the
company returned, with this difference, that Stupeo maintained with more
obstinacy than ever his doctrine of chance and skepticism. Frederick wavered in
his mind according to the impulse of his passions; and Doctor Alogos became
convinced that there was more in religion and commonplace maxims of good and
evil, than the great Stupeo would allow.

In this disposition they arrived at Philadelphia, and rejoiced at the prospect
of having reached a place where truth and justice had erected the standard of
reason. Frederick was surprised to find the renowned city not so large as that
part of Mary-le-Bone which is built; but consoled himself with the loss of one
of the finest cities in the world, as he could look over the ground where it
was to stand.

As they passed along the streets, they were hooted at by the children, and
called vagabond English, with other opprobrious names. 'This is very strange,'
said Frederick: 'I thought the Americans made no distinctions of country; but
we are only strangers yet -- they will respect us when they know us better.'

They procured lodgings at an extravagant rate, and calling for refreshment,
received some very coarse cakes, wretched butter, and salt meat, for in summer
no fresh meat will keep a day; and for this they paid more than the best
articles would have cost in London.

'Things are not quite as they should be even here,' said the Doctor.

'What do you mean by that?' said an American waiter. 'Do you mean to
stigmatize Congress?'

'Heaven forbid,' replied the Doctor: 'I should like to speak to your master
about my baggage.'

'My master! I don't know such a man. Do you think I am a slave? -- I am a
republican, a freeborn American. But who are you? some lousy, beggarly emigre,
come here to cut wood and hew stone for us.'

Doctor Alogos looked in silent amazement. -- Frederick was rising to kick the
republican down stairs; but Stupeo observed that this was the genuine blunt
spirit of freedom; that, like Spartans, the Americans took perfect liberty of
speech.

'But they do not seem to allow it to others,' said Laura.

The heat was extremely intense, so much so, that the whole company confined
themselves within doors, deliberating on the mode they should adopt in
promoting their pastoral scheme. Laura amused herself at the windows: to her it
had an air of novelty to see every third person a black; but she was astonished
to see the people laboring notwithstanding the violent heat, which was almost
suffocating to those who remained inactive; and the swarms of musquetoes were
to Englishmen a perfect plague.

'These laborers,' said a waiting maid, 'are Scotch, Irish, and German
emigrants, who earn eleven shillings a day currency.

'Eleven shillings a day!' exclaimed Frederick; 'it is more than our peasants
in England earn in a week: they must live like noblemen. But what do you call
currency?'

'Why it is about six and sixpence English; but they are very badly off for
all that, for every thing is so dear they can hardly live upon it, and one half
of them soon die of fevers and agues.'

The landlord's daughter was a prettyish girl, and night coming on, Frederick
requested her to bundle with him. 'If you insult me,' said she, 'our Matthew
shall bundle you into the Delaware.'

Frederick was astonished at this frankness. It is very different here, said he
to himself; but I do not know whether it is all for the better.

In the night Frederick was disturbed by the rumbling of carts: -- It is very
strange, thought he, that so many nightmen are at work at once in such a little
city, or perhaps they all come through this street. The Americans surely do not
go in carts to balls. In the morning he inquired, and was informed it was only
the dead carts that carried away those who died in the course of the day.

'That is strange,' said he, 'I counted near twenty, and this city is of very
narrow extent.' 'It is a very magnificent city, and the largest in all the
union,' said the landlord; -- 'but the yellow fever carries off some dozens in
a day; however, we don't mind these things since we have got our independence.'

'Very true,' replied the Doctor: 'liberty sweetens every thing, and it is a
glorious epoch in the annals of man, that property ceases in this great western
continent to influence the actions of men.'

The landlord gazed with surprise. 'Property,' said he, 'is the only stimulus
to commerce -- commerce is the support of arts and sciences, and no man will be
above trade: we have no honest gentlemen here -- no idle hands -- if a man will
not work, he may starve.'

'That is a detestable system,' said Stupeo; 'the ancient Spartans never
degraded themselves with work. Man, in a state of nature, does not work, he has
few wants, and these the waters or the woods supply.'

'That may be, friend; but our motto is, endure, but hope, and that of all
new-comers is, work, or starve. I see you are a green-one yet, and unseasoned;
all you people from the old world think money is made for nothing here -- but
it is all a farce.'

'Where in the world,' said the Doctor, 'shall we find the genuine principles
of liberty and equality?'

'As to liberty,' said the American, 'every man has liberty to follow any trade
he pleases, and to vote for the Congress, if he is a naturalized citizen; and
as to equality, we have no titles except 'squire, but for equality of property,
as some of our own people would like it, it is a mere fire-fly of a dark
evening.'

The idea of the yellow fever had damped the spirits of the whole company, and
it was resolved to quit the city of Philadelphia with all convenient speed.
This matter was under consideration when a thin man entered the room.

'My good friends,' said he, 'I understand you intend settling upon an
agricultural plan. Agriculture is the most noble pursuit of independent man,
and a sure source of wealth.' 'How did you know our intention?' said the
Doctor: 'we have not yet been twenty-four hours in the city.'

'My desire to serve all mankind,' replied he, 'and to prevent the schemes of
impostors, who, taking advantage of their local knowledge, often deceive and
cheat strangers, has led me to intrude upon you.'

'Indeed,' said Alogos, 'I thought all the people of the new world had been
disinterested and benevolent toward all mankind, who fly from the old world to
be free of its crimes.'

'Human nature, Sir, is not yet arrived at perfection: It is true we are
advancing rapidly forward -- witness the great public roads and canals which
intersect the country.'

'Why are these roads?' said Frederick: 'You ought to throw every impediment in
the way of commerce -- it is thence arises all our evils.'

'That is very true, Sir, but in this country to talk disrespectfully of
commerce is high treason: we are a commercial people. By means of these roads
and canals, we have peopled the great wilderness, and planted settlements where
only rattlesnakes used to bask. To what part of the continent do you intend
journeying?'

'That we are undetermined upon,' said the Doctor: 'we would be as far from
society as we can, and in a country where we can enjoy the advantages of
nature.'

'Then Kentucky is your object; it is the most delectable spot on the face of
the earth; it is a second Arcadia -- a continued scene of romantic delight, and
picturesque prospects. An author of undoubted veracity has given an history of
that heavenly region. Sympathy, says he, is regarded as the essence of the
human ^oul, participating of celestial matter, and as a spark engendered to
warm our benevolence, and lead to the raptures of love and rational felicity.

'With such sentiments our amusements flow from the interchange of civilities,
and a reciprocal desire of pleasing. That sameness may not cloy, and make us
dull, we vary the scene as the nature of circumstances will permit. The opening
spring brings with it the prospects of our summer's labor, and the brilliant
sun actively warms into life the vegetable world which blooms and yields a
profusion of aromatic odours. A creation of beauty is now a feast of joy, and
to look for amusement beyond this genial torrent of sweets would be a
perversion of nature, and a sacrilege against heaven.'

The season of sugar making occupies the women, whose mornings are cheered by
the modulated buffoonery of the mocking-bird, the tuneful song of the thrush,
and the gaudy plumage of the paroquet. Festive mirth crowns the evening. The
business of the day being over, the men join the women in the sugar-groves,
where enchantment seems to dwell. The lofty trees wave their spreading branches
over a green turf, on whose soft down the mildness of the evening invites the
neighboring youth to sportive play, while our rural Nestors, with calculating
minds contemplate the boyish gambols of a growing progeny; they recount the
exploits of their early age, and in their enthusiasm, forget there are such
things as decripitude and misery. Perhaps a convivial song, or a pleasant
narration closes the scene See Imley's Romantic account of Kentucky.
.'

'Or perhaps,' said Laura, with a smile, 'the Fairy strikes with her silver
wand, and the whole vanishes, leaving behind an uncultivated wilderness.'

'It is every word true,' said Citizen Common: 'I have not told you half what
Mr. Im -- y says of it. I am a surveyor, and can point you out the most
eligible situations, which, out of my respect for your characters, I will do
without reward. -- Here are plans of eight different estates, from one hundred
acres to five thousand. There are three qualities of land, but I suppose you
would prefer the best, which will be parted with prodigiously cheap -- twelves
guineas for the hundred acres.'

'Twelve guineas for the hundred acres!' exclaimed the Doctor: 'why you
mistake, you are giving the land away. Ah! if all the poor vagabonds in the old
world knew that here they could have a portion of earth for almost nothing,
they would beg, borrow, or steal, to procure a passage to this land of milk and
honey.'

'There are thousands every year,' said the stranger, 'who benefit by our
hospitality. If I might advise, this plat of ground, situated on the north fork
of the Elkhorn, is the most eligible for a first settlement.

'Well,' said the Doctor, 'if you bring me the title deeds and witnesses, I
will purchase that: A thousand acres is just an hundred and eight guineas, and
that is a mere song.'

'Indeed,' said Common, with a stare, 'you shall have the deeds drawn out and
registered with precision.' -- This being settled, he observed, that at such a
distance, they would require to take with them various implements of husbandry,
and articles of necessity, every thing being tripled in expense beyond the
Alleghany mountains.

'But why,' said Frederick, 'should we encumber ourselves with articles of
luxury? We intend to quit society, and will not load ourselves with its
inconveniences.'

'My dear Sir,' said Common, 'you advance beyond the mark; so much do we depend
upon each other, that we can neither begin nor proceed without the
co-operations of our fellows: For instance, how will you cultivate the earth?
Will you tear down the trees with your bodily prowess? or will you turn the sod
with your nails? You must have spades and ploughs, and a variety of other
articles.'

'We are obliged to have all these in England,' said Frederick: 'I do not see
that labor is less or more easy in the new world than the old.'

'Infinitely so,' cried Common; 'farmers here work for themselves, wages are so
high that they cannot afford to hire men, and land is so cheap that servants
soon become masters.'

'That is as it should be,' said Stupeo, 'that is something like equality. In
our country, a farmer, with a few hundred acres does little more than overlook
his servants.'

Under the directions of Common, near a thousand pounds were expended in
articles necessary for a settlement -- the patent was made out at the regular
office, and four wagons waited the pleasure of these great men, who quitted
the haunts of luxury in search of virtue and liberty in an howling wilderness.

Every article as they passed along the road was exorbitantly dear, seventeen
dollars being charged for a common dinner for themselves and their horses; but
what more astonished them, was the impertinence of the innkeepers, who being
all agricultural men, did not altogether depend on their inns, and conceived
travelers to be the obliged parties.

'This is very singular hospitality,' said the Doctor: 'I have read a book
which informed me it was customary to travel from farm-house to farm-house, and
from New England to Maryland, almost free of expense.'

'Republicans,' said Stupeo, 'are independent people, they do not cringe and
fawn upon you for a shilling like your traders in Europe; they possess a
conscious manly dignity.'

'The dignity of an innkeeper is certainly very great,' said Laura; 'but I
prefer the slavish European, where people seem obliged to you at least.'

As they advanced over the mountains to Fort Pit, they were charmed with the
scenery, and the majestic river Ohio, down which they sailed, between extensive
savannas and high-towering forests, where scarcely the beams of day, much less
the foot of man, ever penetrated.

Stupeo, who was a man of profound reflection, was frequently subject to
melancholy, to dissipate which, he had recourse to peach brandy and American
rum, (indeed these mingled with water are the common drink); but though he was
no milksop, he was soon seized with a dysentery, which to his comfort he found
was very usual to new comers.

Being arrived at Lexington, the metropolis of the finest country in the world,
they were a little surprised at sight of about thirty ill-looking wooden
houses, but they had seen so many wonders in the new world, that they were not
altogether confounded, and Stupeo declared that he was delighted at the
prospect of coming nearer a state of nature than they had even hoped or
expected.

Their large train of baggage was a sufficient sign of importance to procure
them several visitors* by this means the place of their intended settlement was
quickly known, and a great deal of unnecessary trouble avoided, there being
already a family at Lexington, come from Virginia, with a grant for the same
land, which they were unable to settle, it being already in the possession of
another holder.

'This is inconceivable,' said Doctor Alogos; 'one had need possess a share of
suffering philosophy to endure this; but how am I to be righted?'

'You may go to law,' replied the informant. 'I am an attorney, and will do you
justice; for though the other purchaser has been at law this twelvemonth, and
has lost his cause, that was because he did not employ me.'

'Go to law!' cried the Doctor with horror; 'what are there laws and lawyers in
a wilderness? I expected to have found nothing worse than rattlesnakes and
tigers.'

'The world could not exist without law,' said the lawyer. 'Why, it is almost
impossible to purchase a lot of land here without a lawsuit entailed, for at
the office they grant patent upon patent, so that any man may choose what part
he prefers of the whole country, and when he is here he cannot easily return.'

'That is right,' cried Stupeo, 'that is exactly my system of argument, the
greatest resulting good is the first to be defined; the wilderness must be
peopled, and the human race expanded over the surface of the earth.'

'But can we have no land?' said Frederick; 'surely this prodigious country is
not all monopolized?'

'You may have thousands of acres,' replied the lawyer; 'but, if you would be
safe, you must purchase at second-hand -- that is, a lot from the great
farmers. You may have good uncultivated land at six guineas the hundred acres
-- Mr. Common imposed upon you more than one half, but I am an honest man.'

CHAPTER XV. The Pleasures of bending Nature to the rules of art -- Stupeo and
Susan determine to People the wilderness -- the Superiority of savage life
exemplified.
HAVING made a purchase of three hundred acres, about one hundred and fifty
miles from Lexington, nearer the Ohio, containing two fine mill-seats, with
water-carriage for timber, they began their march through the wilderness. Every
ten or twelve miles along the road a little plantation was begun. Laura looked
in vain for the blooming orchards and sugar-groves, with fine lawns beneath
them; she saw indeed some clusters of sugar-maple trees at intervals in the
woods, where Nature had planted them; but as to the velvet meadows, nothing of
that sort appeared, the native grass being several feet high, matted so as to
be almost impassable, and too rank for any use. The weather was insufferably
hot -- millions of insects tormented them night and day -- snakes curled along
the tracks (called roads) and prodigious large frogs and toads wallowed in
every little tank of stagnant water, which the impenetrable forest prevented
the sun from evaporating.

Neither milk nor butter were procurable at any price, and they were under the
necessity of drinking spirits and water, which threw them all into s^ight
fevers, and added strength to the disease of Stupeo.

Being arrived at the place where they were to settle, they were a little
surprised to find it covered with prodigious large trees, which seemed to bid
defiance to human labor. A thick cane brake overran half the surface, and was
so matted and entangled with the trees, that they could not even clear a path
through. The ground, which was not thus covered, was apparently so barren, that
the black heaths of England were a sort of comparative garden.

'It is plain to me,' said Stupeo, 'that cultivating the ground is a deviation
from the state of nature. Has she not spread her wide extended branches to
shelter us from heat and from rain? Has she not scattered various fruits and
shrubs within our reach, and what do we want more? When we shall have spent our
strength in destroying these trees, and labored to raise the rotten sods into
life, shall we not set some value on the earth? We shall become proud, selfish
and tyrannical -- we shall not readily yield it to another, and thus we give
birth to all the horrors of civil life.'

'It is too late now to retract,' said Laura; 'surely the resources of
philosophy are not exhausted, reason and truth have now full power to expand
unchecked in the desert wild.'

'To be perfectly free,' said Stupeo, 'we should become like the roaming
Indians; let us give to mankind a great and glorious example? Let us cast aside
our cloths, they are an encumbrance beneath the dignity of virtue, let us live
like the wild Indians.'

'You may if you like' said Laura, laughing, 'but I fear you will not easily do
without brandy, and that is a forbidden article in the big book of Nature.'

'For my part,' said Frederick, 'I will try the inconveniences of a detached
life before I wholly enter into a state of ^avagism; we have contracted so many
unnatural wants, which reason knows to be useless, that it requires time to
root out our habits and prejudices.'

In about a week's time, an uncomfortable hovel was erected, with the help of
some neighbors; but these philosophers had so little resolution in
encountering great difficulties, that these three great men were another week
before they had cut off the lower boughs of a few trees, where they had planned
a kitchen garden.

Stupeo was thrown off his legs with the little exertion he had made, the heat
and the bad provisions, no meat, keeping without salt. No physician was within
many miles, except one, an ignorant quack, whose whole knowledge was drawn from
Salmon's Dispensatory, and the London Complete Art of Healing.

Stupeo pretended he rejoiced that Nature would have her course; but she soon
so reduced him, that it was evident the great man would quit the world without
having caused one revolution; and the Doctor dispatched a messenger for the
surgeon, who, on his arrival, prescribed some common medicines, which greatly
relieved the patient.

Doctor Alogos lamented the want of books, though he had very little time to
read; what leisure he had was spent in idle repining, and cursing the day he
ever set his foot on the new world, which to his eyes appeared only half
formed. He had another subject of disquiet in Susan, who was every day
reproaching him with having carried her out of the world to die in a desert.
Laura was the only one any way contented, for the sweetness of her disposition,
and her affection for her uncle, overlooked many difficulties. Surely, thought
the Doctor, there is something at least very pleasant in the attachment of
kindred, and though she may love me as an individual, contrary to the new
philosophy, I do not perceive any great evil in it.

The progress they made in cultivation served only to show them the futility of
their undertaking and a whole family happening to die of a fever occasioned by
over-labour, they purchased the farm, which had been brought into some degree
of cultivation. -- The ground, which had never been turned up to the air, being
composed of rotten vegetable substance, was loaded with febrile particles and
noxious vapor, the effects of which are frequently seen in the deaths of new
comers; nor did the Doctor and Frederick escape without a severe fit of the
ague, which disabled them from labor.

The great Stupeo seemed here buried in unworthy obscurity; he saw his genius
and talents unemployed, and mankind unbenefited by his labors. He had
fruitlessly attempted to injure the innocence of Laura, who detested him even
more than Frederick; and he resolved no longer to suffer the unjust monoply
which Doctor Alogos practiced in the person of Susan. The latter was heartily
tired of the Doctor, who was not so young as Stupeo, and having imbibed the
real principles of equality, she made very little difficulty of aiding to
people this wilderness, where, it must be confe^sed, there was a little too
much of solitude.

The Doctor beheld, as a singular phenomenon, the change of Susan's shape,
which neither reason nor argument could account for, though it was evident
there must have been a cause superior to chance.

'It may be nothing more than an idea,' said Stupeo; 'but at any rate it does
not signify who is the parent of the child -- the resul^ing good is equal; it
is of no consequence to the child because under the protection of philosophy,
its mind will gradually expand to the genial beams of truth. I am of opinion,
that children should be brought up indifferently by the male or female, as it
may happen. Why, I would ask, in the name of common sense, are not men as well
calculated for nurses as women?'

'Because,' said Laura, 'they are not so domestic, and because Providence has
provided the female with a nutriment adapted to the tenderness of infancy.'

'That arises from mere repletion,' said the great philosopher, 'and is the
source of all our diseases -- we draw in corruption at the breast, and if we
would one day become immortal, I am of opinion we should be educated
independent from the birth, and fed upon something more natural than milk,
which is of all substances soonest corrupted.'

'Of course upon brandy,' said Laura: 'brandy is one of the least corruptible
of fluids.'

Susan, in due time, brought a man child into the world; but no physician or
person of skill being within reach, an ignorant old woman officiated, and the
poor wretch expired in agony.

'Such,' cried Stupeo, 'are the consequences of being neither in or out of
society: -- Here we are in a desert, abandoned by our species, with all the
habits we contracted in society, and no means to satisfy them; -- if we had
been in a state of nature, nature would have accomplished every thing.'

The Doctor was shocked at the event, though satisfied she had not been
constant to himself; and he more than ever began to doubt the reality and
practicability of the sublime doctrines of the new philosophy. Stupeo undertook
the education of the boy, whom he insisted should enjoy perfect freedom, and be
allowed to crawl about the house like any other animal.

'He shall not be thwarted in any thing,' said he: 'The great Rousseau tells us
that we only implan vices into children by pretending to teach them justice,
and destroy the temper by checking the sallies of imagination.' Unfortunately
for the enlightened system of education, this grand experiment proved abortive.
The tender infant sickened and died of a consumption.

Frederick, however, maintained that it was the kindness of Laura which killed
it;. and Stupeo discovered that it was stung to death by musquetoes, its body
being delicate, and not plaistered over with unguents of grease, like the
infants of Indians; and the Doctor swore that Stupeo had poisoned it with
brandy. Thus these three great men could not agree upon so insignificant a
thing as the death of a child under a grand philosophical experiment: Where
then is the wonder that men are daily outting each others throats for
difference of political opinion?

One day when these three philosophers were laboring in the field, sometimes
uttering execrations, and sometimes disputing, not a little to the prejudice of
immutible truth, which often appeared in different shapes, a troop of Miama
Indians crossed the Ohio in their punts, and carried off all the portable
articles at the little farm, which they had dignified with the name of Clarens.
Poor Laura shared the fate of the rest of the stock, and it was not known to
the philosophers till their return home.

'Black forever be the day!' exclaimed the Doctor, 'when I left England with
all its evils -- there, persons and property enjoy some protection. Alas! my
dear Laura, my beloved child is murdered and scalped!'

'Nothing more natural,' said Stupeo, coolly; 'savages do not make those
childish distinctions we do between beauty and ugliness -- revenge is all they
seek, for the unjust usurpation of the Europeans: -- Are we not driving them
from their ancient possessions, and daily narrowing their bounds and power to
live?'

'What have they done,' said the Doctor, 'in the course of some thousand years?
The utmost extent of their knowledge in agriculture, is the planting of a few
slips of maize and tobacco.'

'But they enjoy perfect liberty,' said Frederick; 'they have few vices; and
few wants -- they roam at will over the face of the creation: -- I feel myself
enamoured of savage life It is the practice of the new school to exalt every
thing savage. An Indian is with them the most virtuous of human beings; and
they make him utter sentiments he never heard, and perform actions which never
were witnessed. Why is all this but to loosen men from the reciprocal bonds of
society, and to sap the foundations of human governments. So far indeed are the
Indians removed from, these sentimental phantoms, that they are totally the
contrary; though the emancipation of the negroes, and the inhumanity of
Christians, is an excellent stalking horse, for those who pretend to ^er
feelings than the rest of mankind. The following note will illustrate the
tenderness of the emancipated negroes, and the fine feelings of their
deliverers. See the note in Playfair's History of Jacobinism, page 341.

'The insurrections, massacres, and cruelties of St. Domingo, would make a
large volume, were they to be detailed. The Abbe Gregoire and Brissot were too
of the most active instigators of the revolt of the negroes and mulattoes.
Gregoire, who was member of the Assembly, when he heard of a terrible massacre,
in which the negroes, had for their bloody standard a white infant, impaled on
a spear, declared it was the pius beau jour de sa vie. This philosophic
cannibal was at supper when the news was brought, and he and his friends
finished the evening with mutual congratulations and joy, on the success of
their plans.'


?

'I see plainly, returned the Doctor, 'that very few men can exist in a savage
state: I see we must have made a progress in arts and sciences before we can
pretend to civil life. Thus arts and sciences, with all their defects, tend to
increase the numbers of mankind. Indeed, I begin to perceive philosophy has not
every claim I supposed to universal acceptance.'

'The new philosophy is immutable,' cried Stupeo; 'and notwithstanding every
check from selfishness, it will in time sap all society, and depopulate those
hot-houses of vice and disease -- large cities.'

'My life,' cried Alogos, 'is a burden in this wilderness: -- I have no books
to amuse and instruct me -- no intercourse of polished friendship, all is
rugged and rude. There is no market for commodities that might stimulate
avarice. I feel a thousand wants I cannot gratify, and even common necessaries
I cannot procure. -- Affection, which I once thought a blind partiality, I now
find like a balm amidst the evils of life; and as I have lost my Laura, I am
completely wretched. I am not now equal to the task of cultivating the ground;
and I might have procured more comforts, conveniences, and luxuries in England,
as a day labourer, than in this wild with all its freedom.'

'I must grant,' said Frederick, 'that we have too much labor: this is not a
state congenial to human nature -- this is solitude without its concomitants,
plenty, liberty, and ease. What signifies my being at liberty to w^nder in a
forest and shoot deer, when I must till the ground or starve; this is not
genuine equality, and I am determined to seek it in a savage state.'

'For me,' said the Doctor, 'I am so completely wretched, that I will seek no
further for a bauble -- I will die here.'

'The great moralist, Rousseau,' said Stupeo, 'has said, by rendering life
insupportable, God orders one to quit it. Now you believe in a Deity, and
surely you may trust his mercy.'

'I will not provoke his anger, thou fiend of darkness,' said Doctor Alogos,
with more energy than he usually displayed: 'do I suffer one single
inconvenience I have not brought upon myself, and you would have me close the
account with murder. The Deity does not act by evils, nor are the consequences
of our headstrong passions, our follies, and our crimes to be laid to his
charge. Rousseau was a fool, with all his rants and declamations, and many of
his followers show their long ears.'

A black slave, whom these advocates for universal freedom had purchased, his
labor being cheaper than an hired servant, now entered the hut, with the
tidings that Laura had been seen crossing the Ohio, with the Indians, in a
western direction.

Doctor Alogos, at this intelligence, roused himself to action, and the two
philosophers proposed to accompany him, more from an expectance of novelty,
than any desire to recover Laura, who would never attend to the lectures of
these great men.

They set out on horseback well armed, pursuing the track pointed out to them.
For four days they followed the Indians, till their provisions were exhausted,
and their horses nearby jaded out. They subsisted upon the wild berries and
fruit in the forests, still continuing their rout, and having plenty of powder
the birds supplied them a frequent repast.

By degrees they lost all knowledge of the direction of the country. Their
horses fell beneath them, and the underwood became almost impenetrable. -- A
council of war was called, in which Frederick pleaded strenuously that they
should join the first band of Indians they might meet, and cast away every
trace of society; he even proposed that they should abandon their arms and
clothes, and trust wholly to chance.

This he was prevailed upon to give up, by the observance that the Indians were
not so divested of all art as to be without arms, these being necessary in a
roaming life to procure themselves food.

Doctor Alogos, who had no wish to return without his niece, complied with all
the sublime whims of these great men; and though he was far from being in
perfect health, he attended them through the dreary labyrinths of an almost
impassable forest, where hunger and thirst were their constant companions.

For near ten days they did not see a single human being except themselves.
They had fallen in with a drove of buffaloes, on one of which they made a
plentiful repast. Their shoes were already worn out, and the green hide bound
with thongs supplied the place; though they now ran considerable hazard from
the swarms of snakes which basked in the sun, or hung from the trees like
caterpillars in an English hedge. Frederick being the tallest, had received
several severe confusions from the boughs of the trees, and the infinite swarms
of musquetoes which seemed to fill the air, goaded the whole party incessantly.

Some Indians they accidentally fell in with, ran away from them in terror. In
the woods they found several skeletons, which, from their mutilated state,
appeared to have been killed in battle.

'It is very singular,' said Frederick, 'that even these savages, who are very
little more advanced in civil life than an Ouran-outang, should delight so much
in war.

'War,' replied Stupeo, 'is congenial to human nature: -- what, are all the
civilized states that now exist immersed in voluptuousness and ^oth? -- All the
manly virtues are lost, when arts and sciences are cultivated. Look back to the
ancients -- the Celtae, the Danes, the Goths, the Scythians, and all those
hardy tribes who lived only in war, we shall there find all the heroic virtues,
the contempt of danger, the bravery of seasons, the generosity of friendship,
and the gallantry to the fair, so peculiar to the times of chivalry -- all
these are the children of a state of perpetual war.'

'I thought,' said the Doctor, 'you held gallantry in contempt, as a
pusillanimous trifling, unworthy a great mind; and that particular friendships
are an outrage against political justice.'

'So I do,' cried Stupeo? 'and whoever knew me retract what I once advanced?'

'But how do you reconcile the contradiction?'

'A philosopher can reconcile every thing. -- The new philosophy is founded
upon the broad expanded basis of universal truth; it establishes principles not
all the powers of kings and priests shall overthrow, much less a few
contradictions.'

This warm debate was interrupted by some female screams. The Doctor cocked his
rifle piece, and the whole company moved toward the place, where, in a little
retreat, they saw an Indian severely beating two women with a cane.

'This is very astonishing gallantry,' said Doctor Alogos, 'this is a warlike
people; but let us inquire what is the reason of this usage.'

Their black servant, Mungo, who understood the dialect of the five nations,
inquired the meaning of the chastisement.

'Because I choose it,' said the Indian: 'I have a great mind to shoot them
both with my arrow.'

'Well, but you have some cause for your anger,' said the Doctor, through the
medium of Mungo. -- 'To be sure I have: -- I ordered them to shoot some plovers
for my dinner, while I was painting myself with this delightful blue, and they
return to tell me they can find none.'

'I suppose,' said the Doctor, 'you are related to them?' -- 'They are my
wives.' -- 'One of them is very young.' -- 'She is my daughter.' See Byron's
Narrative, Cook's Voyages. Loss of the Grosvenor. etc.
-- 'What, do you use your daughter as a wife?' -- To be sure I do -- have not
I the most right to my own? Does not Nature and the great Manetaw of the lakes
tell us to do so?'

'We must acknowledge,' said the Doctor, 'this is very strange; -- the women
appear universally to be slaves to the men; but, alas! what a mere brute is
man, when some greater law than his own will does not curb his passions. If
this be liberty, bind me forever to a galley oar.'

'I find nothing strange in all this,' said Stupeo. 'These men are ignorant of
the sublime doctrines of philosophy -- they do things without seeing their
fitness, and therefore may err a little in promoting universal good; for
instance, what is there unnatural in this revolution of kindred; is it not a
common practice with animals?'

'What horrid principles,' said Alogos: 'how would it be possible to rear
brothers and sisters to maturity?'

'That is none of my business,' replied Stupeo; 'I do not concern myself with
trifles.'

Doctor Alogos felt the truth of this reply; and having witnessed the brilliant
virtues of a warlike nation in the savage state, he concluded that the whole
human species was under some dreadful ^urse, for insanity seemed to influence
all their actions.

The following day they crossed a large savanna, where they could not procure
the smallest sustenance, and in the evening tired and exhausted, they arrived
at a little settlement of Indians.

'Now,' cried Frederick; in rapture, 'we shall behold genuine hospitality; we
shall see pure nature, unsophisticated by the vices of society?

They requested of an Indian, in an humble tone, some hoe-cake, but received
for answer, that they had scarcely sufficient for themselves, and a demand of
some of their arms.

This was very unexpected to these philosophers, who, notwithstanding their
knowledge of human nature, often made egregious mistakes, and finding pity and
hospitality alike unknown, they bargained for a supply of provisions, in
exchange for a brace of pistols and some shot.

'These men,' said Stupeo, 'must have been contaminated by trading with
Europeans, at least they possess the virtues of sacred friendship; with them
the security of oaths is unnecessary.'

'Sacred friendship!' said Doctor Alogos; 'you are a profound philosopher --
you can acknowledge what you stand in need of: -- you deny and affirm just as
it suits your then convenience.'

'And what is the use of words,' returned the other, 'if we are not to turn
them to our own advantage?'

Having with difficulty procured leave to repose in one of the wigwams, they
made many inquiries into the situation of the country, but received no
satisfactory answer, and from the tone of their dialect, they appeared to be a
tribe beyond any that had immediate connection with Europeans. They lay down
upon some long grass; their weariness caused them to sleep particularly sound,
and they were not a little amazed to find in the morning most of their clothes
stolen, with two of their fowling pieces.

'So much for savage honesty and justice,' said Alogos: 'they are a parcel of
rascally thieves, and where is their sacred hospitality in leaving us here to
perish in a wild, without arms or clothes; for we have saved nothing but what
we kept on our backs, or concealed beneath the grass at the request of Mungo.'

'In the first place,' said Stupeo, 'we have no right to complain, they have
not taken our lives, which, from our imprudence, was in their power; and in the
second, we mistake terms. In society, I grant this would be called a robbery,
but, amongst the children of nature, it is only taking from another what they
want to use themselves; they have not our ideas of particular property.'

'It seems to me however,' said Frederick, 'that they were conscious of
injustice, or they would not all have departed in this sneaking way. I begin to
think the savage state of man is not conducted on philosophical principles.'

'That is what I have been saying all the time,' cried Stupeo. 'Listen while I
explain to you the progress of human nature, from gross darkness to
superstition; from superstition to the great light of truth; and from thence to
philosophical ignorance, which is the genuine state of real felicity.'

'You might as well talk of the light darkness of the full noon of night,'
cried the Doctor in a rage. 'I will demonstrate it,' cried Stupeo. -- 'You
contradict yourself,' said Frederick; 'I will prove that philosophy --

'You may prove the devil,' said Stupeo, 'if you will, but ^u shall not
overturn my arrangement, which is founded on the broad basis of truth and
universal man.'

'What, will you have eatee masses?' said Mungo: -- and the three great
philosophers arose to provide themselves breakfast from a neighboring brook,
where they gathered some herbs.

CHAPTER XVI. The Vagabonds arrive at a perfect Republic on the principles of
equality and political justice.
OUR troop of philosophical vagabonds set out, they knew not whither, and had
not gone far before they found, exposed beneath a tree, an Indian child, puny,
weak, and almost expiring.

'Behold,' cried Alogos, 'the humanity of savages! this, I suppose, is parental
care. This poor wretch is so ill-formed, that it will take too much trouble to
rear; and savages have too many wants to supply, and are too ignorant of physic
to encumber themselves with a sickly infant.'

'It is a glorious practice,' exclaimed Stupeo; 'and shows them to be, in fact,
more humane than ourselves. Of what value is life with an unhealthy or deformed
person? We are, in such a case, a burden to ourselves and to others.'

'But how many great heroes and philosophers have had very little persons,'
said Doctor Alogos. 'I do not apprehend the human mind to be in admeasurement
to the prowess of the body -- so far from it, that men of brilliant genius,
have most freq^ently been of weak constitutions; the hardy and robust being too
full of animal spirits to be contented with speculations, and why may we not
find, in this very custom, the reason that Indians remain in a stationary
state, as they deprive themselves of these persons of intellect.

'It explains to me,' said Frederick, 'what I had attributed to their manner of
life and want of luxuries. It is easy to have none but people of strength and
vigor, if all that are otherwise be destroyed in infancy.'

'Experience,' replied Alogos, with a deep sigh, 'is the best school, but the
mischief is, that those who are yet well, will not take warning by example,
till they suffer themselves.'

For forty days they continued to wander, more than once encountering a few
straggling Indians, who attempted to convince them, that in a state of nature,
force was the only law, and passion the only standard of right. They came at
length to a great chain of mountains, extremely barren, and placed in such
confusion, that they appeared scattered by the hand of tempest.

They had continued their journey, merely from the restless spirit of rambling,
and the dread they felt of returning to their delightful farm of Clarens. --
They now debated whether they should climb the summit, or take some other
route; but the expectation of beholding an entire new country, invited them to
labor at the steep. They were by this time so accustomed to hardship, that a
trifle could not intimidate them, and in three days they gained the elevation
of the mountains.

They gazed upon the prospect beneath them, which was much superior to their
expectation. A fine level country, interspersed with gentle swellings, and
intersected with limpid streams, watering extensive groves, presented itself.
Amongst the groves appeared high spires and lofty domes, evidently the
workmanship of ingenious artists.

The philosophers were enraptured, and wearied themselves in conjectures of
what region they could be advanced to. They waited impatiently for the morning,
when they began to unravel the mazes which wound down from the mountains, and
it was the ensuing day before they reached the base.

They then refreshed themselves with some fine fruit, which seemed to grow
neglected, and proceeded forward toward the great piles of buildings which
they had seen from far. They overtook a man who was slowly walking, with his
eyes bent upon the ground, as if in deep study, and totally naked. Our
philosophers were therefore not put out of countenance by their own ragged
appearance.

Doctor Alogos accosted him in various languages, but without being understood,
when the man inquired in Hebrew what they were, and how they came into that
country. -- 'Why do you walk naked?' said the Doctor.

'Because we have nobody to make clothes.' -- 'How do you employ yourselves?'
-- 'I am studying the public good.'

'Studying the public good!' repeated the Doctor: 'you are then a legislator of
the country?' -- 'No, I am a private individual; but it is the place of every
man to study to promote the public good.'

Having passed this politician, who seemed unwilling to speak much, our
vagabonds disputed with themselves, on the nature of the country, which they
thought very strange, especially as they met several persons employed studying
the public good. A man striking a tree sometimes with his fist, and then with
his head, induced the Doctor to inquire the meaning of so singular an action.
'What are you doing?' said the Doctor. 'I am endeavoring to drive this idea
out of my path.' 'That is not an idea,' said the Doctor, 'that is a reality.'
-- 'All things are ideas,' replied the man: 'every thing which appears to
exist, is merely an idea; we cannot prove that there is reality, body,
substance, extension, or any such quality.'

'Very good,' said the Doctor: 'I fancy before you have beat that idea, in form
of a tree, out of your way, you will have an idea of a fractured skull. It is
astonishing how ridiculous and even irrational the new doctrines appear, when
taken from the page of metaphysics, and contrasted with practice.
'

As they advanced along the high road, the hedges of which were fallen into
decay, they overtook a troop of people, who were moving a tree by means of a
machine; the greater part stood idle, while five or six furthered the work.
Doctor Alogos inquired of the nearest what was the name of the country. The man
paused for some time, at length replied, 'I do not think it for the public good
to answer you -- I will reflect upon it.' While he stood reflecting, he was
called by his comrades; the first gang or laborers retiring for another to
take their places.

The travelers proceeded onwards toward the great city. They perceived some
builders repairing an house, which, from its singular construction, engaged
their attention. While they stood admiring, all the laborers gave over work. A
man, who was half way up a ladder, fixed his burden on an hook, which seemed
there on purpose. Some men winding up a crane, fixed the pulley upon a catch,
and left the beam hanging in the air. The whole party sauntered away different
ways, and a new set advancing, began to labor. The travelers reflected on
this incident, remaining stationary for some time. In half an hour this new set
of builders retired like the former, and another troop advanced.

'This is a curious mode of building,' said the Doctor. 'It seems an equal
division of labor,' said Stupeo; 'I dare say we are arrived at last in a
country of philosophers.'

'But at this rate an house will not be finished in ten years: -- the public
good does not seem much promoted by this means.'

They proceeded on, and saw on one side of the road a smith's shop. They paused
to see if labor was here equally divided. Some iron in the fire was heated to
a proper heat, taken out and laid upon the anvil, when the man who was working
left it there and marched away. Another took his place, but the welding heat
was lost, and the iron was returned again to the fire.

A man drew near them in deep thought, and the Doctor ventured to inquire the
subject of his reflection. 'I am debating,' replied he, 'whether it will be
most to the public good, that I should help half an hour at getting in the
harvest, or labor half an hour at building the new granary; I have spent all
the morning in considering, and cannot determine.'

'Then it is necessary to do one?' -- 'Yes, it has been proved in a voluminous
book of political justice: that, in the old system of things, the labor which
was performed by a certain number of the lower people, could be done in half an
hour's labor for each individual per diem Godwin's Political Justice, 8 vo.
edition, chap. VI. also Enquirer* page 163.
. But I do not know how it is, since we are all equal, and all laborers, and
all studying the public good, our country is going rapidly to decay. An house
that used to be built in three months, is not now done in as many years; and as
to works of genius, it was found utterly impossible for different sets of
workmen to paint a picture, write a book, or finish a device.'

'At least,' observed the Doctor, 'you might provide yourselves clothes.'

'We do manufacture some coarse canvass, but it is a matter of prodigious
difficulty, for no man will work more than half an hour; and the hands wanted
from the sowing of the seed, till it is finished in the web and fashioned to
the body, is astonishing, for it is strange how stupid the people grow since
one man knows every thing.'

'That is an excellent remark,' said the Doctor; 'more good is produced in
society, by the diversity of genius, than if each individual were endowed with
a small but equal proportion.'

A stately personage, with a small piece of coarse canvass round his waist,
advanced, and seeing the travelers, courteously inquired whence they came, and
whither they were going.

'We have a curiosity,' said the Doctor, 'to visit that great city which rises
before us -- we are strangers, and not a little surprised at the customs of
your country.'

'You see then,' said the stranger, whose name was Parecho, '^e utmost limits
of human perfection: you see a people who had arrived at the height in various
arts and sciences, so much so, that scarcely a peasant who labored in the
field, but could read the divine books of our ancestors; we were surrounded
with mountains, which prevented the invasions of an hostile foe, but still we
were not happy. -- It was thought that the rich lived in voluptuous idleness on
the labors of the poor, and that we should never be happy till the most
perfect equality was established.

'It would be endless to enumerate the devices of a set of madmen and knaves,
who stunned the peoples' ears perpetually with systems so impracticable, that
mankind must have been re-modelled to suit them; and indeed several treatises
were written, and several experiments tried to change the very constitution of
the human nature. It was proved that no man could die if fear and prejudice had
not prepared his mind for death; and consequently it followed, that to divest
our minds of this prejudice was to become immortal.

'It was proved clearly, by some systemisers, that the people ought, without
exemption, to have a right of voting and sending delegates to our Council of
the Elders, and that new representatives should be chosen every year. Not to
say any thing of the riots, debauchery, and excess, which disgraced the whole
nation at those periods, it was soon found that scarce any man of real worth
and learning was returned to the Council. Those who were most extravagant, and
could tickle the rude humors of a mob, were chosen representatives. -- The
lower orders likewise took pleasure in sending some of their own class, and
persons of the meanest description were elected in a drunken frolic. These
representatives would, however, have been ciphers, if any proportion had been
preserved, and would very ably have represented their constituents: -- but the
great mischief arose from the middle class of society, who in point of numbers
were nearly equal, and in point of influence more than equal; for, if a man had
any domestics or journeymen, these were necessitated to vote with their master,
and then masters were universally influenced by the powers of oratory. Any man
who could rant and declaim was certain of their support, and our great Council
became like the forum of the ancients, where a demagogue could work the people
into passion, and lead them to any preposterous scheme he fancied.

'The influence of the crown was soon overturned: -- the people were deluded
with the ostensible prospect of liberty, which none of them could describe: and
their leaders throwing off the mask, a (...) ensued, in which near a million of
people perished. The royal family was destroyed; the ^y nearly annihilated, for
the nobles adhered to the crown, from which their honors were derived; and the
rich were compelled to divide their property, or were proscribed, and the most
sho^king excesses took place; during which, all men of any property were in
danger of destruction. For the information of the reader, I will transcribe a
picture of the domiciliary visits at Paris, from Mr. Pel^r's Der^ier, Tableaux
de Paris, printed in London. 'At ten o'clock at night groups of soldiers placed
at the angles of all the streets, arrested whoever was yet found s^ying about.
Two hours had not yet been sufficient for those who sought a place of secrecy
and surely against the formidable inquisition. The husband ^led from his wife,
and the father from his children* whom he pressed to his bosom, thinking it was
for the last time Every one thinks himself accused: every one fears that
amongst their visitors will be found an enemy or a spy, or a servant who will
discover his place of refuge. One flies to the most distant quarter of the
city, here one is received, there one is repulsed, and the fatal moment which
approaches, doubles the inquietude and anxiety. Decency is in a degree violated
by friendship: -- here the brother shares the bed of his sister, and there
chastity and virtue implores an asylum from vice; and many whose lives had been
without a stain, seek security under the curtains of prostitution. -- Every
where persons and property are concealed, every where the interrupted sounds of
the muffled hammer are heard striking with a slow and fearful stroke.'
Equality in every sense of the word was to be established, and all laws,
sacred and civil, were abrogated. All things valuable and curious lost their
worth, because there was no longer a market. If a man worked, or if he remained
idle, food and raiment was all he had to expect; and genius in one hour seemed
blasted from the land.

'No man would work for his neighbor, because the reward destroyed the just
balance of equality. -- It was found that no work could be done without having
some subordinate class, like the Helots, who did the drudgery of the Spartans.
This in our country not being practicable, and the women having declared
themselves no longer dependents on the men, but equal in every point, it was
resolved to subject them by force to the labor necessary for providing food,
raiment, and shelter for the community, while the men should be employed
studying the public good.

'The female sex soon drooped under this usage, and entreated to be reinstated
in the ancient slavery, for they found the rough employments not only spoil
their features, and render them objects of indifference, but they were
incapable of building houses, and other laborious exertions. The whole labor
of the nation was now at a stand, till a prodigious great philosopher observed,
that were all men necessitated to work, the labor would scarcely be felt by
any.

'It was computed, that under the old regimen, ^e twentieth of the people had
been employed in agriculture. If then this were divided, it would amount to
half an hour a day: no one would shrink from this -- nothing could be fairer --
but, how was this to be enforced? For it had been proved by this same great
man, in a very elaborate and verhose book of political justice, that no people
could represent or be represented; What will the advocates for a representative
government say to this doctrine of Mr. Godwin?
that no man could give his vote away by delegation, and the people believed
him.'

'I have no doubt of it,' said Doctor Alogos. -- 'My companions are very great
philosophers, and made me believe wonderful impracticabilities.'

'Well,' continued Parecho, 'anarchy and massacre would have been the
consequence, if a few men had not seized themselves the helm of business, and
declared themselves censors general. This was by no means difficult, for they
had only to talk more about the public good, and profess principles more
hyperbolical than the philosophers, to lead the people any way.'

'It might naturally have been supposed, that genius would have roused itself
from the torpor of an equality with dullness; but there remained no stimulant,
no man being allowed to enjoy greater conveniences or luxuries than another,
and therefore labors of ingenuity lost their reward. Every species of trade
was crushed at once, because it is the nature of trade to a^ass, and the nature
of equality to destroy.'

'Our metropolis, to which we are advancing, is daily sinking into decay.
Nothing new is projected -- all our arts are falling into oblivion, as children
are not allowed to employ their atention on any one thing in particular, but to
be provided at five-and-twenty, well regulated, active, and prepared to learn
Godwin's Enquirer, page 5.
; thus while they pretend to learn every thing, they learn nothing, for the
human mind is of narrow extent, and the next generation will be within a shade
of actual savagism.

During this discourse, they had reached the precincts of a large and venerable
city, but evidently under a rapid decay. The most disgusting filth covered the
streets, emitting a shocking and mephitic vapor. The people were all naked,
marked with extreme dejection, and half the houses were shut up. The reader is
referred to Dr. Me^ ^g^s for Paris, translated into French by Dum^urier, (...)
^e will find a true but wretched description of a counts ^ouring under the
practice of the new philosophy.


'What is the reason of this,' said the Doctor; 'we generally impute the
decrease of population to the pernicious effects of sedentary and mechanical
employ.'

'It is disease,' replied Pa^echo: 'our physicians have forgot their skill, and
no new students can be reared from the want of ostensible reward, and some
distinction to talent.'

'But common humanity, one would suppose, should stimulate them to promote the
public good,' said the Doctor.

'Very likely,' answered Parecho,' 'but common humanity will not teach men
still, there must be a laborious exertion of mind, and that cannot be the case
when we have so many other demands, and the man of genius is lost in the
promiscuous crowd. We were told indeed that genius was to be the only claim to
distinction; but it was soon found, that where all was equal, there could be no
distinction, and genius had no means of expanding.'

'I begin to think,' said the Doctor, 'that at least there must be two orders
in society, those who project, and those who execute; for no man will project,
when he must execute himself, and where no reward is to be gained superior to
food and raiment.'

'But if you allow rewards,' said Parecho, 'equality is sapped to the
foundation; you introduce luxury, and property rises to its old standard.
Beside, how many fools would share it with the men of genius, without any merit
of their own.'

'Surely,' replied Alogos, 'have I not a right to do what I will with the
wealth I have honestly acquired? May not the chief stimulus to my actions have
been this very privilege of rendering a foolish thick-brain son my heir? -- It
strikes me that your present system cannot possibly continue -- your people
will no^ be sufficient to the task of gathering in a plentiful harvest.'

'Indolence in the extreme,' replied Parecho, 'possesses every man, so much so,
that the very cares of connubial affection are become burdensome, and I have
actually heard a man debate with his wife, whether half an hour was not too
much labor for the human economy.'

'My companions,' said the Doctor, 'are two very great philosophers, and not
quite so sublime in their ideas. -- Their system of equality goes to a right of
possessing any of the sex, and I dare say they will not object to the custom of
your country, in laboring half an hour for the public good.'

By this time they arrived in a great square, it was about noon, and our
travelers began to be hungry at sight of some large piles of loaves, cakes,
and fruits. -- 'We do not eat in common, said Parecho, 'because we are not
obliged to be hungry at the same time, but each comes to this repository, and
takes what he wants.'

'Some may eat double to others,' observed the Doctor; 'how do you manage that?'

'At first there were many debates, but it being urged that the labor of all
being equal, those who eat little could not be injured, as they could do
nothing with their superfluous earnings.'

'It is very singular,' said Stupeo, (the Doctor interpreting) 'that such an
admirable institution should have such a strange effect. Is your government
patriarchial, monarchical, tyrannical, aristocratical, oligarchial, or
republican?'

'It is republican,' replied Parecho. -- 'Then I will maintain,' said Stupeo,
'that it is the best possible form; every thing is for and by the people
themselves, and they are not taxed to provide for others.'

'Taxes,' replied Parecho, 'if within moderation, and not sent out of the
country, are like the returning moisture of the dews.' Titles, wealth, and
honors, are incentives to exertion, like prizes amongst schoolboys; -- and,
to speak a truth, the mass of mankind are only grown-up children.'

'And why?' cried Stupeo, in triumph; 'because they are held in profound
ignorance.'

'I will maintain,' said Frederick, 'that men are more happy ignorant than half
learned; they will then follow the pursuits of real life, and are satisfied
with the comforts within their reach. I am almost tired of speculation.'

'It is true,' said Parecho, with a languid smile, 'that your greatest
sticklers for freedom, if they see their folly, become as great champions for
slavery, always in extremes. Under our former government, which was a limited
monarchy, we had every gradation in society. It was observed, that the very
rich, and the very poor ranks rarely produced great men. It was from the
various shades of middle life these arose, and to judge of our real liberty, I
will observe to you the general routine of property. A man of talents, in
humble life, generally raised himself to independence; his son continuing his
track, or pursuing his maxims, became rich; his grandson claimed titles and
honors, and blazed in the zenith of power; but his great-grand-son generally
squandered the estates, and the family again sunk, to rise after two or three
generations.'

'That is exactly as it is in Great Britain,' said Doctor Alogos.

'But truth,' cried Stupeo. 'is omnipotent. It is self-demonstrated that that
government which is instituted by and for the people, is for the benefit of the
people, and equality I know many of the new school will say that I misrepresent
the meaning of equality, that they do not mean equality of property, but
equality of rights; the truth is, they mean both, though the fairest pretense
is held out. Are not titles and distinctions property? But that is not where
they would stop, as every man of common intelligence knows.
is as necessary to genuine liberty as air is to life.'

'But here,' said the Doctor, 'is an example.' -- 'Examples have nothing to do
with rational principles and metaphysical arguments.'

'Do the people always prefer their own good?' inquired Parecho. 'Do they not
cut each others throats today, for what they despise tomorrow? Are they ever
constant to one point? Is it possible then that such a mass of contradiction
should govern itself? Look at this wretched half-peopled city, abandoned to
idleness and vice, for it is necessary the human mind should be employed, and
when it is not in good, it is in evil. It is only indolence prevents this
people cutting each others throats; as it is, there scarcely passes a day
without some violent atrocity, and two or three suicides.'

'But is there no means to stimulate them to some great action?' said the
Doctor; 'and again introducing aristocracy, for to me aristocracy appears the
universal government; for, most certainly the select possessors of the greatest
power and connection, govern the monarch by their strength and advice, or the
people by their influence and intrigues.'

'A government,' replied Parecho, 'to be invulnerable against the attacks of
time, and for the benefit of every individual, must be like a pyramid, rising
from a broad base to a point. The greatest portion of mankind will of necessity
he mean: these are the base, and every advance higher is to the benefit of the
class or structure, till we rise to a solitary point, which finishes the work.
We may indeed make other forms of structure, but no one without a base: if it
is all base, all equality, there can be no building, and of all buildings, the
pyramidical is found to resist longest the destruction of the elements. Had
Nature designed men to be equal, (in exception to all other productions,) she
would have endowed them with equal stature, prowess, and intellect.'

Turning the corner of the street, they saw a man standing on a tub, declaiming
to a concourse of naked people. -- 'This,' said Parecho, 'is one of our
philosophers -- we will hear him a moment.'

'Citizens!' said the rhetorician, 'let us never forget the glorious day of our
emancipation from slavery, when a new era, a new epoch, ever to be celebrated
in the annals of man, began; when a great people set aside at once every
species of government, allotted each individual his share in the terrestrial
globe, and set their feet upon the necks of trade and commerce. These two
monsters are happily strangled, and exulting men heard their expiring groans.
Now, citizens, no man labors for others, it is all for himself, and he may
enjoy the fruits of it beneath his own vine, and under his own fig tree. The
sun of science has arisen, and darkness flies before her to the borders of the
universe. Where shall we stop? Who shall set bounds to our pursuits? Yes, you
will wonder at the discoveries of intellect. This earth upon which we stand, is
proved to be no bigger in reality than an apricot, so wonderful are the
deceptions of our senses. What is matter composed of but particles ad
infinitum* And these are united by attraction, so that attraction is, in fact,
the only cause of bulk or extension. But, have we not magnifying glasses, which
make an insect appear as big as a cart-horse? And what are our eyes but
magnifying-glasses, which so deceive us, that what we take for men six feet,
and forests rising to ^he clouds, are nothing more than imperceptible animals
upon a peach, to whom the down appears in their eyes, large trees? Who after
this will give credit to their senses? Who will not doubt every thing? --
Citizens, I have an amazing improvement to offer to your reflection -- it
requires your assistance, as the artist will not be able to complete it in less
than a thousand days, with six changes of twenty hands per day, which will only
be one hundred and twenty, a number that will do little more than plant an acre
of garlic. This grand invention is a plough, which will work by itself, ploughs
three acres of ground in ten minutes, reaps it at the same time, and threshes
it out into bi^s. Thus, citizens, we see the effects of the human mind when
untrammelled by tyrants, and thus shall mind overcome matter, insomuch, that I
will venture to pronounce a solemn fact, that we shall shortly be able to make
automatons, to do every act of labor the human species are now necessitated to
perform.'

'Is it possible,' said the Doctor, 'the orator believes himself?'

'The people must be fools to believe him,' said Frederick: 'he will persuade
them next that he will thresh the corn before it grows.'

'And I should not wonder if they gave him credit,' answered Parecho. 'This man
was an apothecary before he commenced orator, but his eloquence gaining him
applause, he left the rattle of the pestle, for the clatter of his own tongue,
and he is now so great a favorite, that any thing he utters is received with
applause. Have you no men in your country, who are heard with delight while
they speak nonsense?'

'Yes,' replied the Doctor mournfully, 'we have too many: I fear our country
will one day be like yours, or even worse, for my countrymen* are of so
restless a disposition, that, were they equal today, like your citizens,
tomorrow they would be plunged in anarchy.'

'I hope,' said Parecho, 'they will not quit the reality of felicity with some
natural evils, for the shade with every possible ill.'

CHAPTER XVII. Moral virtues, theory and practice -- Stupeo is convinced there
are other existences besides his own ideas, by a tremendous Phenomenon in
nature.
OUR philosophers were invited to the house of their guide, which had once heen
extremely magnificent, and yet bore the vestiges of fading grandeur; it
contained some rich furniture, which time had not devoured, for as to any thing
new, it was impossible to be procured.

'What you see here,' said Parecho, 'is only the fragments of what I once
possessed -- my whole property is divided, and of this house I could only claim
two rooms, a chimney-sweeper, and several other equally important personages
possessing the others; but since the mortality in the city, I am allowed my
whole house -- I had a library of ancient Syriac and Egyptian manuscripts
containing an account of the most early ages, together with thirteen thousand
modern productions. But these enlighteners of the human race, during their
struggle for liberty, and the promotion of general knowledge, being in want of
cases for their fire-powder and ball, condemned all the libraries to that
purpose.' At Narbonne the books have been sent to the arsenal; and at Fontaine
le Dijon, the library of the Fuillants has been thrown aside as waste, in the
hall of old papers. Horace and Virgil have been condemned not only for
acknowledging tyrants, but for having been often printed for the use of
tyrants, and by the permission of tyrants. The meridian circles made by
Butterfield, for the globes of Coronelli, and the medals which are at the
national library, were calculated to amount to half a little cannon. At Lions,
Cassenet threw into the crucible 800 antique medals of gold. Notes at the end
of Playfair's History, where the new philosopher will find a catalogue of
glorious exploits of a similar nature.


'How is it possible,' said the Doctor, 'you should be acquainted with
gunpowder, which is a very modern invention, and only a few years introduced
into America.'

Parecho smiled. -- 'My friend,' said he, 'as our great ancestor said, there is
nothing new under the sun. -- This art we learnt from a people of India, called
Oxydracae: Alexander the Great feared to march against this people, and
pretended it was on account of religion, but had he passed the Hyphasis, he
might doubtless have made himself master of the coun^ ^ll round the; but their
cities he could never (...) taken, though (...) had led a thousand as brave
(...) o^ the (...) such as Ajax to the assault. (...) they came not in^o the
field to fight those who are ^^ked there: ^^t these holy men, beloved by the
gods, overthrew their enemies with tempests, thunderbolts, and lightening from
the walls See this extraordinary passage in the life of Appollonius Tyananus,
by Phylostratus, Lib. ii. Cap. 14.
.

'It is very singular, indeed,' replied the Doctor, 'but by no means
surprising: but pray of what race of people are you, since you seem acquainted
with the old world?'

'We are part of the tribes of Abraham,' said Parecho; 'we crossed the great
deserts of Tartary and China, traveling those regions of desolation and
eternal ice which unite the Continents, and in about one hundred years
wandering, discovered this valley, where we were happy as it is possible for
the transient and perishable existence of man to be.'

'Have you no religion?' inquired the Doctor.

'To-morrow,' answered their host, 'you shall visit our temple, it is sabbath.'

The philosophers retired to their room, where some clean straw was laid upon
the floor, the beds having been sequestered for the public purposes.

'It must be owned,' said Frederick, 'these people are a whimsical set, and do
not seem much better for their liberty.'

'This is a philosophical republic,' said Alogos; 'the ancient republics were
fighting republics; -- the Americans and the Hollanders are trading republics,
but men seemed neither better satisfied, better governed, or better fed in any
of them; nor in fact, do they enjoy so many benefits as in a limited monarchy.'

'But I insist upon it,' said Stupeo, 'monarchy is unnatural. It is one tyrant
usurping the privileges of the whole people, contrary to the sacred majesty of
the body politic.'

'But how came that body politic into being?' said the Doctor. 'The roaming
families of men,' replied the great politician, 'found the need of mutual
assistance and defense, and they united into nations.'

'No*' replied the Doctor* 'you talk absurd* it is contrary to the nature of
man -- man is a rapacious animal, and is perpetually (if not curbed by laws and
subordination) seeking objects of rapine and violence. Let us look back to the
origin of any people, to the remote annals of heroic ages, and we shall find an
herd of robbers gathering together for the sake of plunder. The boldest becomes
their leader and chief; the weak tribes submit and join them, till their power
is irresistible, and they found extensive empires. Conquest is at first the
only compact, and the people, little better than an herd of murderers, directed
by a chief. The ambition of this chief to excel in splendor, introduces
luxury, and softens the ferocious habits of his followers; the arts of peace
follow a court. The fermentation subsides, or is let off by continual wars,
while the peaceable remain at home; and this is the history of man in reality.
To talk of a people assembling from the woods, and forming general laws and
social compacts is as absurd as it is false. In all established governments,
the origin was the same, whether they were republican or monarchical; though,
for a thousand reasons, a limited monarchy seems to me the best calculated for
man, as d^ffusing the most general good, and in fact, the greatest proportion
of real freedom.'

'I am still convinced,' cried Stupeo, 'that a state of nature is the more
eligible. It signifies nothing that the human species may be multiplied in
society. The happiness, and not the numbers of mankind is to be considered; and
the greatest possible good would be, to let one family reside upon a thousand
acres, in the most perfect freedom and happiness, rather than have a family
upon every acre, with the present consequences of society.'

'You talk strange contradictions,' said the Doctor. 'You are never consistent
in your opinions: do you not know, that in society we must barter some
privileges for a portion of social happiness.'

'But truth, eternal truth,' cried Stupeo, 'is -- '

'What we have heard an hundred times,' said Frederick, 'in as many different
definitions; for my part I am disgusted with every thing.' These philosophers
were here interrupted by the snoring of Mungo, who had quietly laid down upon
the straw, untroubled with the nature of truth or metaphysical disquisitions;
and the three great men concluded, that ignorance was in some measure necessary
to happiness. The next morning, Parecho attended his guests to a large hall,
where they found a great number of people sitting upon benches: in the midd of
the hall was a square platform, railed round similar to a small stage. There
was no ornament to fix the eye, nor any music to catch the ear, a profound
silence remained.'

'Why,' said Alogos to Parecho, 'is the place painted black. Have you no
priests -- no music?'

'There was once very fine paintings,' said Parecho, 'representing the miracles
in Egppt and the Wilderness, but it was feared by the philosophers that these
symbols would recall to mind the God of their fathers, which they wished to
expunge from the human soul. -- We used to have fine music; but the musicians
could not be paid, and the whole art sell rapidily to decay, for who would or
could attend to the acquirement of skill, when all their reward was a bare
existence. As to the old priests they were deemed to have enslaved the people,
by darkening their minds with superstition, and indulging themselves in
licentiousness; so that they were most of them destroyed, and the rest mingled
with the people.'

A person now moved from the crowd, and mounting the stage, made an oration for
half an hour upon morality, political justice, and the great book of Nature,
where he asserted every thing was to be learnt that was worth knowing: he
concluded with declaring against the power of revealed religion, to check the
crimes of men, asserting, that morality was every thing, and the light of
nature the real standard of virtue.

The people then waited some time; and no one else coming forward, they
dispersed to walk in the fields, the day being an holiday.

Our philosophers likewise quitted the city, following at a distance the
orator, who had harangued about morality. They entered a grove of trees where
they sat down, conversing on politics. A young woman was walking in the grove,
to whom the moralist advanced, and seemed to press her to something she
objected. He was proceeding to violence, when a young man sprung upon him; they
both fell to the ground, but the orator being the strongest, rose, and with a
long knife stabbed the youth to the heart, and ran away.

'Horrid!' cried Doctor Alogos, 'is there no means of punishing the monster?'

'This man,' said Parecho, indignantly, 'is a reformer of the people, and such
the consequence of his doctrine. If you destroy in the minds of men the belief
of an avenging and infinite Power, you give loose to every passion in the
corrupted heart of man. It is not possible to bring this wretch to justice,
because no individual has the power of life and death, unless it is done in a
private manner, by way of retaliation; -- besides, it is contrary to political
justice, that any past offense should be punished with coercion.

'Very true,' said Stupeo, 'that I taught the people of England. But he might
be fined -- no man, or body of men, can have a right to punish with death.'

'But how will you fine a man who has no property, and where all are equal --
and what could be done with the fine? You would soon destroy equality.'

'But you might imprison him,' said Frederick, 'to prevent his doing the same
again.'

'Impossible,' replied Parecho. -- 'My dear Sir, hear the opinions of our great
philosophers. The body is perpetually changing -- the soul of man becomes every
moment a different being; so that were we to put this man in prison, tomorrow
we should be confining a totally different being wholly innocent of the crime.'

'Very good,' replied Doctor Alogos, 'the fashionable Mr. Hume has made most of
the young men converts to these very doctrines in my country. So that,
notwithstanding I can recollect a friend or a wife for twenty years back, they
are not the same persons. I and they are changed, transformed, and renewed,
nobody knows how often; and Mr. Hume, who finished the essays, was not the Mr.
Hume who wrote the treatise on Human Nature. So Alexander the Great, who was
the son of Philip of Macedon, was not the Alexander the Great who subdued
Greece by his flatteries, nor him who overthrew the Persians.'

'Such being the case,' said Parecho, 'it is plain* that there can be no
punishments without they are corporeal, nor any corporeal punishment without
infringing political justice: you cannot restore the injury done to society by
committing an outrage in the article of punishment.'

'Then crimes may be done with impunity,' said Doctor Alogos.

'What a delightful country,' cried Stupeo. 'I will never quit it. The human
mind is here in perfect freedom. At length, my dear Frederick, we have found
the place where our principles are practicable, where truth and philosophy
shine with beams of irradiating splendor, and the dignity of human nature is
unsophisticated in its pursuits.'

'Would that I were once more in England with my dear Laura, if the children of
nature have not murdered her,' said the Doctor, with a deep sigh.

Frederick knew not what to think: his senses frequently contradicted the
profound Stupeo, and often led him to think his tutor in the wrong; but the
philosophical disquisitions, the grand doctrines of the greatest good, and the
elegant Romance of Political Justice, inclined him again to the new philosophy.

Our vagabonds returned to the city, when they became hungry. Stupeo grumbled
very much to find only coarse bread and fruits, with clear water. 'Have you no
fermented liquors,' said he, 'no spirits?'

'No,' answered Parecho: 'spirits could not be the universal drink, independent
of the labor to procure them; they are, therefore, unallowable in a state of
equality. At first, when they were distributed according to every one's
pleasure, the streets were filled with drunkards. Nature never designed men to
drink liquid fire.'

'At least,' said Frederick, 'I should think animal food would give variety to
your table.'

'What,' replied Parecho, 'rear animals on purpose to destroy them. Nature
never tells us any such thing -- we used formerly to have excellent oxen, but
since labor has been equally divided, no body will undertake to breed them;
and the species is become almost extinct: besides, no one would take the
unpleasant office of butcher, where there was no reward.'

'Human life,' said the Doctor, 'is not worth enjoying, when we thus limit our
pursuits -- the very peasants in my country enjoy infinitely more advantages:
and what does any government signify, if in reality men are not benefitted, the
intellects expanded, and their gratifications increased?'

'It is a false taste,' said Stupeo, 'which has introduced animal food: and if
we do indulge in it, why not eat it raw? -- Nature, had she intended we should
feed upon dressed dishes, would have produced animals ready roasted and boiled.'

'And why not,' said Parecho, 'have loaves and cakes ready baked, grow upon
stalks in the field: all this is a deviation from nature, and very absurd in
great philosophers to follow. But seriously, what is this jargon about nature?
-- What is nature?'

'Why, nature,' answered Stupeo, 'is that which every man sees with his eyes --
it is visible at first view to all understandings -- it is the influence of
rational principles impinging upon men, actions palpable to every
comprehension: -- It is derived from the single letter N. -- Take the Latin
words nascor, natus, natura, and the French ne for born, analyze them, and you
will find that Ascor being but a frequentive, Atus a common idiomatic
expression, Atura the same, e the same, reduces all these words to the single
letter N, which offers no sense: restore the eliptic syllable ge, cut off by
the usual tendency of languages to contraction, or to euphony, you have
geN-ascor, geN-atu^, geN-atura, geN-e; in which gen, the radical of generative,
of kind, of beginning, and of hundreds more, gives a clear sense, and
consequently are derived from (...) Etymological Dictionary.
thus nature signifies beginning, or begetting, so that to act according to
nature, is to begin, to beget, to produce, which is according to the light of
reason and nature.'

'But what is the light of nature?' cried Doctor Alogos* -- 'We know the
genuine meaning of the word, bat you apply to nature a personality; you make a
mere action an active being; such are the consequences of applying terms, when
the real meaning of the word is not understood; and thus we go to deny a
Creator, and place in his stead not a power, not a being, but an absolute
action, called a beginning or a begetting. Thus to express ourselves clearly,
we should say, The act of beginning teaches us to prefer good for evil. The act
of beginning has produced all things. Thus we should avoid the absurdity of
confounding an act with the person of the actor, for even a new philosopher
would startle, if, in place of saying man can be no longer happy than while he
lives according to nature, we were to say -- man can be no longer happy than
while he lives according to the act of beginning. Let the worshippers of the
act of beginning, or nature, remember the advice of Mr. Lock, to be perfectly
acquainted with the meaning of words they begin to dispute about, and not
overthrow society with a cant jargon of equivocal expressions. But we are now
plunging into the profound and muddy abyss of metaphysics, and shall lose
ourselves in the darkness.'

'How do you marry in this country of equality?' said Frederick: 'Is it a civil
or religious ceremony?'

'It cannot well be called either, replied Parecho. 'At the first establishment
of equality, every man gave a full sway to his passions, and in one week there
was scarcely a maid above fourteen. The labor of the females, as I informed
you before, rendered them very indifferent objects to the young men, and it was
judged a deviation from equality, that one should have a pretty wife, and
another an ordinary one. It was proposed that all young people, arrived at the
age of marriage, should once a year assemble, and the nearest of stature
divided into parcels, each casting lots for his partner; -- they are then
deemed marr^ed, and if they have children, cannot be disunited; but if they
have not, they may, by mutual consent, change every year, because the number of
the people are the strength of the republic; thus we attempt to increase
population, while we smother the principles of vitality.'

'Have you any mode of punishing adultery?' inquired Stupeo.

'No; the will of the sex is free, and were it not a matter of policy, no man
would marry.'

'That is as it should be,' said Stupeo: 'if the rich of the old world knew of
this blessed spot, you would have no reason to complain of the decay of your
people.'

'No grass grows in our highways,' says Parecho: 'licentiousness and debauchery
will never increase or improve the human species; the people must have a taste
for domestic enjoyments: a hope must be excited of reward for the rearing of an
offspring, or natural affection will do very little.'

'You shall go with me to England,' said Doctor Alogos; 'you shall see there
the remains of conjugal affection, and virtues which still linger in Europe;
you shall tell the people the effects of this horrid and impracticable system
of equality.'

'Impossible,' said Parecho; 'a man who is really a patriot, will not abandon
his country when it is in danger. The hour may come when the people will awake,
and they will need some one to direct their rising hopes.'

'I will return,' cried the Doctor, 'that I may at least set my example before
them, and would to God they could see the precipice to which they are blindly
straying, and open their eyes to the private views and interests of those
misereants who are shaking the torch of sedition in their face, while they seek
only an opportunity of picking their pockets.'

Stupeo made a long oration against leaving the country, where the new
philosophy completely triumphed, protesting if they had but a little brandy, he
would prefer it to any spot on the earth; and Frederick, who was nearly ashamed
of his former opinions, consented to follow the Doctor.

Having taken leave of Parecho, they returned by the way they came, not a
little amused with those naked philosophers, who were studying the public good,
and working in ratio for the support of equality.

'It seems to me,' said the Doctor, 'that to study private good would be more
advantageous: it is impossible the public good can be established upon private
evils.'

They clambered the rugged mountains with difficulty, descending again to the
forests of America. The day was extremely sultry, not a breath of air whispered
amongst the trees, and a strong sulphurous smell exhaled around them. A thick
haze overspread the face of the heavens, through which the sun appeared one
moment purple, and the next violet.'

'Oh horrible!' cried Stupeo: 'what do I see? The phenomena of nature are
changing -- the desolation of all things is at hand.'

'What desolation?' said the Doctor, calmly; 'are you frightened at your own
ideas? or do you think this terrene habitation will dissolve? Do you believe in
the revelations and prophecy?'

'Is this a moment to talk of such things,' said Stupeo, 'when an instant may
swallow us alive into the gulf of hell? Do you not feel the ground tremble
beneath you?'

'The ground tremble!' said the Doctor; 'what have you an idea in your head of
the ground being in convulsions?'

'An idea?' cried Stupeo* 'can any man in his senses call this an idea? Look at
the dreadful appearance of the sun, and say if that is an idea: see how the
trees bend -- the earth moves like the waves of the ocean: -- O God! what will
become of us?'

At these words, Stupeo cast himself upon the ground, which was agitated by an
earthquake, and exhibited a scene tremendously grand. The mountains, over which
they had passed, split with dreadful chasms, tumbling fragments of rock broke
from their beds, and rushed into the plains, tearing all before them. The earth
undulated like a moving lake -- at the intervals of a few minutes, yawning with
a frightful rent, and closing with a dreadful concussion: a large savanna sunk
at a distance, and a body of water overwhelmed it forever.

'Oh! omnipotent Being,' cried Doctor Alogos, falling on his knees, 'protect us
from the surrounding ruin -- if such, O Preserver of mankind, be the
consequence of some trif^ing disorder in nature, what would this world be if
governed alone by chance? -- It depends upon thee forever for its existence,
and, if thy power be withdrawn, every atom will disunite, and the wind bear
them like chaff through the regions of space.'

'I acknowledge,' said Frederick, his eye gazing upon the dun face of the
heavens; 'I acknowledge there is a great and ETERNAL POWER. The phenomena of
nature must convince us, if we are not fools, but it is easy in a calm region,
where the seasons are scarcely ruffled by a storm, to doubt the existence of a
God, as men frequently doubt in their own minds, whether they shall die before
they arrive at an hundred while health floats in their veins.'

'It is not sufficient,' said Doctor Alogos, 'that we behold the wonders of
nature, these can only inspire our minds with the sublime and the terrific; we
must be taught first by revelation, the great truths of religion, and then
shall we find a confirmation in every particle of matter.'

For half an hour the shocks of the earth continued, and the profoundest
silence sealed the lips of these philosophers. Horror chilled their veins, and
they expected that the hour of final vengeance was come, when the Most High
should judge the world. By degrees the undulations became fainter; the sta^ing
rocks remained in their beds, and the philosophers found sufficient courage to
seat themselves upon fragment.

'At this moment,' said Frederick, 'a solemn awe, a strange sensation trembles
through my frame -- I feel that I am re-assured, and I do not fear this scene
of desolation: -- I would at this moment that I could believe in the
immortality of the soul; but we are told in the eighteenth century, that it is
a modern invention of Christianity.'

'Like many other falsehoods which are delivered dogmatically,' said the
Doctor; 'there are none greater than this. There is scarcely a nation or a
people under the heavens who have not believed in it, though some of their
ignorant young men have pretended to set it aside, merely because it did not
agree with the excess of their passions. Those people we call heathens, in the
Elysian fields, plainly testify their belief, which is as ancient as record can
refer to. -- Homer was no philosopher of the eighteenth century -- but we might
go higher than Homer, we might travel to the ages immediately succeeding the
deluge when the Noahchidae settled in the Median mountains, when the Cushites
hewed out the mountains of Thebes into caverns, which exist to this day, an
everlasting memorial of that great devastation. In these caverns, safe, as they
hoped, from another flood, and before they dared venture into the plains (where
they built the city of Thebes) they invented the mysteries of hieroglyphics to
convey the sacred doctrines of their religion, which, doubtless they received
by traditions prior to the deluge Bruce's Travels.
. In these hieroglyphics the Thebaic beetle had principal part, and was the
emblem of immortality for two reasons: the first, because, after the waters of
the Nile subside, and leave the mud behind, this insect is the first which
appears, and is thence emblematic of the resurrection; and the second, because
the beetle is the longest lived of any insect known, far exceeding the age of
man. From these people descended the Egyptians, the fathers of science. A
colony also spread eastward, and were the founders of the Hindoo nations,
professing the religion of Buddha or Boodh, who was the Hermes, or Mercury of
the western, and the Woden, Odin, or Gwoden of the northern world See Maurice's
very curious work of Indian Antiquities.
. It is remarkable that all the primitive mythologies agree in every grand
point, as the existence of a great Supreme, the creation, the immortality of
the soul, and future rewards and punishments. The (...) or Druids, who,
according to Pliny, took their name from (...) an oak, though inhabiting the
regions of the North, yet agree in these points of religion with the people of
the torrid zone. Were I to enter into the astonishing discussion, which, of
itself must strike the mind with amazement, we should perceive that the first
inhabitants of the earth had a pure religion, unmixed with fable, and that i^
is time which has introduced amongst them so many fictitious deities: but, to
prove to you what I have said, I will repeat to you part of a passage relative
to a future heaven, which is taken from the Icelandic, and was the tradition of
the ancient Cel^e, Danes, Scytheans, etc. from whom the nations of Europe are
descended.

Speaking of the destruction of the world: -- The fire consumes every thing,
and the flame reaches up to heaven; but presently after, a new earth springs up
from the bosom of the waves, adorned with green meadows; the fields there bring
forth, without culture; calamities are there unknown; a palace is there raised
more shining than the sun, all covered with gold: this is the place that the
just inhabit, and enjoy delights for ever more. Then the powerful, the valiant,
He who governs all things, comes forth from his lofty abodes to render divine
justice -- He pronounces decrees -- He establishes the sacred destinies which
shall endure forever. See this passage* amongst many very singular remains of
antiquity, in Mallet's Northern Antiquities.


'Such is the doctrine of those men we call heathens, whom we are told only
invented deities through fear. But let us one moment now, when the earth ceases
its concussions, ask, if the point blank assertion of the new philosophers be
true, when they tell us that the immortality of the soul cannot be traced from
the Old Testament.'

'Prove that it can,' said Stupeo; -- 'prove that, and I will believe any
thing.'

'What do you say of Saul, and the Witch of Endor?' said the Doctor. 'The very
identical spirit of Samuel was supposed to appear, which could not have been,
if they believed the soul either a bundle of transient ideas with Hume, or mere
matter. What do you say of charmers and dealers with familiar spirits? or, in
the Ecclesiastes, chap. 3. v. 21, where Solomon asks, who knows the spirit of
a man that goes upward, and the spirit of a beast that goes downward to the
earth? But even more plain than all this, we read in the twelfth chaper of
Daniel, Many of them that sleep in the dust of the earth, shall awake, some to
everlasting life, and some to shame, and everlasting contempt. -- In the 4th
chapter of Job, he says, Then a spirit passed before my face, and the hair of
my head stood up The book of Job is reckoned one of the most ancient by
canonists.
.

'But why,' said Stupeo, 'is not the Old Testament as full in this point as the
New? And why did not Moses' law declare future rewards and punishments?'

'The Old Testament,' answered the Doctor, 'contains only the civil code of the
Jews, holding up to them a deity who held sin in so much abhorrence, that its
effects were entailed to the fourth generation. The sublime doctrines of
Christianity were reserved for a greater than Moses to promulgate; though it
was evident the Jews, as well as other nations, believed the immortality of the
soul.'

'Why,' said Frederick, 'could you ever doubt, when you seem so capable of
removing the doubts of others?'

'Because,' answered Doctor Alogos, 'the human mind is charmed with novelty,
and loses solid reason in the glare of plausible hypothesis. It requires
reflection to perceive that the philosophers of the present day are supremely
ignorant, and to cover which, they pretend to deny and discredit every relic of
antiquity, by which they would plunge the world again into ignorance. What are
the dead languages, is a common cry -- they teach us nothing -- we should be
studying man; but, how pray are we to study man: -- man, who is a creature of
experience, when we destroy the experience of ages? I have actually heard a
public character, a man of the literary world maintain, that all the classics
were mere forgeries of the fifth century, and that he did not believe there
ever existed such persons as Homer, Demosthenes, etc.'

The face of the sky by degrees became serene, and the vagabonds bent their
course by the attitude of the sun. Stupeo supported his principles with more
vehemence than ever, and ridiculing his late trepidation, he asserted that it
was a mere accidental impulsion of the animal economy, arising from the action
of the air in its perturbid state, and had nothing in common with his rational
faculties, and the grand principles of truth and reason, and universal man.

Frederick revolved in silence the words of Doctor Alogos -- he shuddered at
the remembrance of his former actions, and would have openly derelicted from
his professions, had he not been ashamed of the reproaches of Stupeo, who
perpetually declaimed against that imbecility of mind, which, having once felt
the force of reason, and the grand light of truth, returned again to
superstition and ignorance.

To these taunts, Doctor Alogos steadily replied, that, to say he had changed
his opinion, was only to say, he was wiser to day than he was yesterday.

CHAPTER XVIII. Stupeo quits the world in a blazing idea -- an unexpected
meeting, and the conclusion of what is not concluded.
DURING many days these philosophers wandered in the woods, till their
ammunition was expended, and their spirits exhausted. They had no means of
making a fire, and had for some time devoured all their game raw, to the no
small prejudice of a state of nature -- for even Stupeo himself allowed, that
the idea of provisions dressed, was better than the idea of them raw. Their
bodies were worn out with fatigue and want; and they were so miserable, as to
desire death as a relief.

For three days they tasted nothing but water, and a few berries which grew
wild. Their clothes were partly worn from their backs, and the remnants were
animated with living multitudes: -- a severe fever burnt in the veins of
Frederick, and but for the steady encouragement of the Doctor, he would have
sunk by the way; -- their beards were grown to philosophical length, and take
them all in all, they appeared truly the vagabond children of nature.

In this forlorn condition, Stupeo uttered curses with volubility, arraigning
the conduct of Providence, if such there really were.

Doctor Alogos endeavored to inspire him with patience, observing, that
Providence was not to blame, as themselves had wilfully plunged into the
wilderness in search of an ignus fatuus.

When they were all nearly at the last exertion, they were overtaken by a tribe
of Indians returning from an expedition against another tribe; and as they
could make no defense, they became prisoners without a struggle. These men of
nature having fed them with a paste of pounded Indian corn, tied their hands
behind them, and, notwithstanding they were every moment at the point of
fainting, urged them forward in a rapid march -- poor Mungo fell down and
expired, with the over-exertion; but his fate did not move with false pity the
callous bosoms of these children of nature.

Stupeo was almost distracted at his condition, though he obstinately insisted
that pity was a false feeling of weakness in the human heart. Frederick now
remembered that Rousseau had said, 'That pity was a natural sentiment, which
moderates in each individual the activity of self-love, concurring to the
mutual preservation of all the species. So wonderfully do great philosophers
contradict each other in the grand affair of immutable truth.

On the following day they reached a little Indian village. On setting up the
war-whoop, a number of women and children came out to meet them, with screams
and yells, surpassing in variety and sublimity of tone, a chorus of an hundred
cats howling by moonlight.

'This is the music of a natural ear,' said the Doctor -- but Stupeo was too
much absorbed in his execrations, to reply. These great men were confined in a
little hut, and had a plentiful repast of bruised Indian wheat and water. --
'After all,' said Stupeo, 'these savages are better than men in civilized life;
this hut or prison is wholesome and clean, we are not confined in a loathsome
dungeon -- the light of nature is always pure, and the actions of simple men
cannot fail to be just. We only become monsters when we condemn each other to
eternal flames for a bugbear, or drag each other to stakes for the sake of
religion. I am more than ever a skeptic; all existence is to my eyes a farce, a
folly, an idea. Pain, pleasure, life, death, every thing is an idea, or Hume
must be wrong.'

While he thus spoke to his silent companions, an hideous howl and continued
roar of joy advanced toward them. It was night, and the Indians drew near,
dancing in rude figures, with torches of pitch-pine, blazing in the air.

'These are very singular ideas,' said the Doctor; 'if your ideas and my
perceptions are alike, we shall have a comfortable idea of roasting.'

'I maintain,' said Stupeo: -- the door of the hut at that instant was opened,
and several black children of reason dragged out the miserable philosopher, and
bore him triumphantly to a green, in the center of the village. There they
fastened him to a stake, and sticking his body full of pine-knots, set fire to
the whole, which consumed the miserable wretch with the most agonizing
tortures, while the sons of nature danced around him, mocking his cries, and
encouraging their children to dart at him little pointed arrows Note from
Playfair's History of Jacobinism, page 496 -- 'Amongst these prisoners (i. e.
200 whom the new philosophers murdered at the grand Chatelet) was a woman who
formerly sold flowers, and who in a fit of jealousy, had mutilated her lover,
one of the French guards, in a very barbarous and shameful manner. -- She had
been condemned, but obtained a respite for some time. -- The rage of the
murderers was redoubled on seeing the woman who had thus murdered one of their
companions: -- she was tied to a stake, her feet nailed to the ground, her
breasts cut off with a sabre, and then tortured with lighted torches and
pointed instruments, in a more cruel and brutal manner than it would be fit to
describe.'

The learned may infer that savages are much alike, all over the world.


.

Such was the termination of that enlightened great man, who, while he lived,
endeavored to kindle the world, and set society in a flame, but expired
himself in the midst of a blaze.

'Alas!' cried Frederick, in extreme agitation, 'What is man? A being
influenced by cruelty and rapine: -- he is worse than the savage hyena of the
desert, or the untamed tiger of the burning sands. I see with bitter
conviction, that coercion and laws are necessary to restrain the arm of
destruction and violence: in the imperfect nature of all terrene existences, no
law can be made to deter the wicked, without being a restraint, or in some
instances, a grievance to some who are innocent. -- I see that society, with
all its drawbacks, possesses the greatest portion of real happiness; and that
half our miseries we bring on ourselves, by endeavoring to raise human nature
superior to itself.'

'I am afraid,' said the Doctor, 'it will be our turn next. These wretches are
ignorant of the laws of nations; and they have not sufficient religion to teach
them the duties of man to man.'

Thus these two vagabonds, turncoats, unworthy the great name, or glorious
martyrdom of the immortal Stupeo, who perished in the heat of his own ideas,
bewailed the accident of a gentle roasting. But the Indians had no sooner
perfectly reduced the great philosopher, metaphysician, and politician, to the
idea of a few cinders, than they advanced to the cottage, and dragged out the
two prisoners to renew their pastime.

As they approached the stakes, they were buffetted on every side by severe
blows from the delicate fists of the ladies, who out of spite at the fair skin
of the dirty, lousy, Frederick, bit and pinched him with a very agreeable and
sportive air. Indeed, if one might judge by their cries, they were even more
delighted than the tender European ladies who crowd to see some poor wretches
extended on a gibbet, or run screaming to contemplate an house in flames; or,
than the fair daughters of France, who danced the Carmagnole round the
guillotine.

While they were tying their victims to the stake, and dancing round with their
blazing torches, the report of a gun struck them with consternation, and a loud
yell bespoke their despair: -- a second fire, which sent a bullet whistling
amongst them, urged them to flight, and our heroes remained exposed to whatever
might ensue -- a large fire gleamed on one side of them, by the light of which
they perceived several persons advancing, dressed in* frocks, like American
hunters.

They drew near with their rifles in their hands, and seemed to start with
astonishment when they saw two white men naked, and covered with dirt. 'Whoever
you are,' said Frederick, in a doleful voice, 'have pity upon our situation,
and release us before these monsters return.'

'Who are you?' said one of the strangers, whose hat was adorned with a feather
-- 'Surely, I am no stranger to your voice.'

'My name is Fredrick Fenton.'

'Frederick Fenton!' exclaimed the stranger; 'O! eternal Providence, what
mysteries involve us finite beings? -- Have thou brought into the wilderness of
America 'the man I had most reason to abhor, and made me the instrument of his
preservation. Me, whom he so cruelly injured in the person of my Amelia?'

'What,' cried Frederick, 'are you Vernon? Point your rifle at me, and finish
at once the days of a miscreant.'

'No,' replied Vernon; 'it is not for me to wrest vengeance to myself; but how
are you in this situation? Gratitude to your father makes me almost rejoice
that I have saved his son.'

'Gratitude,' sighed Frederick. 'Ah, Vernon! had I but felt it more early; had
I listened to the common claims of nature and of society, I might have been a
worthy member. But the new sophisticated jargon of philosophy and impracticable
liberty, had rendered me insane. I have, however, been the pupil of experience,
and have seen the ashes of Stupeo scatterred by the wind.'

'I will return to society,' said Vernon: 'it was the loss of a woman which
embittered it to me, and drove me a forlorn wanderer in these woods; where I
have fortunately found another to supply her lost, and lead me again into the
world. I fancy, Frederick, she is not unknown to you; and if I may judge right,
this is Doctor Alogos her uncle.'

'Can it be,' cried the enraptured man, 'that my dear Laura yet lives -- is it
possible she has escaped from these horrid savages?'

'She now, I hope, waits us at your plantation,' replied Vernon, 'where I left
her to search for you, in company with these my friends; though I confess with
very little expectation of finding you.'

'Thou art too good: O Providence!' cried Alogos, shedding tears, 'what is man,
that thou art mindful of him?'

'I am glad,' said Frederick: -- 'I feel at this moment more satisfaction than
I have felt for years -- surely, there is something in virtue not be described,
-- you will be happy, Vernon, with Laura -- she is formed for you, and I
rejoice that I did not succeed in debasing her purity. I am tired with
philosophy; I detest politics; and I perceive that an equality, the most exact
and perfect in respect of every moral and social obligation, springs from
inequality itself.'

'Have you heard lately from Europe?' inquired Doctor Alogos. 'Yes,' replied
Vernon: 'I have news, that in Frederick's present sentiments, will increase his
satisfaction. His mother yet lives; she recovered with much difficulty from her
wounds -- but she mourns with, her husband the deviation of their son.'

'I will fly,' cried Frederick -- 'I will cast myself at their feet, and
implore them to pardon me.'

In less than a month, they arrived again in Kentucky, where they found
population increasing with the numerous emigrations, but unhappiness and
discontent prevailed: for though the grounds which were cultivated were
productive, there was no channel for trade -- and it signifies nothing to a
farmer, that his harvest is plentiful, if he has no market to meet his
commodities.

Taxes increased, and every man was obliged to learn the military exercise, and
keep in check the predatory Indians.

Doctor Alogos remarked, that the people of America was equally dissatisfied
with the people of England; and saw clearly, that no government would be
universally approved, which was not to the exact model and interest of every
private individual.

At Philadelphia he settled his accounts, and drew his money from the bank. --
Laura gave her hand to Vernon; and Frederick could not but feel a wish, that he
had some amiable maid to unite her destiny with his -- and by mutual good
offices, smooth the rugged road of life. He felt at that moment, that the
endearing and tender smile of a modest woman has more real pleasure, than the
most wanton blandishments of promiscuous intercourse.

The wind favored their return to the land of genuine liberty, where there is
not one man so obscure as not to possess a right, nor one man so high, as not
to be subject to the laws.

Where the noble and the peasant are upon equality in the penal code, and no
man can suffer for his crimes, but with the consent of twelve of his equals, --
a right unknown to every government heretofore existing -- a right which checks
at once the arm of power, bribery, or malice.

Doctor Alogos threw himself upon the beach, while tears of pleasure gushed
from his eyes. -- 'Happy, happy shores,' exclaimed he, 'how few comparitive
evils do you know. Unvisited by savage war -- insulated from a treacherous and
rapacious foe -- untainted by pestilence, and at a distance from the climes,
where earthquakes and tornados in one moment swallow up, or sweep away the
exertions of a century. -- Thy lands are never parched with the beams of a
torrid sun, or gelid with the frosts of the polar circles: thou never fe^est
the blaze of perpetual day, or the stillness of constant twilight. Thy fields
never fail in their produce, and half the world brings the tributes of commerce
to thy shores -- though the smallest nation on earth in local territory, thy
situation and the valor of thy genuine children, renders thee impregnable. Nor
is there a spot upon the universal globe, so favored by Nature, and so blessed
by Heaven.

May then thy fair face never be blasted by the insidious attacks of
self-interested and ignorant empirics; may the mania of impracticable political
dreams be dispersed by the surges of thy rocky shores; and may thy fair
daughters know, that modesty and maternal feelings are the chief ornaments of a
celestial mind. Experience has qualified me to judge of learning, whose
researches have taught me the paucity of the human mind! taught me, that in
this age of reason, in the eighteenth century, I may exclaim with the learned
and polished Socrates -- ' All that I know is that I know nothing.'

FINIS

