AN ORATION, In Consequence of the Death of GENERAL George Washington, LATE
PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES, DELIVERED BY REQUEST, IN THE REFORMED DUTCH
CHURCH OF FLATBUSH, On Saturday the 22d of FEBRUARY, 1800.

By PETER VAN PELT, A. B. STUDENT OF DIVINITY.

Una nox, manet omnibus. -- Et via lethi semel calcanda est. HOR. Brooklyn:
Printed by THOMAS KING. 1800.

Flatbush, Feb. 22, 1800.
AT a Meeting of the Committee of Arrangement for Kings County; It was
unanimously Resolved, that the thanks of the Committee be presented to Mr.
PETER VAN PELT, for his Patriotic Oration, delivered this day in the Church of
Flatbush, and that a Copy of the same be requested for publication.

By order Of the Meeting, JEREMIAH LOT, Secretary.

AN ORATION, etc.
Americans, Friends, and Fellow Citizens!
IN compliance with a late resolve of Congress, and the Proclamation of the
President of the United States; We are this day assembled, to express in the
most public manner our grief, for the loss of an illustrious Chief -- the
first, the greatest of Columbia's sons.

Summoned by the herald of mortality to relinquish his earthly abode, he has
winged his flight to that unknown region, from whence no traveller returns:
Yet, he lives! embalmed in the affections of a grateful people. The memorial of
his virtue, -- his wisdom, -- his patriotism shall never die. It shall survive
the rapid revolutions of time, and triumph over the waste of ages. Millions yet
unborn, shall hail the deliverer of United America! Shall feel the glow of
patriotism, the fervor of affection vibrate in unison with our feelings, and
rear to his beloved name, an immortal monument.

Other nations have furnished us with examples of martial courage, of state
polisy, and of virtuous legislation. In America, nature has combined these in
one person; from her richest materials, she produced a noble form, breathed
into it an exalted spirit, and called it WASHINGTON.

Born to endure hardships, and to make a people free, his whole life was one
uninterrupted series of greatness. He arose like the morning sun above the
eastern horizon, gradually diffusing light through the world, till at length his
meridian splendour dazzled the sight of admiring beholders.

No sooner had he left the rocking cradle, but he appears destined for high
appointments. In early youth, his mind discovers so great a degree of
fortitude, mixed with such an uncommon profundity of thought, as to engage
general attention.

At the age of twenty three, we find him in the rear of the haughty Braddock;
that ill-fated General, who disdained the the seasonable council of our
youthful hero, fell by the hands of a savage foe, a victim to his own folly and
rashness; while the poor remains of a panic struck army, were nobly covered and
safely conducted by the skill and prowess of WASHINGTON, and his courageous
band of Virginians.

The buds of warlike genius now begin to unfold; they are soon to appear in
full bloom; the field was hitherto circumscribed; it will be enlarged, and the
trumpet of fame waxing louder and louder, will emblazen his martial deeds, and
hail him the hero of the western world! the friend of the rights of man, the
defender of his injured country. The genius of Columbia forbids he should only
move in a contracted sphere, at the head of a few compatriots in arms; he was
designed for nobler purposes.

Many years had not elapsed, before his country calls him; and he obeys his
country's call, and yields to the high behosts of heaven.

America began to groan, under the merciless dominion of Britain: cut off from
many valuable rights, imposition succeeded imposition, and her sons, no longer
able to bear the galling yoke of a tyrant; and finding they must soon be
crushed by the usurping power of royalty, proclaimed themselves a free and
independent people.

The time was now come for the most vigorous exertion: WASHINGTON, by the
unanimous voice of the people, is chosen the leader of their armies.

With what humility and (...) does he accept this important trust, sufficient
to convict the most haughty and ambitious, that he had not temporary
emoluments, or earthly honor in view; no, it was the love of Liberty, of
Country, of Justice, that animated him to so arduous an enterprise.

It was the unfathomable purpose of just heaven, to conduct him in safety through
toils and dangers; to make him victorious over all his enemies, to deliver a
people from the dread and terror of oppression, and bring them to the full
enjoyment of the dearest of earthly blessings. Yes, my fellow citizens, the
Sovereign Lord of the universe, infused into this MAN a soul that disdained
ambition, luxury and honor; and his country, as long as the wheels of time
continue to roll, shall proscribe the miscreant, who would dare attempt to
tarnish his unsullied fame.

For a moment follow him in full command leading his armies: his person noble
and erect; his eyes fixed, his solemn countenance expressive of the most
profound judgment and sagacity, and all his actions only becoming that man whom
an independent people delight to honor.

In battle, mark his firm and determined attitude; hear his thundering voice
rousing his young and inexperienced soldiers: and by his superior skill, good
management, and indefatigable perseverance, vanquishing his enemies, invariably
with the loss of but a few men. Unlike other heroes, who only fought for honor
and conquest, he enjoins the observence of strict decorum. His soul big with
virtue, forbids peals of savage rejoicing* and his conquering army proceed in
majestic pace, with the unfurled ensigns of American freedom.

Not many in this assembly I presume, were eye witnesses to his mighty feats of
war; but you are no strangers to the records of his triumphs! You have read the
historic page.

Yet, when I trace the silver locks of age; they speak, that you lived
cotemporary with our departed hero; and with him, beheld the torch of war,
blazing in defense of your country's rights.

Ye unshaken patriots of seventy six, who embarked in a glorious revolution.
Ye, who marched both night and day, through woods and marshes, who clambered
over mountains and craggy rocks, in ardent pursuit of that liberty you* now
enjoy; say, do not your minds often run back to former days, when scenes of
cruelty and blood were held up to your view? Do you not still remember your
laborious struggle for freedom and independence? and while the name of the
departed WASHINGTON is whispered in your ears, does not the tear of deep rooted
affection, steal down your cheeks and bedew his Urn? He was only a man, true;
but he was instrumental, in recovering you from a state of servitude, and
restoring to you liberty and peace.

Let your hearts now glow with gratitude, to the supreme author of such
deliverance, and let your conduct bear witness, that you have not forgotten him
who is the rock of your salvation.

For a moment, let us turn our attention to the awful scenes exhibited on Long
Island; now, the asylum of peace and plenty, but then, the prison of despair.

An armed fleet with spreading canvass, and weather beaten prows, approach your
shore. At the sight of so formidable a foe, every face gathers paleness; -- and
the woeful shrieks of the desponding mother -- re-echo's from house to house.

At this time of dread and terror, when your villages are ransacked -- the
affrighted inhabitants dispersed -- your solemn sanctuaries converted into
schools of horsemanship -- the receptacles of filth -- or the theaters of
slaughter! -- Your peaceable clergy driven from their sacred pulpits -- the
holy worship of the great GOD, trampled under foot -- and your dwellings of
repose the dens of plunderers! -- I say, at this critical juncture, when all
human probability of future success seemed to terminate -- did not the name of
WASHINGTON, reanimate your drooping spirits, and stimulate every nerve to deeds
of bravery? -- Your country's fate was now in vibration; on one side were seen
the heavy burdened ships, fraught with the implements of destruction -- to swim
to your devoted city -- while on the heights of Brooklyn, on the other, was
posted your army.

The haughty foe, in different columns advance, and bid defiance to all
opposition. -- At Flatbush a skirmish ensues -- the contents of loaded muskets,
are heard to rattle through woods, and the whistling of bullets, becomes the
music of the day. Through ill conduct, -- disorder, confusion, and flight
succeed; a whole army are on the brink of ruin, but the Almighty preserver of
our injured country, now interposes his protecting arm. -- A thick and cloudy
vapor pendent in the atmosphere, over the ships and army of the enemy,
suspends every hostile operation. -- Then, at midnight's gloomy hour -- when
all nature laid absorbed in sleep -- and moon and stars, refused to give their
light! The immortal WASHINGTON! the Not a Meteor, but a Sun. Dr. LINN.
Sun of America arose, and with his trusty men, in silence crossed to
Manhattan's shore, and by matchless skill expeditiously effected the most
memorable retreat ever accomplished by military art; or, ever recorded in the
annals of history.

You well know that he regarded not the prowess, the ambition and fury of that
aspiring nation, with whom you fought in defense of your liberties.

Amidst all the embarassments, the difficulties and dangers to which he was
eminently exposed, in our revolutionary war -- his deportment was uniformly
brave and dignified; and every action of his life, demonstrative of patriotism.

Compare, with his zeal in the generous cause, and with his invincible love of
country; the inferior number of his soldiers, their rude and undisciplined
state; the want of ammunition, of arms, and various other necessaries; and you
mark in him the characteristics of true magnanimity. Let the heights of
Princeton testify -- and while you with astonishment admire his virtues -- his
peerless worth -- and unrivalled fame: Succeeding generations will unite with
you in exclaiming -- What a MAN! What a HERO!

With the assistance of a foreign power, It is perhaps of little use to
investigate the motives, which induced France, to support the American cause.
Her assistance was without doubt highly useful, in recovering our rights; and
for this, a suitable acknowledgment has been made. That her conduct since has
proved unfriendly, nay hostile to our Republic, is too obvious. In regard to
us, she now stands on a level with Great Britain; we are indebted to neither
for much civility. It is sound policy, with decent* firmness, to guard against
the diplomatic skill and intrigues of both; and to stand aloof from the one, as
the rock of Scylla -- to shun the other, as the quicksands of Charybdis.
the American chief persevered in what he so virtuously began, under the
watchful eye of the omnipotent Being, who taught him to plant in this new
world, the victorious standard of liberty, which "lights up a smile in the
aspect of woe."

Without this -- " What is life?
It Is not to stalk about, and draw fresh air
From time to time, or gaze upon the sun;
It Is to be free. When liberty is gone,
Life grows insipid, and has lost its relish.
ADDISON. After many conflicts, and disappointments, he closed a war in freedom
and independence; but not without the sacrifice of a WARREN -- a MONTGOMERY --
a MERCER -- a WOOSTER, and others, whose names will ever sparkle in the
catalogue of warriors. He, repairs to our national council, to surrender to
them, the important trust, committed to his hands. The hour now approached to
complete, and forever to fix, the patriotic character of the American chief. In
the presence of an august assembly he formally resigns; and replete with honor
and glory, he retires like Cincinnatus, to his farm -- there to rest from the
fatiguing labors of war, and to enjoy the comforts of domestic life.

Hail happy, eventful period! the din of war is hushed -- the bloody sword
returns to its scabbard: the raging storm is over -- Your villages and cities,
which, had been wrapped in flames, threatening universal havoc, are now evacuated:
Victory is the motto inscribed on every front, and Americans, with nodding
plumes rally round the standard of triumphant liberty.

The Farmer now secure from danger, may sow his seed, and, unmolested by the
hostile foe, in due time reap the fruits of his labor, at evening enjoy the
social comforts of his own fire side, and at night securely repose on the bed
of peace. Commerce now begins to unfurl her banners, and our ships in safety
plough the ocean. The arts and sciences begin to flourish, and genius like the
sun just bursting from behind a cloud, diffuses through the darkness of
ignorance her resplendent beams.

To begin and perfect his character as a lawgiver, he is called from the sweets
of retirement to form and sign a constitution, which should regulate, while it
dignifies the conduct of Americans.

The character of this truly wonderful man, though uniformly great, is not yet
complete; his cup of fame is not yet filled up: for as the wise disposer of
events had determined, he must ascend the summit of human greatness. Heaven's
high decree was, that he should be the ruler, the father of that family, which
he had rescued from bondage: Having led you in war, he must also conduct in
peace; and roll his vigilant parental eye over you, his beloved children.

Again, he is called by unanimous voice to be the President of the United
States. Their dearest rights, and blood-bought privileges are committed to his
guardianship. A wreath of fresh laurels entwines his illustrious brow, and the
distinguished father of his country with becoming dignity supports the load of
massy honors. His wisdom, his equanimity, his justice remain inflexible: not
less vigilant than brave, he guides the helm of government the same, in war and
peace: the same, in skies serene and calm, as during the fury of the storm.

By his wonderful counsel he overawes nations which are enveloped in war --
which threaten general devastation -- and hasten to hurl, order into confusion:
-- while a free people, with gratitude marked in every feature, look at, and
admire their virtuous -- their noble patron; and hail the auspicious era in
which they live! Unlike kings or princes who consider their own aggrandizement
as a primary object; he invariably discovers the love of country, and the
incomparable value of that independence which was bought and sealed with blood,
by nobly refusing every pecuniary consideration, as a reward for his services,
having his steady and penetrative eye fixed on the constitution, the best, and
wisest, ever devised by man; esteeming it sacred and inviolable -- he governs
to the admiration, and astonishment of mortals; never failing to consult the
good of his country; the ease, the comfort, the happiness of you, the sons and
daughters of Columbia.

Being at length wearied with so great a care, and making rapid strides toward
old age -- he, once more retires to Mount Vernon's shade, where the
unparalleled Hero, closes a well spent life. -- His character being now
complete, nothing more remained for him to do. -- Nature said, it is enough: --
He had finished his course, and fully answered the purposes of heaven.

Americans, what means this general mourning -- these sable shrouds which
strike the mind, with such unusual grief? Why, this universal sadness which
pervades every countenance? Ah! the answer is too obvious. -- America has lost
her brightest jewel -- her inestimable treasure, is removed for ever.

You, cannot now be blind to the unerring councils of heaven, nor to the
instability of all human grandeur. -- Great, as our WASHINGTON was, his body
must be left to moulder into dust -- but his immortal spirit snatched from its
tenement of clay, survives the dissolution. Like the poor, the rich, the young,
the aged, the noble, and ignoble -- he must stoop under the all governing hand,
and close his eyes in the sleep of death. -- But, with such astonishing
magnanimity, as strictly accorded with all his former actions.

Will any attempt to weigh in the scale of greatness: a Themistocles, who
defended Athens from the mighty host of Xerxes; an Epaminondas, who called his
immortal sons, Leuctra and Mantinea, Towns in Beotia and Arcadia.
or an Alexander, who boasted in the conquest of the world; while a slave to
irregular appetites, and follies; but never made a people free and independent;
nor made them in point of privileges and honor, the admiration of the world;
nor loosened them from the shackles of increasing tyranny.

WASHINGTON, as a Man was great; as a General, the greatest; and as a
Magistrate, unequalled.

In him, were treasured all the virtues, which can make a man respected,
beloved, and admired. Orphans will miss a guardian; It is a fact, well known,
that he contributed liberally to the support of orphans at Alexandria.
an army, a leader; our country, a patron; and the world a friend. His strict
attention on the duties of religion, evinced the sense he entertained of a
dependence on his Creator, and that if he neglected the means of grace, must
like the reprobate; be for ever spurned from the divine presence.

A man of such amiable qualities, distinguished by such heroic achievements,
may emphatically be called, great.

Freemen! be thankful, that once you enjoyed this gift, improve the blessings
resulting from it; be our souls filled with love, to the Supreme Giver of all
good; who has so liberally scattered his blessings over our land; who, has
made us a distinguished people, and ranked us with the nations of the earth.

Alas! how wretched would have been our condition, had not the LORD, been on
our side. He it is, who upheld, and supported you, when in war; and forsakes
not in peace. While we sit together under this solemn roof, let it be our firm
resolution, with hands on our breasts, henceforth to declare our sincere
gratitude, in that we are yet the monuments of divine mercy, and that we are,
neither the dupes, nor the vassals, of a foreign power.

Ye respected Militia, who enjoy the vigor of manhood, and an invincible glow
of the love of country: Ye, whose deep engraven motto, is, liberty, and
independence: You, are the security; the defense; the bulwark, of our country.
Although each of you, now sit under the shade of the peaceful olive; and gently
fanned, by the cooling zephyrs, breathe a purer air: Yet, the cloud of direful
alarm may again brood over this western hemisphere, and burst on its millions.

Be thoughtful, be ready, be prepared: so that if duty, if necessity, if your
country's call, should again be sounded, by the shrill trumpet of war; -- with
the sword of justice girt about you, and the plate of righteousness sealed to
your bosoms: you may boldly encounter your hostile invaders, secure your
constitution and laws inviolate, and preserve your rights and liberties to the
latest ages of posterity.

Learn then, to copy the example of your illustrious chief, whom indulgent
heaven so greatly favored. Be taught by him, who for eight toilsome years led
on your brave ancestors, and crowned them with wreaths of honor which time
shall never fade. -- Realize the state in which your country once was involved:
when, terror spread through the martial camp -- when horror seized the
philanthropic breast. Compare it with its present state; now peace, order, and
harmony prevail. Let the love of country; of religion, and gratitude to GOD; be
your prevailing characteristics; for with this, you shall be happy.

WASHINGTON, who but lately resumed the command and chief of your armies; to
prepare against a foreign invasion, is no more! He is gone to the region of
unceasing being, never -- never to return. Where you -- where I -- also, soon
must go. Death, the unconquerable summoner -- the King of terrors -- cited him
to his eternal home.

But, while immortality solemnly proclaims, that he lives, in the world of
spirits; the grateful memorial of his virtuous exploits, shall live in our
bosoms.

Teach your children, and your children's children, the unrivalled character of
WASHINGTON, great in war, great in peace: and they, like us, will drop the tear
of affection, on the Urn of our departed Hero.

FINIS

