WASHINGTON'S Political Legacies.

TO WHICH IS ANNEXED, AN Appendix, CONTAINING AN ACCOUNT OF HIS ILLNESS, DEATH,
AND THE NATIONAL TRIBUTES OF RESPECT PAID TO HIS MEMORY, WITH A Biographical
Sketch, OF HIS LIFE AND CHARACTER, HIS WILL, AND Dr. TAPPAN's DISCOURSE, BEFORE
THE UNIVERSITY OF CAMBRIDGE.

NEW YORK: Printed by GEORGE FORMAN, no. 64, for C. DA^^S, no. 167,
water-street.

-- 1800. --

OH WASHINGTON! thou hero, patriot, sage!
Friend of all climes, and pride of every age!
Were thine the laurels, every soil could raise,
The mighty harvest were penurious praise.
Well may our realms, thy Fabian wisdom boast;
Thy prudence saved, what bravery had lost.
Yet ever had thou, by Heaven's severer sates,
Like Sparta's hero at the Grecian straits,
Been doomed to meet, in arms, a world of foes.
Whom skill could not defeat, nor walls oppose,
Then had thy breast, by danger never subdued,
The mighty Buckler of thy country stood;
Proud of its wounds, each piercing spear would bless,
Which left Columbia's foes one javelin less;
Nor felt one pang -- but, in the glorious deed,
Thy little band of heroes too, must bleed;
Nor throbb'd one fear -- but, that some poisoned dart
Thy breast might pass, and reach thy country's heart!
PAIN. Contents.
GENERAL WASHINGTON'S appointment to the command of the American army, 9 His
orders on the cessation of hostilities, 12 His circular letter to the Governors
of the several states at the close of the revolutionary war, 19 The address of
Congress to him acknowledging his eminent services, 50 His farewell orders to
the army. 54 The answer, 66 His address to Congress on resigning his military
commission, 72 Their answer, 75 His inaugural speech to Congress in 1789, 78
His valedictory address to his fellow-citizens, 89 His letter to President
Adams on accepting the command of the American army, in 1798, 136 Death of
Washington, 142 General Marshall's address to the Speaker of the House of
Representatives on the report of the death of Washington, 145 The President's
message to Congress enclosing Col. Lear's letter announcing the death of Genesis
Washington, 146 General Marshall's second address to Congress, 148 Resolutions
of Congress respecting the manner of paying suitable honors to the memory of
Genesis Washington, 152 Address of condolence from the House of Representatives to
the President, 154 The President's answer, 155 Address of condolence from the
Senate to the President, 156 His answer, 159 Resolutions of Congress for
perpetuating the memory of General Washington, 162 President's proclamation,
165 General Hamilton's introduction to his orders respecting the funeral
solemnities to be paid by the army, 167 Resolves of Congress respecting the
observation of Feb. 22, 1800, 175 Particular account of the last illness and
death of General Washington, 178 His funeral, 182 The President's message to
Congress communicating Mrs. Washington's letter, 188 Biographical sketch of
General Washington, 192 His Will, 241 Rev. Doct. Tappan's discourse, 267
Washington's POLITICAL LEGACIES.
IN CONGRESS, Thursday, June 15, 1775.
RESOLVED, That a GENERAL be appointed to command all the continental forces,
raised, or to be raised, for the defense of American liberty.

THAT five hundred dollars per month be allowed for the pay and expenses of the
General.

THE Congress then proceeded to the choice of a General, by ballot, and GEORGE
WASHINGTON, ESQUIRE. was unanimously elected.

Friday, June 16, 1775.
THE President informed Col. WASHINGTON, that the Congress had, yesterday,
unanimously made choice of him to be General and commander in chief of the
American forces, and requested he would accept of that employment; to which
Col. WASHINGton, standing in his place, as a member of the house, answered:

Mr. President, THOUGH I am truly sensible of the high honor done me in this
appointment, yet I feel great distress, from a consciousness that my abilities
and military experience may not be equal to the extensive and important trust:
however, as the Congress desire it, I will enter upon the momentous duty, and
exert every power I possess, in their service, for support of the glorious
cause. I beg they will accept my most cordial thanks for this distinguished
testimony of their approbation.

BUT, lest some event should happen unfavorable to my reputation, I beg it may
be remembered by every gentleman in the room, that I, this day, declare with
the utmost sincerity, I do not think myself equal to the command I am honored
with.

WITH respect to pay, sir, I must beg leave to assure Congress, that as no
pecuniary consideration could have tempted me to accept this arduous
employment, at the expense of my domestic ease and happiness, I do not wish to
make any profit from it. I will keep an exact account of my expenses. Those I
doubt not they will discharge, and that is all I desire.

ON THE CESSATION OF HOSTILITIES, GENERAL WASHINGTON ISSUED THE FOLLOWING
ORDERS:
Headquarters, Newburgh, April 18, 1783.
THE commander in chief orders the cessation of hostilities between the United
States of America and the king of Great Britain, to be publicly proclaimed
tomorrow at 12 o'clock, at the new building; and that the proclamation which
will be communicated herewith, be read tomorrow evening, at the head of every
regiment and corpse of the army; after which, the chaplains, with the several
brigades, will render thanks to Almighty God for all his mercies, particularly
for his overruling the wrath of man to his own glory, and causing the rage of
war to cease amongst the nations.

ALTHOUGH the proclamation before alluded to, extends only to the prohibition
of hostilities, and not to the annunciation of a general peace, yet it must
afford the most rational and sincere satisfaction to every benevolent mind, as
it puts a period to a long and doubtful contest -- stops the effusion of human
blood -- opens the prospect to a more splendid scene -- and, like another
morning star, promises the approach of a brighter day than has hitherto
illuminated this western hemisphere! On such a happy day -- a day which is the
harbinger of peace -- a day which completes the eighth year of the war, it
would be ingratitude not to rejoice: it would be insensibility not to
participate in the general felicity.

THE commander in chief, far from endeavoring to stifle the feelings of joy in
his own bosom, offers his most cordial congratulations on the occasion, to all
the officers of every denomination -- to all the troops of the United States in
general, and in particular to those gallant and persevering men, who had
resolved to defend the rights of their invaded country so long as the war
should continue; for these are the men who ought to be considered as the pride
and boast of the American army, and who, crowned with wellearned laurels, may
soon withdraw from the field of glory to the more tranquil walks of civil life.

WHILE the General recollects the almost infinite variety of scenes through
which we have passed with a mixture of pleasure, astonishment and gratitude --
while he contemplates the prospects before us with rapture -- he cannot help
wishing that all the brave men, of whatever condition they may be, who have
shared in the toils and dangers of effecting this glorious revolution, of
rescuing millions from the hand of oppression, and of laying the foundation of
a great empire, might be impressed with a proper idea of the dignified part
they have been called to act (under the smiles of providence) on the stage of
human affairs; for happy, thrice happy, shall they be pronounced hereafter, who
have contributed any thing, who have performed the meanest office in erecting
this stupendous fabric of Freedom and Empire, on the broad basis of
independency; who have assisted in protecting the rights of human nature, and
establishing an assylum for the poor and oppressed of all nations and religions.

THE glorious task for which we first flew, to arms, being thus accomplished --
the liberties of our country being fully acknowledged and firmly secured, by
the smiles of Heaven, on the purity of our cause, and the honest exertions of a
feeble people, determined to be free, against a powerful nation disposed to
oppress them; and the character of those who have persevered through every
extremity of hardship, suffering, and danger, being immortalized by the
illustrious appellation of the Patriot Army, nothing now remains but for the
actors of this mighty scene to preserve a perfect, unvarying consistency of
character through the very last act; to close the drama with applause; and to
retire from the military theater with the same approbation of angels and men,
which have crowned all their former virtuous actions.

FOR this purpose, no disorder or licentiousness must be tolerated, every
considerate and well-disposed soldier must remember, it will be absolutely
necessary to wait with patience, until peace shall be declared, or Congress
shall be enabled to take proper measures for the security of the public stores,
etc. As soon as these arrangements shall be made, the General is confident
there will be no delay in discharging, with every mark of distinction and
honor, all the men enlisted for the war, who will then have faithfully
performed their engagements with the public. The General has already interested
himself in their behalf; and he thinks he need not repeat the assurances of his
disposition to be useful to them on the present, and every other proper
occasion. In the mean time he is determined that no military neglects or
excesses shall go unpunished, while he retains the command of the army.

THE Adjutant-General will have such working-parties detached to assist in
making the preparation for a general rejoicing, as the chief engineer, with the
army, shall call for; and the quarter-master-general will also furnish such
materials as he may want. The quarter-master-general will, without delay,
procure such a number of discharges to be printed as will be sufficient for all
the men enlisted for the war; he will please to apply to headquarters for the
form.

AN extra ration of liquor to be issued to every man tomorrow, to drink
PERPETUAL PEACE, INDEPENDENCE, AND HAPPINESS, TO THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA.

A CIRCULAR LETTER, FROM HIS EXCELLENCY GEORGE WASHINGTON, COMMANDER IN CHIEF
OF THE ARMIES OF THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, TO THE GOVERNORS OF THE SEVERAL
STATES.
Headquarters, Newburg, June 18, 1783. SIR,
THE great object for which I had the honor to hold an appointment in the
service of my country, being accomplished, I am now preparing to resign it into
the hands of Congress, and return to that domestic retirement, which, it is
well known, I left with the greatest reluctance: a retirement for which I have
never ceased to sigh through a long and painful absence, in which (remote from
the noise and trouble of the world) I meditate to pass the remainder of life in
a state of undisturbed repose; but, before I carry this resolution into effect,
I think it a duty inincumbent on me to make this my last official
communication, to congratulate you on the glorious events which Heaven has been
pleased to produce in our favor, to offer my sentiments respecting some
important subjects, which appear to me to be intimately connected with the
tranquillity of the United States, to take my leave of your Excellency as a
public character, and to give my final blessing to that country in whose
service I have sp^nt the prime of my life; for whose sake I have consumed so
many anxious days and watchful nights; and whose happiness being extremely dear
to me, will always constitute no inconsiderable part of my own.

IMPRESSED with the liveliest sensibility on this pleasing occasion, I will
claim the indulgence of dilating the more copiously on the subject of our
mutual felicitation. When we consider the magnitude of the prize we contended
for, the doubtful nature of the contest, and the favorable manner in which it
has terminated; we shall find the greatest possible reason for gratitude and
rejoicing: this is a theme that will afford infinite delight to every
benevolent and liberal mind, whether the event in contemplation be considered
as a source of present enjoyment, or the parent of future happiness; and we
shall have equal occasion to felicitate ourselves on the lot which providence
has assigned us, whether we view it in a natural, a political, or moral point
of view.

THE citizens of America, placed in the most enviable condition, as the sole
lords and proprietors of a vast tract of continent, comprehending all the
various soils and climates of the world, and abounding with all the necessaries
and conveniences of life, are now, by the late satisfactory pacification,
acknowledged to be possessed of absolute freedom and independency; they are,
from this period to be considered as the actors on a most conspicuous theater,
which seems to be peculiarly designed by providence for the display of human
greatness and felicity: here they are not only surrounded with every thing that
can contribute to the completion of private and domestic enjoyment, but heaven
has crowned all its other blessings, by giving a surer opportunity for
political happiness than any other nation has ever been favored with. Nothing
can illustrate these observations more forcibly than the recollection of the
happy conjuncture of times and circumstances, under which our republic assumed
its rank among the nations. The foundation of our empire was not laid in a
gloomy age of ignorance and superstition, but at ^n epoch when the rights of
mankind were better understood, and more clearly defined than at any former
period: researches of the human mind after social happiness have been carried
to a great extent: the treasures of knowledge acquired by the labors of
philosophers, sages, and legislators, through a long succession of years, are
laid open for us, and their collected wisdom may be happily applied in the
establishment of our forms of government: the free cultivation of letters, the
unbounded extension of commerce, the progressive refinement of manners, the
growing liberality of sentiment, and, above all, the pure and benign light of
revelation, have had a meliorating influence on mankind, and increased the
blessings of society. At this auspicious period the United States came into
existence as a nation, and if their citizens should not be completely free and
happy, the fault will be entirely their own.

SUCH is our situation, and such are our prospects; but notwithstanding the cup
of blessing is thus reached out to us -- notwithstanding happiness is ours, if
we have a disposition to seize the occasion, and make it our own; yet it
appears to me, there is an option still left to the United States of America,
whether they will be respectable and prosperous, or contemptible and miserable
as a nation. This is the time of their political probation; this is the moment,
when the eyes of the whole world are turned upon them; this is the time to
establish or ruin their national character forever; this is the favorable
moment to give such a tone to the federal government, as will enable it to
answer the ends of its institution; or this may be the ill-fated moment for
relaxing the powers of the union, annihilating the cement of the confederation,
and exposing us to become the sport of European politics, which may play one
state against another, to prevent their growing importance, and to serve their
own interested purposes. For, according to the system of policy the states
shall adopt at this moment, they will stand or fall; and, by their confirmation
or lapse, it is yet to be decided, whether the revolution must ultimately be
considered as a blessing or a curse; a blessing or a curse, not to the present
age alone, for with our fate will the destiny of unborn millions be involved.

WITH this conviction of the importance of the present crisis, silence in me
would be a crime. I will therefore speak to your Excellency the language of
freedom and sincerity, without disguise. I am aware, however, those who differ
from me in political sentiments may perhaps remark, I am stepping out of the
proper line of my duty; and they may possibly ascribe to arrogance or
ostentation, what I know is alone the result of the purest intention; but the
rectitude of my own heart, which disdains such unworthy motives -- the part I
have hitherto acted in life -- the determination I have formed of not taking
any share in public business hereafter -- the ardent desire I feel and shall
continue to manifest, of quietly enjoying in private life, after all the toils
of war, the benefits of a wise and liberal government -- will, I flatter
myself, sooner or later, convince my countrymen, that I could have no sinister
views in delivering, with so little reserve, the opinions contained in this
address.

THERE are four things which I humbly conceive are essential to the well-being,
I may even venture to say, to the existence of the United States, as an
independent power.

1 st. AN indissoluble union of the states under one federal head.

2 dly. A sacred regard to public justice.

3 dly. THE adoption of a proper peace establishment. And,

4 thly. THE prevalence of that pacific and friendly disposition among the
people of the United States, which will induce them to forget their local
prejudices and policies, to make those mutual concessions which are requisite
to the general prosperity, and, in some instances, to sacrifice their
individual advantages to the interest of the community.

THESE are the pillars on which the glorious fabric of our independency and
national character must be supported. Liberty is the basis, and whoever would
dare to sap the foundation, or overturn the structure, under whatever specious
pretext he may attempt it, will merit the bitterest execration and the severest
punishment which can be inflicted by his injured country.

ON the three first articles I will make a few observations, leaving the last
to the good sense and serious consideration of those immediately concerned.

UNDER the first head, although it may not be necessary or proper for me in
this place to enter into a particular disquisition of the principles of the
union, and to take up the great question which has been frequently agitated,
whether it be expedient and requisite for the states to delegate a large
proportion of power to Congress, or not: yet it will be a part of my duty, and
that of every true patriot, to assert, without reserve, and to insist upon the
following positions. That unless the states will suffer Congress to exercise
those prerogatives they are undoubtedly invested with by the constitution,
every thing must very rapidly tend to anarchy and confusion. -- That it is
indispensible to the happiness of the individual states, that there should be
lodged, somewhere, a supreme power, to regulate and govern the general concerns
of the confederated republic, without which the union cannot be of long
duration. -- That there must be a faithful and pointed compliance on the part
of every state with the late proposals and demands of Congress, or the most
fatal consequences will ensue. -- That whatever measures have a tendency to
dissolve the union, or contribute to violate or lessen the sovereign authority,
ought to be considered as hostile to the liberty and independency of America,
and the authors of them treated accordingly. -- And lastly, that unless we can
be enabled by the concurrence of the states, to participate of the fruits of
the revolution, and enjoy the essential benefits of civil society, under a form
of government so free and uncorrupted, so happily guarded against the danger of
oppression, as has been devised and adopted by the articles of confederation,
it will be a subject of regret, that so much blood and treasure have been
lavished for no purpose; that so many sufferings have been encountered without
a compensation, and that so many sacrifices have been made in vain. Many other
considerations might here be adduced to prove, that without an entire
conformity to the spirit of the union, we cannot exist as an independent power.
It will be sufficient for my purpose to mention but one or two, which seem to
me of the greatest importance. It is only in our united character, as an
empire, that our independence is acknowledged, that our power can be regarded,
or our credit supported among foreign nations. The treaties of the European
powers with the United States of America, will have no validity on the
dissolution of the union. We shall be left nearly in a state of nature; or we
may find, by our own unhappy experience, that there is a natural and necessary
progression from the extreme of anarchy to the extreme of tyranny; and that
arbitrary power is most easily established on the ruins of liberty abused to
licentiousness.

As to the second article, which respects the performance of public justice,
Congress have, in their late Address to the United States, almost exhausted the
subject; they have explained their ideas so fully, and have enforced the
obligations the states are under to render complete justice to all the public
creditors, with so much dignity and energy, that in my opinion, no real friend
to the honor and independency of America can hesitate a single moment
respecting the propriety of complying with the just and honorable measures
proposed. If their arguments do not produce conviction, I know of nothing that
will have greater influence, especially when we reflect that the system
referred to, being the result of the collected wisdom of the continent, must be
esteemed, if not perfect, certainly the least objectionable of any that could
be devised; and that, if it should not be carried into immediate execution, a
national bankruptcy, with all its deplorable consequences, will take place,
before any different plan can possibly be proposed or adopted; so pressing are
the present circumstances, and such is the alternative now offered to the
states.

THE ability of the country to discharge the debts which have been incurred in
its defense, is not to be doubted. An inclination, I flatter myself, will not
be wanting; the path of our duty is plain before us; honesty will be found, on
every experiment, to be the best and only true policy. Let us then, as a
nation, be just; let us fulfill the public contracts which Congress had
undoubtedly a right to make for the purpose of carrying on the war, with the
same good faith we suppose ourselves bound to perform our private engagements.
In the mean time let an attention to the cheerful performance of their proper
business, as individuals, and as members of society, be earnestly inculcated on
the citizens of America; then will they strengthen the bands of government, and
be happy under its protection. Every one will reap the fruit of his labors;
every one will enjoy his own acquisitions, without molestation and without
danger.

IN this state of absolute freedom and perfect security, who will grudge to
yield a very little of his property to support the common interests of society,
and ensure the protection of government? Who does not remember the frequent
declarations at the commencement of the war, that we should be completely
satisfied, if at the expense of one half, (...) ^ould defend the remainder of
our possessions? Where is the man to be found, who wishes to remain indebted
for the defense of his own person and property to the exertions, the bravery,
and the blood of others, without making one generous effort to pay the debt of
honor and of gratitude? In what part of the continent shall we find any man, or
body of men, who would not blush to stand up, and propose measures purposely
calculated to rob the soldier of his stipend, and the public creditor of his
due? And were it possible that such a flagrant instance of injustice could ever
happen, would it not excite the general indignation, and tend to bring down
upon the authors of such measures, the aggravated vengeance of heaven? If,
after all, a spirit of disunion, or a temper of obstinacy and perverseness
should manifest itself in any of the states; if such an ungracious disposition
should attempt to frustrate all the happy effects that might be expected to
flow from the union; if there should be a refusal to comply with the
requisitions for funds to discharge the annual interest of the public debts,
and if that refusal should revive all those jealousies, and produce all those
evils which are now happily removed -- Congress, who have in all their
transactions shown a great degree of magnanimity and justice, will stand
justified in the sight of God and man! And that state alone, which puts itself
in opposition to the aggregate wisdom of the continent, and follows such
mistaken and pernicious councils, will be responsible for all the consequences.

FOR my own part, conscious of having acted, while a servant of the public, in
the manner I conceived best suited to promote the real interests of my country;
having, in consequence of my fixed belief, in some measure, pledged myself to
the army, that their country would finally do them complete and ample justice,
and not willing to conceal any instance of my official conduct from the eyes of
the world, I have thought proper to transmit to your Excellency the enclosed
collection of papers, relative to the half-pay and commutation granted by
Congress to the officers of the army: from these communications, my decided
sentiment will be clearly comprehended, together with the conclusive reasons,
which induced me at an early period, to recommend the adoption of this measure
in the most earnest and serious manner. As the proceedings of Congress, the
army, and myself, are open to all, and contain, in my opinion, sufficient
information to remove the prejudice and errors which may have been entertained
by any, I think it unnecessary to say any thing more, than just to observe,
that the resolutions of Congress, now alluded to, are as undoubtedly and
absolutely binding upon the United States as the most solemn acts of
confederation or legislation.

As to the idea, which I am informed, has in some instances prevailed, that the
half-pay and commutation are to be regarded merely in the odious light of a
pension, it ought to be exploded forever: that provision should be viewed, as
it really was, a reasonable compensation offered by Congress, at a time when
they had nothing else to give to officers of the army, for services then to be
performed: it was the only means to prevent a total deriliction of the service;
it was a part of their hire. I may be allowed to say, it was the price of their
blood, and of your independency; it is therefore more than a common debt, it is
a debt of honor; it can never be considered as a pension or gratuity, nor
cancelled until it is fairly discharged.

WITH regard to the distinction between officers and soldiers, it is sufficient
that the uniform experience of every nation of the world, combined with our
own, proves the utility and propriety of the discrimination. Rewards, in
proportion to the aid the public draws from them, are unquestionably due to all
its servants. In some lines, the soldiers have perhaps generally had as ample
compensation for their services, by the large bounties which have been paid
them, as their officers will receive in the proposed commutation; in others, if
besides the donation of land, the payment of arrearages of clothing and wages
(in which articles all the component parts of the army must be put upon the
same footing) we take into the estimate, the bounties many of the soldiers have
received, and the gratuity of one year's full pay, which is promised to all,
possibly their situation (every circumstance being duly considered) will not be
deemed less eligible than that of the officers. Should a farther reward,
however, be judged equitable, I will venture to assert, no man will enjoy
greater satisfaction than myself, in an exemption from taxes for a limited time
(which has been petitioned for in some instances) on any other adequate
immunity of compensation granted to the brave defenders of their country's
cause: but neither the adoption or rejection of this proposition will, in any
manner affect, much less militate against the act of Congress, by which they
have offered five years full pay, in lieu of the half-pay for life, which had
been before promised to the officers of the army.

BEFORE I conclude the subject on public justice, I cannot omit to mention the
obligations this country is unber to that meritorious class of veterans, the
non-commissioned officers and privates, who have been discharged for inability,
in consequence of the resolution of Congress, of the 23d of April, 1782, on an
annual pension for life. Their peculiar sufferings, their singular merits and
claims to that provision, need only to be known, to interest the feelings of
humanity in their behalf. Nothing but a punctual payment of their annual
allowance can rescue them from the most complicated misery: and nothing could
be a more melancholy and distressing sight, than to behold those who have shed
their blood, or lost their limbs in the service of their country, without a
shelter, without a friend, and without the means of obtaining any of the
comforts or necessaries of life, compelled to beg their daily bread from door
to door. Suffer me to recommend those of this description, belonging to your
state, to the warmest patronage of your Excellency and your legislature.

IT is necessary to say but a few words on the third topic which was proposed,
and which regards particularly the defense of the republic. As there can be
little doubt but Congress will recommend a proper peace establishment for the
United States, in which a due attention will be paid to the importance of
placing the militia of the union upon a regular and respectable footing; if
this should be the case, I should beg leave to urge the great advantage of it
in the strongest terms.

THE militia of this country must be considered as the palladium of our
security, and the first effectual resort in case of hostility: it is essential,
therefore, that the same system should pervade the whole; that the formation
and discipline of the militia of the continent should be absolutely uniform;
and that the same species of arms, accoutrements, and military apparatus,
should be introduced in every part of the United States. No one, who has not
learned it from experience, can conceive the difficulty, expense, and confusion
which result from a contrary system, or the vague arrangements which have
hitherto prevailed.

IF, in treating of political points, a greater latitude than usual has been
taken in the course of the Address, the importance of the crisis, and the
magnitude of the objects in discussion, must be my apology; it is, however,
neither my wish nor expectation, that the preceding observations should claim
any regard, except so far as they shall appear to be dictated by a good
intention; consonant to the immutable rules of justice: calculated to produce a
liberal system of policy, and founded on whatever experience may have been
acquired by a long and close attention to public business. Here I might speak
with more confidence, from my actual observations; and if it would not swell
this letter (already too prolix) beyond the bounds I had prescribed myself, I
could demonstrate to every mind, open to conviction, that in less time, and
with much less expense than has been incurred, the war might have been brought
to the same happy conclusion, if the resources of the continent could have been
properly called forth; that the distresses and disappointments which have very
often occurred, have, in too many instances, resulted more from a want of
energy in the continental government, than a deficiency of means in the
particular states: that the inefficacy of the measures, arising from the want
of an adequate authority in the supreme power, from a partial compliance with
the requisitions of Congress in some of the states, and from a failure of
punctuality in others, while they tended to damp the zeal of those who were
more willing to exert themselves, served also to accumulate the expenses of the
war, and to frustrate the best concerted plans; and that the discouragement
occasioned by the complicated difficulties and embarrassments, in which our
affairs were by this means involved, would have long ago produced the
dissolution of any army, less patient, less virtuous, and less persevering than
that which I have had the honor to command. But while I mention those things,
which are notorious facts, as the defects of our federal constitution,
particularly in the prosecution of a war, I beg it may be understood, that as I
have ever taken a pleasure in gratefully acknowledging the assistance and
support I have derived from every class of citizens; so shall I always be happy
to do justice to the unparalleled exertions of the individual states, on many
interesting occasions.

I HAVE thus freely disclosed what I wished to make known before I surrendered
up my public trust to those who committed it to me: the task is now
accomplished. I now bid adieu to your Excellency, as the chief magistrate of
your state: at the same time I bid a last farewell to the cares of office, and
all the employments of public life.

IT remains, then, to be my final and only request, that your Excellency will
communicate these sentiments to your legislature at their next meeting; and
that they may be considered as the legacy of one who has ardently wished, on
all occasions, to be useful to his country, and who, even in the shade of
retirement, will not fail to implore the divine benediction upon it.

I NOW make it my earnest prayer, that God would have you, and the state over
which you preside, in his holy protection; that he would incline the hearts of
the citizens to cultivate a spirit of subordination and obedience to
government; to entertain a brotherly affection and love for one another, for
their fellow-citizens of the United States at large; and particularly for their
brethren who have served in the field; and finally, that he would most
graciously be pleased to dispose us all to do justice, to love mercy, and to
demean ourselves with that charity, humility, and pacific temper of the mind,
which were the characteristics of the divine Author of our blessed religion;
without an humble imitation of whose example, in these things, we can never
hope to be a happy nation.

I HAVE the honor to be, with much esteem and respect, sir, your Excellency's
most obedient, and most humble servant,

G. WASHINGTON.

UNITED STATES, IN CONGRESS ASSEMBLED.
According to order, Genesis WASHINGTON attended, and being introduced by two
Members, the President addressed him as follows:
Princeton, August 26, 1783. SIR,
CONGRESS feel particular pleasure in seeing your Excellency, and in
congratulating you on the success of a war, in which you have acted so
conspicuous a part.

IT has been the singular happiness of the United States, that during a war so
long, so dangerous, and so important, Providence has been graciously pleased to
preserve the life of a General, who has merited and possessed the uninterrupted
confidence and affection of his fellow-citizens. In other nations many have
performed services, for which they have deserved and received the thanks of the
public; but to you, sir, peculiar praise is due. Your services have been
essential in acquiring and establishing the freedom and independence of your
country. They deserve the grateful acknowledgments of a free and independent
nation. Those acknowledgments, Congress have the satisfaction of expressing to
your Excellency.

HOSTILITIES have now ceased, but your country still needs your services. She
wishes to avail herself of your talents in forming the arrangements which will
be necessary for her in the time of peace. For this reason your attendance at
Congress has been requested. A committee is appointed to confer with your
Excellency, and to receive your assistance in preparing and digesting plans
relative to those important objects.

The Answer.
MR. PRESIDENT,
I AM too sensible of the honorable reception I have now experienced, not to be
penetrated with the deepest feelings of gratitude.

Notwithstanding Congress appear to estimate the value of my life beyond any
services I have been able to render the United States, yet I must be permitted
to consider the wisdom and unanimity of our national councils, the firmness of
our citizens and the patience and bravery of our troops, which have produced so
happy a termination of the war, as the most conspicuous effect of the divine
interposition, and the surest presage of our future happiness.

HIGHLY gratified by the favorable sentiments which Congress are pleased to
express of my past conduct, and amply rewarded by the confidence and affection
of my fellow-citizens; I cannot hesitate to contribute my best endeavors
toward the establishment of the national security in whatever manner the
sovereign power may think proper to direct, until the ratification of the
definitive treaty of peace, or the final evacuation of our country by the
British forces; after either of which events, I shall ask permission to retire
to the peaceful shade of private life.

PERHAPS, sir, no occasion may offer more suitable than the present, to express
my humble thanks to God and my grateful acknowledgments to my country, for the
great and uniform support I have received in every vicissitude of fortune, and
for the many distinguished honors which Congress have been pleased to confer
upon me in the course of the war.

Farewell Orders OF GENERAL WASHINGTON TO THE ARMIES OF THE UNITED STATES.
Rocky-Hill, near Princeton, Nov. 2, 17^^.
THE United States in Congress assembled, after giving the most honorable
testimony to the merits of the federal armies, and presenting them with the
thanks of their country, for their long, eminent and faithful service, having
thought proper, by their proclamation bearing date the 18th of October last, to
discharge such part of the troops as were engaged for the war, and to permit
the officers on furlough to retire from service, from and after tomorrow,
which proclamation having been communicated in the public papers, for the
information and government of all concerned, it only remains for the Commander
in Chief to address himself once more, and that for the last time, to the
armies of the United States (however widely dispersed individuals who compose
them may be) and to bid them an affectionate -- a long farewell.

BUT before the Commander in Chief takes his final leave of those he holds most
dear, he wishes to indulge himself a few moments in calling to mind a slight
view of the past: -- he will then take the liberty of exploring, with his
military friends, their future prospects; of advising the general line of
conduct which in his opinion ought to be pursued; and he will conclude the
Address, by expressing the obligations he feels himself under for the spirited
and able assistance he has experienced from them, in the performance of an
arduous office.

A CONTEMPLATION of the complete attainment (at a period earlier than could
have been expected) of the object for which we contended, against so formidable
a power, cannot but inspire us with astonishment and gratitude. The
disadvantageous circumstances on our part, under which the war was undertaken,
can never be forgotten. The signal interpositions of Providence, in our feeble
condition, were such as could scarcely escape the attention of the most
unobserving; while the unparallelled perseverance of the armies of the United
States, through almost every possible suffering and discouragement, for the
space of eight long years, was little short of a standing miracle.

IT is not the meaning, nor within the compass of this Address, to detail the
hardships peculiarly incident to our service, or to describe the distresses
which in several instances have resulted from the extremes of hunger and
nakedness, combined with the rigours of an inclement season: nor is it
necessary to dwell on the dark side of our past affairs.

EVERY American officer and soldier must now console himself for any unpleasant
circumstance which may have occurred, by a recollection of the uncommon scenes
in which he has been called to act no inglorious part, and the astonishing
events of which he has been a witness; events which have seldom if ever before,
taken place on the stage of human action, nor can they probably ever happen
again. For who has before seen a disciplined army formed at once from such raw
materials? Who that was not a witness could imagine that the most violent local
prejudices would cease so soon, and that men who came from the different parts
of the continent, strongly disposed by the habits of education to despise and
quarrel with each other, would instantly become but one patriotic band of
brothers? Or who that was not on the spot, can trace the steps by which such a
wonderful revolution has been effected, and such a glorious period put to all
our warlike toils?

IT is universally acknowledged, that the enlarged prospects of happiness,
opened by the confirmation of our independence and sovereignty, almost exceed
the power of description: and shall not the brave men who have contributed so
essentially to these inestimable acquisitions, retiring victorious from the
field of war to the field of agriculture, participate in all the blessings
which have been obtained? In such a republic, who will exclude them from the
rights of citizens, and the fruits of their labors? In such a country, so
happily circumstanced, the pursuits of commerce, and the cultivation of the
soil, will unfold to industry the certain road to competence. To those hardy
soldiers who are actuated by the spirit of adventure, the fisheries will afford
ample and profitable employment: and the extensive and fertile regions of the
West, will yield a most happy asylum to those who, fond of domestic enjoyment,
are seeking personal independence. Nor is it possible to conceive that any one
of the United States will prefer a national bankruptcy, and the dissolution of
the union, to a compliance with the requisitions of Congress, and the payment
of its just debts; so that the officers and soldiers may expect considerable
assistance, in recommencing their civil occupations, from the sums due to them
from the public, which must and will most inevitably be paid.

IN order to effect this desirable purpose, and remove the prejudices which may
have taken possession of the minds of any of the good people of the states, it
is earnestly recommended to all the troops, that with strong attachment to the
union, they should carry with them into civil society, the most conciliating
dispositions, and that they should prove themselves not less virtuous and
useful as citizens, than they have been victorious as soldiers. What though
there should be some envious individuals, who are unwilling to pay the debt the
public has contracted, or to yield the tribute due to merit, yet, let such
unworthy treatment produce no invective, or any instance of intemperate
conduct. Let it be remembered, that the unbiassed voice (...) the free citizens
of the United States, has promised the just reward, and given the merited
applause. Let it be known and remembered, that the reputation of the federal
armies is established beyond the reach of malevolence; and let a consciousness
of their atchievments and fame, still excite the men who composed them to
honorable actions, under the persuasion that the private virtues of economy,
prudence and industry, will not be less amiable in civil life, than the more
splendid qualities of valor, perseverance, and enterprise were in the field.
Every one may rest assured that much, very much of the future happiness of the
officers and men, will depend upon the wise and manly conduct which shall be
adopted by them, when they are mingled with the great body of the community.
And although the General has so frequently given it as his opinion, in the most
public and explicit manner, that unless the principles of the federal
government were properly supported, and the powers of the union increased, the
honor, dignity, and justice of the nation would be lost forever: yet he cannot
help repeating on this occasion so interesting a sentiment, and leaving it as
his last injunction to every officer and every soldier who may view the subject
in the same serious point of light, to add his best endeavors to those of his
worthy fellow-citizens, toward effecting these great and valuable purposes, on
which our very existence as a nation so materially depends.

THE Commander in Chief conceives little is now wanting to enable the soldier
to change the military character into that of the citizen; but that steady,
decent tenor of behavior, which has generally distinguished not only the army
under his immediate command, but the different detachments and armies through
the course of the war. From their good sense and prudence he anticipates the
happiest consequences; and while he congratulates them on the glorious occasion
which renders their services in the field no longer necessary, he wishes to
express the strong obligations he feels himself under for the assistance he has
received from every class, and in every instance. He presents his thanks in the
most serious and affectionate manner, to the general officers, as well for
their councils on many interesting occasions, as for their ardor in promoting
the success of the plans he had adopted. To the commandants of regiments and
corpse, and to the other officers for their zeal and attention in carrying his
orders promptly into execution -- to the staff for their alacrity and exactness
in performing the duties of their several departments; and to the
non-commissioned officers and private soldiers, for their extraordinary
patience and suffering, as well as their invincible fortitude in action. To the
various branches of the army, the General takes this last and solemn
opportunity of professing his inviolable attachment and friendship. He wishes
more than bare professions were in his power, that he was really able to be
useful to them all in future life. He flatters himself, however, they will do
him the justice to believe that whatever could with propriety be attempted by
him, has been done.

AND being now to conclude these his last public orders, to take his ultimate
leave in a short time of the military character, and to bid a final adieu to
the armies he has so long had the honor to command, he can only again offer in
their behalf, his recommendations to their grateful country, and his prayers to
the God of armies. May ample justice be done them here, and may the choicest of
Heaven's favors, both here and hereafter attend those, who under the divine
auspices, have secured innumerable blessings for others. With these wishes, and
this benediction, the Commander in Chief is about to retire from service. The
curtain of separation will soon be drawn, and the military scene to him will be
closed forever.

The Answer.
WE the officers of the part of the army remaining on the banks of the Hudson,
have received your Excellency's serious and farewell Address to the armies of
the United States. We beg you to accept our unfeigned thanks for the
communication, and your affectionate assurances of inviolable attachment and
friendship. If your attempts to ensure to the armies the just, the promised
rewards, of their long, severe, and dangerous services, have failed of success,
we believe it has arisen from causes not in your Excellency's power to
control. With extreme regret do we reflect on the occasion which called for
such endeavors. But while we thank your Excellency for these exertions in favor
of the troops you have so successfully commanded, we pray it may be believed,
that in this sentiment our own particular interests have but a secondary place;
and that even the ultimate ingratitude of the people (were that possible) could
not shake the patriotism of those who suffer by it. Still with pleasing wonder
and with grateful joy shall we contemplate the glorious conclusion of our
labors. To that merit in the revolution which, under the auspices of Heaven,
the armies have displayed, posterity will do justice; and the sons will blush
whose fathers were their foes.

MOST gladly would we cast a veil on every act which sullies the reputation of
our country -- never should the page of history be stained with its dishonor --
even from our memories should the idea be erased. We lament the opposition to
those salutary measures which the wisdom of the union has planned; measures
which alone can recover and fix on a permanent basis the credit of the states;
measures which are essential to the justice, the honor, and interest of the
nation. While she was giving the noblest proofs of magnanimity, with conscious
pride we saw her growing fame; and, regardless of present sufferings, we looked
forward to the end of our toils and dangers, to brighter scenes in prospect.
There we beheld the genius of our country dignified by sovereignty and
independence, supported by justice, and adorned with every liberal virtue.
There we saw patient husbandry fearless extend her cultured fields, and
animated commerce spread her sails to every wind. There we beheld fair science
lift her head, with all the arts attending in her train. There, blessed with
freedom, we saw the human mind expand; and, throwing aside the restraints which
confined it to the narrow bounds of country, it embraced the world. Such were
our fond hopes, and with such delightful prospects did they present us. Nor are
we disappointed. Those animating prospects are now changed and changing to
realities; and actively to have contributed to their production is our pride,
our glory. But justice alone can give them stability. In that justice we still
believe. Still we hope that the prejudices of the misinformed will be removed,
and the arts of false and selfish popularity, addressed to the feelings of
avarice, defeated: or, in the worst event, the world, we hope, will make the
just distinction: we trust the disingenuousness of a few will not sully the
reputation, the honor, and dignity, of the great and respectable majority of
the states.

WE are happy in the opportunity just presented of congratulating your
Excellency on the certain conclusion of the definitive treaty of peace.
Relieved at length from long suspense, our warmest wish is to return to the
bosom of our country, to resume the character of citizens; and it will be our
highest ambition to become useful ones. To your Excellency this great event
must be peculiarly pleasing: for while at the head of her armies, urged by
patriot virtues and magnanimity, you persevered, under the pressure of every
possible difficulty and discouragement, in the pursuit of the great objects of
the war -- the freedom and safety of your country; -- your heart panted for the
tranquil enjoyments of peace. We cordially rejoice with you that the period of
indulging them has arrived so soon. In contemplating the blessings of liberty
and independence, the rich prize of eight years hardy adventure, past
sufferings will be forgotten; or if remembered, the recollection will serve to
heighten the relish of present happiness. We sincerely pray God this happiness
may long be yours; and that whon you quit the stage of human life, you may
receive from the unerring Judge, the rewards of valor exerted to save the
oppressed, of patriotism, and disinterested virtue.

Address OF GENERAL WASHINGTON TO CONGRESS, ON RESIGNING HIS MILITARY
COMMISSION.
December 23, 1783. MR. PRESIDENT,
THE great events on which my resignation depended having at length taken
place, I have now the honor of offering my sincere congratulations to Congress,
and of presenting myself before them, to surrender into their hands the trust
committed to me, and to claim the indulgence of retiring from the service of my
country.

HAPPY in the confirmation of our independence and sovereignty, and pleased
with the opportunity afforded the United States, of becoming a respectable
nation, I resign with satisfaction the appointment I accepted with diffidence
-- a diffidence in my abilities to accomplish so arduous a task; which however
was superceded by a confidence in the rectitude of our cause, the support of
the supreme power of the union, and the patronage of Heaven.

THE successful termination of the war has verified the most sanguine
expectations; and my gratitude for the interposition of Providence, and the
assistance I have received from my countrymen, increases with every review of
the momentous contest.

WHILE I repeat my obligations to the army in general, I should do injustice to
my own feelings not to acknowledge, in this place, the peculiar services and
distinguished merits of the gentlemen who have been attached to my person
during the war. It was impossible the choice of confidential officers to
compose my family should have been more fortunate. Permit me, sir, to recommend
in particular, those who have continued in the service to the present moment,
as worthy of the favorable notice and patronage of Congress.

I CONSIDER it an indispensible duty to close this last act of my official life
by commending the interests of our dearest country to the protection of
Almighty God, and those who have the superintendance of them to his holy
keeping.

HAVING now finished the work assigned me, I retire from the great theater of
action, and bidding an affectionate farewell to this august body, under whose
orders I have so long acted, I here offer my commission, and take my leave of
all the employments of public life.

The Answer.
SIR,
THE United States in Congress assembled receive, with emotions too affecting
for utterance, the solemn resignation of the authorities under which you have
led their troops with success through a perilous and a doubtful war. Called
upon by your country to defend its invaded rights, you accepted the sacred
charge, before it had formed alliances, and whilst it was without funds or a
government to support you. You have conducted the great military contest with
wisdom and fortitude, invariably regarding the rights of the civil power
through all disasters and changes. You have, by the love and confidence of your
fellow-citizens, enabled them to display their martial genius, and transmit
their fame to posterity. You have persevered, till these United States, aided
by a magnanimous king and nation, have been enabled, under a just Providence,
to close the war in freedom, safety and independence; on which happy event we
sincerely join you in congratulations.

HAVING defended the standard of liberty in this new world: having taught a
lesson useful to those who inflict and to those who feel oppression, you retire
from the great theater of action, with the blessings of your fellow-citizens --
but the glory of your virtues will not terminate with your military command; it
will continue to animate remotest ages.

WE feel with you our obligations to the army in general, and will particularly
charge ourselves with the interests of those confidential officers, who have
attended your person to this affecting moment.

WE join you in commending the interests of our dearest country to the
protection of Almighty God, beseeching him to dispose the hearts and minds of
its citizens, to improve the opportunity afforded them, of becoming a happy and
respectable nation. And for you we address to him our earnest prayers, that a
life so beloved, may be fostered with all his care: that your days may be happy
as they have been illustrious; and that he will finally give you that reward
which this world cannot give.

Inaugural Speech OF PRESIDENT WASHINGTON TO CONGRESS, APRIL 30, 1789.
Fellow-citizens of the Senate, and of the House of Representatives,
AMONG the vicissitudes incident to life, no event could have filled me with
greater anxieties, than that of which the notification was transmitted by your
order, and received on the 14th day of the present month. -- On the one hand I
was summoned by my country, whose voice I can never hear but with veneration
and love, from a retreat which I had chosen with the fondest predilection, and
in my flattering hopes, with an immutable decision, as the asylum of my
declining years; a retreat which was rendered every day more necessary as well
as more dear to me, by the addition of habit to inclination, and of frequent
interruptions in my health to the gradual waste committed on it by time. On the
other hand, the magnitude and difficulty of the trust to which the voice of my
country called me, being sufficient to awaken in the wisest and most
experienced of her citizens, a distrustful scrutiny into his qualifications,
could not but overwhelm with despondence, one, who, inheriting inferior
endowments from nature, and unpractised in the duties of civil administration,
ought to be peculiarly conscious of his own deficiencies. In this conflict of
emotions, all I dare aver, is, that it has been my faithful study to collect my
duty from a just appreciation of every circumstance, by which it might be
affected. All I dare hope, is, that if in executing this task, I have been too
much swayed by a grateful remembrance of former instances, or by an
affectionate sensibility to this transcendant proof of the confidence of my
fellow-citizens; and have thence too little consulted my incapacity as well as
disinclination, for the weighty and untried cares before me; my error will be
palliated by the motives which misled me, and its consequences be judged by my
country, with some share of the partiality in which they originated.

SUCH being the impressions under which I have, in obedience to the public
summons, repaired to the present station; it would be peculiarly improper to
omit in this first official act, my fervent supplications to that Almighty
Being who rules over the universe: who presides in the councils of nations, and
whose providential aids can supply every human defect, that his benediction may
consecrate to the liberties and happiness of the people of the United States, a
government instituted by themselves ^^r these essential purposes; and may
enable every instrument employed in its administration, to execute with
success, the functions allotted to his charge. In tendering this homage to the
great author of every public and private good, I assure myself that it
expresses your sentiments not less than my own; nor those of my fellow-citizens
at large, less than either. No people can be bound to acknowledge and adore the
invisible hand, which conducts the affairs of men, more than the people of the
United States. Every step by which they have advanced to the character of an
independent nation, seems to have been distinguished by some token of
providential agency. And in the important revolution just accomplished in the
system of their united government, the tranquil deliberation, and voluntary
consent of so many distinct communities, from which the event has resulted,
cannot be compared with the means by which most governments have been
established, without some return of pious gratitude along with an humble
anticipation of the future blessings which the past seem to presage. These
reflections arising out of the present crisis, have forced themselves too
strongly on my mind to be suppressed. You will join with me, I trust, in
thinking that there are none under the influence of which, the proceedings of a
new and free government can more auspiciously commence.

BY the article establishing the executive department, it is made the duty of
the President to "recommend to your consideration, such measures as he shall
judge necessary and expedient." The circumstances under which I now meet you,
will acquit me from entering into that subject, farther than to refer to the
great constitutional charter under which you are assembled, and which, in
defining your powers, designates the objects to which your attention is to be
given. It will be more consistent with those circumstances, and far more
congenial with the feelings which actuate me, to substitute, in place of a
recommendation of particular measures, the tribute that is due to the talents,
the rectitude, and the patriotism which adorn the characters selected to devise
and adopt them. In those honorable qualifications, I behold the surest pledges,
that as on one side on local prejudices, or attachments -- no separate views,
no party animosities, will misdirect the comprehensive and equal eye which
ought to watch over this great assemblage of communities and interests; so, on
the other, that the foundations of our national policy will be laid in the pure
and immutable principles of private morality; and the pre-eminence of free
government, be exemplified by all the attributes which can win the affections
of its citizens, and command the respect of the world -- I dwell on this
prospect with every satisfaction which an ardent love of my country can
inspire. Since there is no truth more thoroughly established, than that there
exists in the economy and course of nature, an indissoluble union between
virtue and happiness; between duty and advantage, between genuine maxims of an
honest and magnanimous policy, and the solid rewards of public prosperity and
felicity. Since we ought to be no less persuaded that the propitious smiles of
Heaven, can never be expected on a nation that disregards the eternal rules of
order and right, which Heaven itself has ordained. And since the preservation
of the sacred fire of liberty, and the destiny of the republican model of
government, are justly considered as deeply, perhaps as finally staked on the
experiment entrusted to the hands of the American people.

BESIDES the ordinary objects submitted to your care, it will remain with your
judgment to decide, how far an exercise of the occasional power delegated by
the fifth article of the constitution is rendered expedient at the present
juncture by the nature of objections which have been urged against the system,
or by the degree of inquietude which has given birth to them.

INSTEAD of undertaking particular recommendations on this subject, in which I
could be guided by no lights derived from official opportunities, I shall again
give way to my entire confidence in your discernment and pursuit of the public
good.

FOR I assure myself that whilst you carefully avoid every alteration which
might endanger the benefits of an united and effective government, or which
ought to await the future lesson of experience; a reverence for the
characteristic rights of free men, and a regard for the public harmony, will
sufficiently influence your deliberations on the question how far the former
can be more impregnably fortified, or the latter be safely and advantageously
promoted.

To the preceding observations I have one to add, which will be most properly
addressed to the House of Representatives, it concerns myself, and will
therefore be as brief as possible.

WHEN I was first honored with a call into the service of my country, then on
the eve of an arduous struggle for its liberties, the light in which I
contemplated my duty required that I should renounce every pecuniary
compensation. From this resolution I have in no instance departed. And being
still under the impressions which produced it, I must decline as inapplicable
to myself, any share in the personal emoluments, which may be indispensibly
concluded in a permanent provision for the executive department; and must
accordingly pray, that the pecuniary estimates for the station in which I am
placed, may, during my continuance in it, be limited to such actual
expenditures as the public good may be thought to require.

HAVING thus imparted to you my sentiments, as they have been awakened by the
occasion which brings us together -- I shall take my present leave; but not
without resorting once more to the benign parent of the human race, in humble
supplication, that since he has been pleased to favor the American people with
oportunities for deliberating in perfect tranquillity, and dispositions for
deciding with unparalleled unanimity on a form of government, for the security
of their union, and the advancement of their happiness; so his blessing may be
equally conspicuous in the enlarged views, the temperate consultations, and the
wise measures on which the success of this government must depend.

Valedictory address OF PRESIDENT WASHINGTON, TO THE PEOPLE OF THE UNITED
STATES.
Friends and Fellow-Citizens,
THE period for a new election of a citizen, to administer the executive
government of the United States being not far distant, and the time actually
arrived when your thoughts must be employed in designating the person, who is
to be clothed with that important trust, it appears to me prope^, especially
as it may conduce to a more distinct expression of the public voice, that I
should now apprise you of the resolution I have formed, to decline being
considered among the number of those out of whom a choice is to be made.

I BEG you at the same time to do me the justice to be assured, that this
resolution has not been taken, without a strict regard to all the
considerations appertaining to the relation which binds a dutiful citizen to
his country; and that in withdrawing the tender of service which silence in my
situation will imply, I am influenced by no diminution of zeal for your future
interest; no deficiency of grateful respect for your past kindness; but am
supported by a full conviction, that the step is compatible with both.

THE acceptance of, and continuance hitherto, in the office to which your
suffrages has twice called me, have been an uniform sacrifice of inclination to
the opinion of duty, and to a deference for what appeared to be your desire. I
constantly hoped that it would have been much earlier in my power, consistently
with motives, which I was not at liberty to disregard, to return to that
retirement from which I had been reluctantly drawn. The strength of my
inclination to do this, previous to the last election, had even led to the
preparation of an Address to declare it to you; but mature reflection on the
then perplexed and critical posture of our affairs with foreign nations, and
the unanimous advice of persons entitled to my confidence, impelled me to
abandon the idea.

I REJOICE that the state of your concerns, external as well as internal, no
longer renders the pursuit of inclination incompatible with the sentiment of
duty or propriety: and am persuaded whatever partiality may be retained for my
services, that in the present circumstances of our country, you will not
disapprove of my determination to retire.

THE impressions with which I first undertook the arduous trust, were explained
on the proper occasion. In the discharge of this trust I will only say, that I
have with good intentions contributed toward the organization and
administration of the government, the best exertions of which a very fallible
judgment was capable. Not unconscious, in the out-set, of the inferiority of
any qualifications, experience in my own eyes, perhaps still more in the eyes
of others, has strengthened the motives to diffidence of myself; and every day
the increasing weight of years admonishes me more and more, that the shade of
retirement is as necessary to me as it will be welcome. Satisfied that if any
circumstances have given peculiar value to my services, they were temporary, I
have the consolation to believe, that while choice and prudence invite me to
quit the political scene, patriotism does not forbid it.

IN looking forward to the moment which is intended to terminate the career of
my public life, my feelings do not permit me to suspend the deep acknowledgment
of that debt of gratitude which I owe to my beloved country, for the many
honors it has conferred upon me; still more for the steadfast confidence with
which it has supported me; and for the opportunities I have thence enjoyed of
manifesting my inviolable attachment, by services faithful and persevering,
though in usefulness unequal to my zeal. If benefits have resulted to our
country from these services, let it always be remembered to your praise, and as
an instructive example in our annals, that under circumstances in which the
passions, agitated in every direction, were liable to mislead amidst
appearances sometimes dubious -- vicissitudes of fortune often discouraging --
in situations in which not unfrequently want of success has countenanced the
spirit of criticism -- the constancy of your support was the essential prop of
the efforts, and a guarantee of the plans by which they were effected.
Profoundly penetrated with this idea, I shall carry it with me to my grave, as
a strong incitement to unceasing wishes, that Heaven may continue to you the
choicest tokens of its beneficence -- that your union and brotherly affection
may be perpetual -- that the free constitution, which is the work of your
hands, may be sacredly maintained -- that its administration in every
department may be stamped with wisdom and virtue -- that in fine, the happiness
of the people of these states, under the auspices of liberty, may be made
complete, by so careful a preservation and so prudent a use of this blessing,
as will acquire to them the glory of recommending it to the applause, the
affection, and the adoption of every nation which is yet a stranger to it.

HERE, perhaps, I ought to stop. But a solicitude for your welfare, which
cannot end but with my life, and the apprehension of danger, natural to that
solicitude, urge me, on an occasion like the present, to offer to your solemn
contemplation, and to recommend to your frequent review, some sentiments, which
are the result of much reflection, of no inconsiderable observation, and which
appear to me all important to the permanency of your felicity as a people.
These will be offered to you with the more freedom, as you can only see in them
the disinterested warnings of a parting friend, who can possibly have no
personal motive to bias his counsel. Nor can I forget, as an encouragement to
it, your indulgent reception of my sentiments on a former and not dissimilar
occasion.

INTERWOVEN as is the love of liberty with every ligament of your hearts, no
recommendation of mine is necessary to fortify or confirm the attachment.

THE unity of government, which constitutes you one people, is also now dear to
you. It is justly so; for it is a main pillar in the edifice of your real
independence; the support of your tranquillity at home; your peace abroad; of
your safety, of your prosperity; of that very liberty which you so highly
prize. But as it is easy to foresee, that from different causes and from
different quarters, much pains will be taken, many artifices employed to weaken
in your minds the conviction of this truth. As this is the point in your
political fortress against which the batteries of internal and external enemies
will be most constantly and actively (though often covertly and insidiously)
directed, it is of infinite moment, that you should properly estimate the
immense value of your national union, to your collective and individual
happiness; that you should cherish a cordial, habitual, and immovable
attachment to it; accustoming yourselves to think and speak of it as of the
palladium of your political safety and prosperity, watching for its
preservation with jealous anxiety; discountenancing whatever may suggest even a
suspicion that it can in any event be abandoned; and indignantly frowning upon
the first dawning of every attempt to alienate any portion of our country from
the rest, or to enfeeble the sacred ties which now link together the various
parts.

FOR this you have every inducement of sympathy and interest. Citizens by birth
or choice, of a common country, that country has a right to concentrate your
affections. The name of AMERICAN, which belongs to you in your national
capacity, must always exalt the just pride of patriotism, more than any
appellation derived from local discriminations. With slight shades of
difference, you have the same religion, manners, habits, and political
principles. You have in a common cause fought and triumphed together; the
independence and liberty you possess, are the work of joint councils, and joint
efforts of common dangers, sufferings and successes.

BUT these considerations, however powerfully they address themselves to your
sensibility, are greatly outweighed by those which apply more immediately to
your interest. Here every portion of our country finds the most commanding
motives for carefully guarding and preserving the union of the whole.

THE north, in an unrestrained intercourse with the south, protected by the
equal laws of a common government, finds in the productions of the latter,
great additional resources of maritime and commercial enterprise and precious
materials of manufacturing industry. The south in the same intercourse,
benefiting by the agency of the north, sees its agriculture grow and its
commerce expand. Turning partly into its own channels the seamen of the north,
it finds its particular navigation invigorated -- and while it contributes, in
different ways, to nourish and increase the general mass of the national
navigation, it looks forward to the protection of a maritime strength, to which
itself is unequally adapted. The east, in like intercourse with the west,
already finds, and in the progressive improvement of interior communications,
by land and water, will more and more find a valuable vent for the commodities
which it brings from abroad, or manufactures at home. The west derives from the
east supplies requisite to its growth and comfort -- and what is perhaps of
still greater consequence, it must of necessity owe the secure enjoyment of
indispensible outlets for its own productions to the weight, influence, and the
future maritime strength of the Atlantic side of the union, directed by an
indissoluble community of interest as one nation. Any other tenure by which the
west can hold this essential advantage, whether derived from its own separate
strength, or from an apostate and unnatural connection with any foreign power
must be intrinsically precarious.

WHILE then every part of our country thus feels an immediate and particular
interest in union, all the parties combined cannot fail to (...) in the united
mass of means and efforts, greater strength, greater resource, proportionably
greater security from external danger, a less frequent interruption of their
peace by foreign nations; and what is of inestimable value they must derive
from union an exemption from those broils and wars between themselves which so
frequently afflict neighboring countries, not tied together by the same
government; which their own rivalships alone would be sufficient to produce,
but which opposite foreign alliances, attachments and intrigues, would
stimulate and embitter. Hence likewise they will avoid the necessity of those
overgrown military establishments, which under any form of government are
inauspicious to liberty, and which are to be regarded as particularly hostile
to republican liberty: In this sense it is, that your union ought to be
considered as a main prop of your liberty, and that the love of the one ought
to endear to you the preservation of the other.

THESE considerations speak a persuasive language to every reflecting and
virtuous mind, and exhibit the continuance of the union as a primary object of
patriotic desire. Is there a doubt whether a common government can embrace so
large a sphere? Let experience solve it. To listen to mere speculation in such
a case were criminal. We are authorized to hope that a proper organization of
the whole, with the auxiliary agency of governments for the respective
subdivisions, will afford a happy issue to the experiment. It Is well worth a
fair and full experiment. -- With such powerful and obvious motives to union,
affecting all parts of our country, while experience shall not have
demonstrated its impracticability, there will always be reason to distrust the
patriotism of those, who in any quarter may endeavor to weaken its bands.

IN contemplating the causes which may disturb our union, it occurs as a matter
of serious concern, that any ground should have been furnished for
characterising parties by geographical discriminations -- northern and southern
-- atlantic and western: whence designing men may endeavor to excite a belief
that there is a real difference of local interests and views. One of the
expedients of party to acquire influence, within particular districts, is to
misrepresent the opinions and aims of other districts. You cannot shield
yourselves too much against the jealousies and heart burnings which spring from
these misrepresentations: they tend to render alien to each other, those who
ought to be bound together by fraternal affection. The inhabitants of our
western country have lately had a useful lesson on this head: they have seen,
in the negotiation by the Executive, and in the unanimous ratification by the
Senate, of the treaty with Spain, and in the universal satisfaction at that
event, throughout the United States, a decisive proof how unfounded were the
suspicions propagated among them of a policy in the general government, and in
the Atlantic states, unfriendly to their interests in regard to the Missisippi:
they have been witnesses to the formation of two treaties, that with
Great Britain and that with Spain, which secure to them every thing they could
desire, in respect to our foreign relations, toward confirming their
prosperity. Will it not be their wisdom to rely for the preservation of these
advantages on the union by which they were procured? Will they not henceforth
be deaf to those advisers, if such there are, who would sever them from their
brethren, and connect them with aliens?

To the efficacy and permanency of your union, a government for the whole is
indispensable. -- No alliances, however strict, between the parts can be an
adequate substitute; they must inevitably experience the infractions and
interruptions which all alliances in all times have experienced. Sensible of
this momentous truth, you have improved upon your first essay, by the adoption
of a constitution of government, better calculated than your former, for an
intimate union, and for the efficacious management of your common concerns.
This government, the offspring of our own choice, uninfluenced and unawed,
adopted upon full investigation and mature deliberation, completely free in its
principles, in the distribution of its powers, uniting security with energy,
and containing within itself a provision for its own amendments, has a just
claim to your confidence and your support. Respect for its authority,
compliance with its laws, acquiescence in its measures, are duties enjoined by
the fundamental maxims of true liberty. The basis of our political systems is
the right of the people to make and to alter their constitutions of government
-- But the constitution which at any time exists, until changed by an explicit
and authentic act of the whole people, is sacredly obligatory upon all. The
very idea of the power and the right of the people to establish a government,
presupposes the duty of every individual to obey the established government.

ALL obstructions to the execution of the laws, all combinations and
associations, under whatever plausible character, with the real design to
direct, control, counteract, or awe the regular deliberation and action of the
constituted authorities, are destructive of this fundamental principle, and of
fatal tendency. They serve to organize faction, to give it an artificial and
extraordinary force, to put in the place of the delegated will of the nation,
the will of a party, often a small, but artful and enterprizing minority of the
community; and according to the alternate triumphs of different parties, to
make the public administration the mirror of the ill-concerted and incongruous
projects of faction, rather than the organ of consistent and wholesome plans,
digested by common councils, and modified by mutual interests.

HOWEVER combinations or associations of the above description may now and then
answer popular ends, they are likely in the course of time and things to become
potent engines, by which cunning, ambitious, and unprincipled men, will be
enabled to subvert the power of the people, and to usurp for themselves the
reins of government; destroying afterward the very engines which have lifted
them to unjust dominion.

TOWARD the preservation of your government, and the permanency of your
present happy state, it is requisite not only that you speedily discountenance
irregular oppositions to its acknowledged authority, but also that you resist
with care the spirit of innovation upon its principles however specious the
pretexts. -- One method of assault may be to effect in the forms of the
constitution alterations which will impair the energy of the system, and thus
to undermine what cannot be directly overthrown. In all the changes to which
you may be invited, remember that time and habit are at least as necessary to
fix the true character of governments, as of other human institutions -- that
experience is the surest standard, by which to test the real tendency of the
existing constitution of a country -- that facility in changes upon the credit
of mere hypothesis and opinion, exposes to perpetual change, from the endless
variety of hypothesis and opinion; and remember, especially that for the
efficient management of your common interests, in a country so extensive as
ours, a government of as much vigor as is consistent with the perfect security
of liberty, is indispensible. Liberty itself will find in such a government,
with powers properly distributed and adjusted, its surest guardian. It is
indeed, little else than a name, where the government is too feeble to
withstand the enterprises of faction, to confine each member of the society
within the limits prescribed by the laws, and to maintain all in the secure and
tranquil enjoyment of the rights of person and property.

I HAVE already intimated to you, the danger of parties in the state, with
particular reference to the founding of them on geographical discriminations.
Let me now take a more comprehensive view, and warn you in the most solemn
manner against the baneful effects of the spirit of party, generally.

THIS spirit, unfortunately, is inseparable from our nature, having its root in
the strongest passions of the human mind. It exists under different shapes in
all governments, more or less stifled, controuled, or repressed; but in those
of the popular form, it is seen in its greatest rankness, and is truly their
worst enemy.

THE alternate domination of one faction over another, sharpened by the spirit
of revenge, natural to party dissension, which in different ages and countries
has perpetrated the most horrid enormities, is itself a frightful despotism. --
But this leads at length to a more formal and permanent despotism. -- The
disorders and miseries which result, gradually incline the minds of men to seek
security and repose in the absolute power of an individual: and sooner or later
the chief of some prevailing faction, more able or more fortunate than his
competitors, turns this disposition to the purposes of his own elevation, on
the ruins of public liberty.

WITHOUT looking forward to an extremity of this kind (which nevertheless ought
not to be out of sight) the common and continual mischiefs of the spirit of
party are sufficient to make it the interest and duty of a wise people to
discourage and restrain it.

IT serves always to distract the public councils and enfeeble the public
administration. It agitates the community with ill-founded jealousies and false
alarms: kindles the animosity of one part against another, foments occasionally
riot and insurrection. It opens the door to foreign influence and corruption,
which find a facilitated access to the government itself through the channels
of party passions. Thus the policy and the will of one country are subjected to
the policy and will of another.

THERE is an opinion that parties in free countries are useful checks upon the
administration of the government, and serve to keep alive the spirit of
liberty. This within certain limits is probably true; and in governments of a
monarchial cast, patriotism may look with indulgence, if not with favor upon
the spirit of party. But in those of the popular character, in governments
purely elective, it is a spirit not to be encouraged. From their natural
tendency, it is certain there will always be enough of that spirit for every
salutary purpose. And there being constant danger of excess, the effort ought
to be, by force of public opinion to mitigate and assuage it. A fire not to be
quenched; it demands a uniform vigilance to prevent its bursting into a flame,
lest instead of warming it should consume.

IT is important likewise, that the habits of thinking in a free country,
should inspire caution, in those entrusted with its administration, to confine
themselves within their respective constitutional spheres, avoiding in the
exercise of the powers of one department to encroach upon another. The spirit
of encroachment tends to consolidate the powers of all the departments in one,
and thus to create, whatever the form of government, a real despotism. A just
estimate of that love of power, and proneness to abuse it, which predominates
in the human heart, is sufficient to satisfy us of the truth of this position.
The necessity of reciprocal checks in the exercise of political power; by
dividing and distributing it into different depositaries, and constituting each
the guardian of the public weal against invasions by the others, has been
evinced by experiments ancient and modern; some of them in our country and
under our own eyes. To preserve them must be as necessary as to institute them.
If in the opinion of the people, the distribution or modification of the
constitutional powers, be in any particular wrong, let it be corrected by an
amendment in the way which the constitution designates. -- But let there be no
change by usurpation; for though this in one instance, may be the instrument of
good, it is the customary weapon by which free governments are destroyed. --
The precedent must always greatly overbalance in permanent evil, any partial or
transient benefit which the use can at any time yield.

OF all the dispositions and habits which lead to political prosperity,
religion and morality are indispensible supports. -- In vain would that man
claim the tribute of patriotism, who should labor to subvert these great
pillars of human happiness, these firmest props of the duties of men and
citizens. -- The mere politician, equally with the pious man, ought to respect
and to cherish them. -- A volume could not trace all their connections with
private and public felicity. Let it simply be asked, where is the security for
property, for reputation, for life, if the sense of religious obligation desert
the oaths, which are the instruments of investigation in courts of justice? And
let us with caution indulge the supposition, that morality can be maintained
without religion. Whatever may be conceded to the influence of refined
education on minds of peculiar structure; reason and experience both forbid us
to expect that national morality can prevail in exclusion of religious
principles.

It IS substantially true, that virtue or morality is a necessary spring of
popular government. The rule indeed extends with more or less force to every
species of free government. Who that is a sincere friend to it can look with
indifference upon attempts to shake the foundation of the fabric?

PROMOTE then, as an object of primary importance, institutions for the general
diffusion of knowledge. -- In proportion as the structure of a government gives
force to public opinion, it is essential that public opinion should be
enlightened.

AS a very important source of strength and security, cherish public credit.
One method of preserving it is to use it as sparingly as possible; avoiding
occasions of expense by cultivating peace, but remembering also that timely
disbursements to prepare for danger, frequently prevent much greater
disbursements to repel it; avoiding likewise the accumulation of debt, not only
by shunning occasions of expense, but by vigorous exertions in time of peace to
discharge the debts which unavoidable wars may have occasioned, not
ungenerously throwing upon posterity the burden which we ourselves ought to
bear. -- The execution of these maxims belongs to your representatives, but it
is necessary that public opinion should cooperate. -- To facilitate to them
the performance of their duty, it is essential that you should practically bear
in mind, that toward the payment of debts there must be revenue; that to have
revenue there must be taxes; that no taxes can be devised which are not more or
less inconvenient and unpleasant; that the intrinsic embarrassment inseparable
from the selection of the proper objects (which is always a choice of
difficulties) ought to be a decisive motive for a candid construction of the
conduct of the government in making it, and for a spirit of acquiescence in the
measures for obtaining revenue which the public exigencies may at any time
dictate.

OBSERVE good faith and justice toward all nations, cultivate peace and
harmony with all; religion and morality enjoin this conduct; and can it be that
good policy does not equally enjoin it? It will be worthy of a free,
enlightened, and at no distant period a great nation, to give to mankind the
magnanimous and too novel example of a people always guided by an exalted
justice and benevolence. Who can doubt that in the course of time and things
the fruits of such a plan would richly repay any temporary advantages which
might be lost by a steady adherence to it? Can it be, that Providence has not
connected the permanent felicity of a nation with its virtue? The experiment,
at least, is recommended by every sentiment which ennobles human nature. Alas!
is it rendered impossible by its vices?

IN the execution of such a plan, nothing is more essential than that
permanent, inveterate antipathies against particular nations, and passionate
attachments for others should be excluded; and that in place of them just and
amicable feelings toward all should be cultivated. The nation, which indulges
toward another an habitual hatred, or an habitual fondness, is in some degree
a slave. It is a slave to its animosity or to its affection, either of which is
sufficient to lead it astray from its duty and its interest. Antipathy in one
nation against another, disposes each more readily to offer insult and injury,
to lay hold of slight causes of umbrage, and to be haughty and intractable,
when accidental or trifling occasions of dispute occur.

HENCE frequent collisions, obstinate, envenomed, and bloody contests. The
nation, prompted by ill will and resentment, sometimes impels to war the
government, contrary to the best calculations of policy. The government
sometimes participates in the national propensity, and adopts through passion
what reason would reject; at other times, it makes the animosity of the nation
subservient to projects of hostility instigated by pride, ambition, and other
sinister and pernicious motives. The peace often, and sometimes, perhaps, the
liberty of nations has been the victim.

So likewise, a passionate attachment of one nation for another, produces a
variety of evils. Sympathy for the favorite nation facilitating the illusion of
an imaginary common interest in cases where no real common interests exists,
and infusing into one the enmities of the other, betrays the former into a
participation in the quarrels and wars of the latter, without adequate
inducement or justification. It leads also to concessions to the favorite
nation of privileges denied to others, which is apt doubly to injure the nation
making the concessions: by unnecessarily parting with what ought to have been
retained; and by exciting jealousy, ill will, and a disposition to retaliate,
in the parties from whom equal privileges are withheld: and it gives to
ambitious, corrupted, or deluded citizens (who devote themselves to the
favorite nation) facility to betray, or sacrifice the interests of their own
country, without odium, sometimes even with popularity; gilding with the
appearances of a virtuous sense of obligation, a commendable deference for
public opinion, or laudable zeal for public good, the base or foolish
compliances of ambition, corruption, or infatuation.

AS avenues to foreign influence in innumerable ways, such attachments are
particularly alarming to the truly enlightened and independent patriot. How
many opportunities do they afford to tamper with domestic factions, to practice
the arts of seduction, to mislead public opinion, to influence or awe the
public councils? Such an attachment of a small or weak, toward a great and
powerful nation, dooms the former to be the satellite of the latter. -- Against
the insidious wiles of foreign influence (I conjure you to believe me,
fellow-citizens) the jealousy of a free people ought to be constantly awake;
since history and experience prove that foreign influence is one of the most
baneful foes of republican government. But that jealousy to be useful must be
impartial; else it becomes the instrument of the very influence to be avoided,
instead of a defense against it. Excessive partiality for one foreign nation,
and excessive dislike of another, cause those whom they actuate to see danger
only on one side, and serve to veil and even second the arts of influence on
the other. Real patriots, who may resist the intrigues of the favorite, are
liable to become suspected and odious; while its tools and dupes usurp the
applause and confidence of the people, to surrender their interests.

THE great rule of conduct for us, in regard to foreign nations, is in
extending our commercial relations, to have with them as little political
connection as possible. So far as we have already formed engagements, let them
be fulfilled with perfect good faith. Here let us stop.

EUROPE has a set of primary interests, which to us have none, or a very remote
relation. Hence she must be engaged in frequent controversies, the causes of
which are essentially foreign to our concerns. Hence, therefore, it must be
unwise in us to implicate ourselves by artificial ties, in the ordinary
vicissitudes of her politics, or the ordinary combinations and collisions of
her friendships or enmities.

OUR detached and distant situation, invites and enables us to pursue a
different course. If we remain one people, under an efficient government, the
period is not far off, when we may defy material injury from external
annoyance; when we may take such an attitude as will cause the neutrality we
may at any time resolve upon, to be scrupulously respected; when belligerent
nations, under the impossibility of making acquisitions upon us, will not
lightly hazard the giving us provocation; when we may choose peace or war, as
our interest, guided by justice, shall counsel.

WHY forego the advantages of so peculiar a situation? Why quit our own to
stand upon foreign ground? Why, by interweaving our destiny with that of any
part of Europe, entangle our peace and prosperity in the toils of European
ambition, rivalship, interest, humor or caprice?

IT IS our true policy to steer clear of permanent alliances with any portion of
the foreign world; so far, I mean, as we are now at liberty to do it; for let
me not be understood as capable of patronising infidelity to existing
engagements. I hold the maxim no less applicable to public than to private
affairs, that honesty is always the best policy. I repeat it, therefore, let
those engagements be observed in their genuine sense. But in my opinion, it is
unnecessary, and would be unwise to extend them.

TAKING care always to keep ourselves, by suitable establishments, on a
respectable defensive posture, we may safely trust to temporary alliances for
extraordinary emergencies.

HARMONY, liberal intercourse with all nations, are recommended by policy,
humanity, and interest. But even our commercial policy should hold an equal and
impartial hand; neither seeking nor granting exclusive favors or preferences;
consulting the natural course of things; diffusing and diversifying by gentle
means the streams of commerce, but forcing nothing; establishing, with powers
so disposed, in order to give trade a stable course, to define the rights of
our merchants, and to enable the government to support them; conventional rules
of intercourse, the best that present circumstances and mutual opinion will
permit, but temporary, and liable to be from time to time abandoned or varied,
as experience and circumstances shall dictate; constantly keeping in view, that
it is folly in one nation to look for disinterested favors from another; that
it must pay with a portion of its independence for whatever it may accept under
that character; that by such acceptance, it may place itself in the condition
of having given equivalents for nominal favors, and yet of being reproached
with ingratitude for not giving more. There can be no greater error than to
expect, or calculate upon real favors from nation to nation. It Is an illusion
which experience must cure, which a just pride ought to discard.

IN offering to you, my countrymen, these counsels of an old and affectionate
friend, I dare not hope they will make the strong and lasting impression I
could wish -- that they will control the usual current of the passions, or
prevent our nation from running the course which has hitherto marked the
destiny of nations. But if I may even flatter myself, that they may be
productive of some partial benefit, some occasional good; that they may now and
then recur to moderate the fury of party spirit, to warn against the mischiefs
of foreign intrigues, to guard against the impostures of pretended patriotism;
this hope will be a full recompense for the solicitude for your welfare, by
which they have been dictated.

HOW far in the discharge of my official duties, I have been guided by the
principles which have been delineated, the public records and other evidences
of my conduct must witness to you and to the world. To myself, the assurance of
my own conscience is, that I have at least believed myself to be guided by them.

IN relation to the still subsisting war in Europe, my proclamation of the 22d
of April, 1793, is the index to my plan. -- Sanctioned by your approving voice,
and by that of your Representatives in both Houses of Congress, the spirit of
that measure has continually governed me; uninfluenced by any attempts to deter
or divert me from it.

AFTER deliberate examination with the aid of the best lights I could obtain, I
was well satisfied that our country, under all the circumstances of the case,
had a right to take, and was bound in duty and interest, to take a neutral
position. Having taken it, I determined, as far as should depend upon me, to
maintain it, with moderation, perseverance and firmness.

THE considerations which respect the right to hold this conduct, it is not
necessary on this occasion to detail. I will only observe, that according to my
understanding of the matter, that right, so far from being denied by any of the
belligerent powers, has been virtually admitted by all.

THE duty of holding a neutral conduct may be inferred, without any thing more,
from the obligation which justice and humanity impose on every nation, in cases
in which it is free to act, to maintain inviolate the relations of peace and
amity toward other nations.

THE inducements of interest for observing that conduct will be best referred
to your own reflections and experience. With me, a predominant motive has been
to endeavor to gain time to our country to settle and mature its yet recent
institutions, and to progress without interruption, to that degree of strength
and consistency, which is necessary to give it, humanly speaking, the command
of its own fortunes.

THOUGH in reviewing the incidents of my administration, I am unconscious of
intentional error: I am nevertheless too sensible of my defects not to think it
probable that I may have committed many errors. Whatever they may be, I
fervently beseech the Almighty to avert or mitigate the evils to which they may
tend. I shall also carry with me the hope that my country will never cease to
view them with indulgence; and that after fortyfive years of my life dedicated
to its service, with an upright zeal, the faults of incompetent abilities will
be consigned to oblivion, as myself must soon be to the mansions of rest.

RELYING on its kindness in this as in other things, and actuated by that
fervent love toward it, which is so natural to a man who views in it the
native soil of himself and his progenitors for several generations; I
anticipate with pleasing expectation that retreat, in which I promise myself to
realize, without alloy, the sweet enjoyment of partaking, in the midst of my
fellow-citizens, the benign influence of good laws under a free government --
the ever favorite object of my heart, and the happy reward and trust, of our
mutual cares, labors and dangers.

UNITED STATES, Sept* 17, 1796.
A Letter, FROM HIS EXCELLENCY GEORGE WASHINGTON, TO THE PRESIDENT OF THE
UNITED STATES, ON ACCEPTING THE APPOINTMENT OF COMMANDER IN CHIEF OF THE ARMIES
OF THE UNITED STATES.
Mount Vernon, July 13, 1798. DEAR SIR,
I HAD the honor on the evening of the 11th instant, to receive from the hand
of the secretary of war, your favor of the 7th, announcing that you had, with
the advice and consent of the Senate, appointed me "Lieutenant General and
Commander in Chief of all the armies raised or to be raised for the service of
the United States."

I CANNOT express how greatly affected I am at this new proof of public
confidence, and the highly flattering manner in which you have been pleased to
make the communication; at the same time I must not conceal from you my earnest
wish, that the choice had fallen upon a man less declined in years, and better
qualified to encounter the usual vicissitudes of war.

YOU know, sir, what calculation I had made relative to the probable course of
events, on my retiring from office, and the determination I had consoled myself
with, of closing the remnant of my days in my present peaceful abode: you will
therefore be at no loss to conceive and appreciate the sensations I must have
experienced, to bring my mind to any conclusion that would pledge me, at so
late a period of life, to leave scenes I sincerely love, to enter upon the
boundless field of public action, incessant trouble, and high responsibility.

IT was not possible for me to remain ignorant of, or indifferent to, recent
transactions. The conduct of the Directory of France toward our country; their
insidious hostility to its government; their various practices to withdraw the
affections of the people from it; the evident tendency of their acts and those
of their agents to countenance and invigorate opposition; their disregard of
solemn treaties and the laws of nations; their war upon our defenseless
commerce; their treatment of our ministers of peace; and their demands
amounting to tribute, could not fail to excite in me corresponding sentiments
with those my countrymen have so generally expressed in their affectionate
addresses to you. Believe me, sir, no one can more cordially approve of your
administration. They ought to inspire universal confidence, and will, no doubt
combined with the state of things, call from Congress such laws and means as
will enable you to meet the full force and extent of the crisis.

SATISFIED, therefore, that you have sincerely wished and endeavored to avert
war, and exhausted, to the last drop, the cup of reconciliation, we can with
pure hearts appeal to Heaven for the justice of our cause; and may confidently
trust the final result to that kind Providence who has heretofore, and so
often, signally favored the people of these United States.

THINKING in this manner, and feeling how incumbent it is upon every person of
every description, to contribute at all times to his country's welfare, and
especially in a moment like the present, when every thing we hold dear and
sacred is so seriously threatened; I have finally determined to accept the
commission of Commander in Chief of the armies of the United States; with the
reserve only, that I shall not be called into the field until the army is in a
situation to require my presence, or it becomes indispensible by the urgency of
circumstances.

IN making this reservation, I beg it to be understood, that I do not mean to
withhold any assistance to arrange and organize the army, which you may think I
can afford. I take the liberty also to mention, that I must decline having my
acceptance considered as drawing after it any immediate charge upon the public;
or that I can receive any emoluments annexed to the appointment, before
entering into a situation to incur expense.

THE Secretary of War being anxious to return to the seat of government, I have
detained him no longer than was necessary to a full communication upon the
several points he had in charge.

WITH very great respect and consideration, I have the honor to be, dear sir,
your most obedient humble servant, G. WASHINGTON.

Death of Washington.
On the 14th of December, 1799, died suddenly, at his seat in Virginia, Genesis
GEORGE WASHINGTON, Commander in Chief of the armies of the United States of
America;
MATURE IN YEARS,
COVERED WITH GLORY, AND
RICH IN THE AFFECTIONS OF THE
AMERICAN PEOPLE.

WHEN men of common character are swept from the theater of life, they die
without the tribute of public notice or concern, as they had lived without a
claim to public esteem. When personages of more exalted worth are summoned from
the scenes of sublunary existence, their death calls forth a burst of general
regret, and invigorates the flame of public gratitude. In obedience to the
wishes, and to the voice of their country, the orator, the poet, and the
historian, combine to do justice to the virtues of their character, while the
labors of the painter, the sculptor, and the statuary, in perpetuating their
likeness, do homage to their memory.

BUT, when, in compliance with Heaven's high mandate, the HERO OF THE AGE lies
numbered with the dead -- when the reverend sage, the august statesman, the
father of his country, has resigned his breath -- when the Idol of an Empire,
the envy and admiration of distant nations, and the brightest ornament of human
nature -- when WASHINGTON IS NO MORE! let a sense of the general loss be
testified by the badges of a general mourning; but let not the voice of eulogy
be heard, least the weakness of talents, and the deficiency of language, do
injustice to the luster and fame of the deceased!

FROM Vernon's Mount behold the HERO rise!
Resplendent forms attend him through the skies!
The shades of war-worn veterans round him throng,
And lead, enwrapt, their honored Chief along!
A laurel wreath the immortal Warren bears,
An arch triumphal Mercer's hand prepares,
Young Laurence 'erst the avenging bolt of war,
With port majestic guides the glittering car,
Montgomery's godlike form directs the way,
And Green unfolds the gates of endless day!
While angels, "trumpet-tongued," proclaim through air,
" Due honors for the FIRST OF MEN prepare."
[ True (...)]
The first information of the death of Genesis WASHINGTON, was given to Congress
on the 18th of December, in the following manner:
MR. MARSHALL, in a voice that bespoke the anguish of his mind, and a
countenance expressive of the deepest regret, rose, and delivered himself as
follows:

MR. SPEAKER,

"INFORMATION has just been received, that our illustrious fellow-citizen, the
Commander in Chief of the American Armies and the late President of the United
States, is no more.

THOUGH this distressing intelligence is not certain, there is too much reason
to believe its truth. After receiving information of this national calamity, so
heavy and so afflicting, the House of Representatives can be but ill fitted for
public business. I move you, therefore, they adjourn."

THE motion was unanimously agreed to; and the House adjourned till tomorrow
morning, 11 o'clock.

December 19.
THIS event was confirmed officially by a message from the President
communicating a letter from Tobias Lear, Esquire. private secretary to Genesis
WASHINGTON.

Gentlemen of the Senate, and of the House of Representatives,
THE letter herewith transmitted will inform you, that it has pleased Divine
Providence to remove from this life, our excellent fellow-citizen GEORGE
WASHINGTON, by the purity of his character and a long series of services to his
country, rendered illustrious through the world. It remains for an affectionate
and grateful people; in whose hearts he can never die, to pay suitable honor to
his memory.

JOHN ADAMS.


Mount Vernon, December 16, 1799. SIR,
IT is with inexpressible grief, that I have to announce to you the death of
the great and good General WASHINGTON. He died last evening between 10 and 11
o'clock, after a short illness of about twenty-four hours. His disorder was an
inflamatory sore throat, which proceeded from a cold, of which he made but
little complaint on Friday. On Saturday morning about 3 o'clock he became ill.
Doctor Dick attended him in the morning and Dr. Craick, of Alexandria, and Dr.
Brown, of Port Tobacco, were soon after called in. Every medical assistance was
offered, but without the desired effect. His last scene corresponded with the
whole tenor of his life. Not a groan nor a complaint escaped him, in extreme
distress. With perfect resignation and a full possession of his reason, he
closed his well spent life.

I have the honor to be, etc. TOBIAS LEAR.


Mr. MARSHALL, with deep sorrow on his countenance, and in a low, pathetic tone
of voice, rose and addressed the House as follows:

THE melancholy event which was yesterday announced with doubt, has been
rendered but too certain. Our WASHINGTON is no more! The hero, the sage, and
the patriot of America -- the man on whom in times of danger every eye was
turned and all hopes were placed, lives now, only in his own great actions, and
in the hearts of an affectionate and afflicted people.

IF, sir, it had even not been usual openly to testify respect for the memory
of those whom Heaven had selected as its instruments for dispensing good to
men, yet such has been the uncommon worth, and such the extraordinary incidents
which have marked the life of him whose loss we all deplore, that the whole
American nation, impelled by the same feelings, would call with one voice for a
public manifestation of that sorrow which is so deep and so universal.

MORE than any other individual, and as much as to one individual was possible,
has he contributed to found this our wide spreading empire, and to give to the
western world its independence and its freedom.

HAVING effected the great object for which he was placed at the head of our
armies, we have seen him convert the sword into the ploughshare, and
voluntarily sink the soldier into the citizen.

WHEN the debility of our federal system had become manifest, and the bonds
which connected the parts of this vast continent were dissolving, we have seen
him the chief of those patriots who formed for us a constitution, which, by
preserving the union, will, I trust, substantiate and perpetuate those
blessings our revolution had promised to bestow.

IN obedience to the general voice of his country, calling on him to preside
over a great people, we have seen him once more quit the retirement he loved,
and in a season more stormy and tempestuous than war itself, with calm and wise
determination, pursue the true interests of the nation, and contribute more
than any other could contribute, to the establishment of that system of policy,
which will, I trust, yet preserve our peace, our honor and our independence.

HAVING been twice unanimously chosen the chief magistrate of a free people, we
see him, at a time when his re-election with the universal suffrage could not
have been doubted, affording to the world a rare instance of moderation, by
withdrawing from his high station to the peaceful walks of private life.

HOWEVER the public confidence may change, and the public affections may
fluctuate with respect to others, yet with respect to him they have, in war and
in peace, in public and in private life, been as steady as his own firm mind,
and as constant as his own exalted virtues.

LET us then, Mr. Speaker, pay the last tribute of respect and affection to our
departed friend. -- Let the grand council of the nation display those
sentiments which the nation feels.

FOR this purpose, I hold in my hand some resolutions which I will take the
liberty to offer to the House.

RESOLVED, That this House will wait on the President of the United States, in
condolence of this mournful event.

RESOLVED, That the Speaker's chair be shrouded with black, and that the
members and officers of the House wear black during the session.

RESOLVED, That a committee in conjunction with one from the Senate, be
appointed to consider on the most suitable manner of paying honor to the memory
of the man, first in war, first in peace, and first in the hearts of his
country.

RESOLVED, That this House when it adjourn, do adjourn to Monday.

THESE resolutions were unanimously agreed to. Sixteen members were appointed
on the third resolution.

GENERALS Marshall and Smith were appointed to wait on the President to know at
what time it would be convenient to receive the House.

GENERALS Marshall and Smith having waited on the President with the first
resolution, reported, that the President would be ready to receive them at one
o'clock this day. The House accordingly waited on him.

THE Speaker addressed the President in the following words:

SIR, THE House of Representatives, penetrated with a sense of the irreparable
loss sustained by the nation, by the death of that great and good man, the
illustrious and beloved WASHINGTON, wait on you, sir, to express their
condolence on this melancholy and distressing event.

To which the President made the following answer:

Gentlemen of the House of Representatives,
I RECEIVE with great respect and affection the condolence of the House of
Representatives on the melancholy and afflicting event in the death of the most
illustrious and beloved personage which this country ever produced. I
sympathize with you, with the nation, and with good men through the world, in
this irreparable loss sustained by us all.

JOHN ADAMS.


A MESSAGE was received from the Senate, informing the House that they had
agreed to the appointment of a joint committee, to consider a suitable manner
of paying honor to the memory of the man first in war, first in peace, and
first in the hearts of his country, and that they had appointed seven members
to join a committee of the House for that purpose.

SENATE. December 23. AGREEABLY to the first resolution the House waited on the
President, whom they addressed in the following words:
THE Senate of the United States respectfully take leave, sir, to express to
you their deep regret for the loss their country sustains in the death of
General GEORGE WASHINGTON.

THIS event, so distressing to all our fellow-citizens, must be peculiarly
heavy to you, who have long been associated with him in deeds of patriotism.
Permit us, sir, to mingle our tears with yours: on this occasion it is manly to
weep. To lose such a man at such a crisis is no common calamity to the world:
our country mourns her father. The Almighty disposer of human events has taken
from us our greatest benefactor and ornament. It becomes us to submit with
reverence to him, who "makes darkness his pavilion."

WITH patriotic pride we review the life of our WASHINGTON, and compare him
with those of other countries who have been pre-eminent in fame. Ancient and
modern names are diminished before him. Greatness and guilt have too often been
allied; but his fame is whiter than it is brilliant. The destroyers of nations
stood abashed at the majesty of his virtue. It reproved the intemperance of
their ambition and darkened the splendour of victory. The scene is closed, and
we are no longer anxious lest misfortune should sully his glory; he has
traveled on to the end of his journey and carried with him an increasing
weight of honor; he has deposited it safely, where misfortune cannot tarnish
it, where malice cannot blast it. Favored of Heaven, he departed without
exhibiting the weakness of humanity; magnanimous in death, the darkness of the
grave could not obscure his brightness.

SUCH was the man whom we deplore. Thanks to God, his glory is consummated.
WASHINGTON yet lives on earth in his spotless example -- his spirit is in
Heaven.

LET his countrymen consecrate the memory of the heroic general, the patriotic
statesman, and the virtuous sage: let them teach their children never to forget
that the fruits of his labors, and his example are their inheritance.

To which the President returned the following answer:

Gentlemen of the Senate,
I RECEIVE with the most respectful and affectionate sentiments, in this
impressive address, the obliging expressions of your regret for the loss our
country has sustained, in the death of her most esteemed, beloved, and admired
citizen.

IN the multitude of my thoughts and recollections, on this melancholy event,
you will permit me only to say, that I have seen him in the days of adversity,
in some of the scenes of his deepest and most trying perplexities; I have also
attended him in his highest elevation and most prosperous felicity; with
uniform admiration of his wisdom, moderation and constancy.

AMONG all our original associates, in that memorable league of the continent
in 1774, which first expressed the sovereign will of a free nation in America,
he was the only one remaining in the general government. Although, with a
constitution more enfeebled than his, at an age when he thought it necessary to
prepare for retirement, I feel myself alone, bereaved of my last brother; yet I
derive a strong consolation from the unanimous disposition, which appears in
all ages and classes, to mingle their sorrows with mine, on this common
calamity to the world.

THE life of our WASHINGTON cannot suffer by a comparison with those of other
countries, who have been most celebrated and exalted by fame. The attributes
and decorations of royalty, could have only served to eclipse the majesty of
those virtues, which made him, from being a modest citizen, a more resplendent
luminary. Misfortune, had he lived, could hereafter have sullied his glory only
with those superficial minds, who, believing that characters and actions are
marked by success alone, rarely deserve to enjoy it. Malice could never blast
his honor, and envy made him a singular exception to her universal rule. -- For
himself he had lived enough, to life and to glory. For his fellow-citizens, if
their prayers could have been answered, he would have been immortal. For me,
his departure is at a most unfortunate moment. Trusting, however, in the wise
and righteous dominion of Providence over the passions of men, and the results
of their councils and actions, as well as over their lives, and nothing remains
for me, but humble resignation.

HIS example is now complete, and it will teach wisdom and virtue to
magistrates, citizens, and men, not only in the present age, but in future
generations, as long as our history shall be read. If a Trajan found a Pliny, a
Marcus Aurelius can never want biographers, eulogists or historians.

JOHN ADAMS.


IN the House of Representatives Genesis Marshall made a report from the joint
committee appointed to consider a suitable mode of commemorating the death of
General WASHINGTON.

HE reported the following resolutions:

RESOLVED by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States of
America in Congress assembled, That a marble monument be erected by the United
States at the capitol of the city of Washington, and that the family of General
WASHINGTON be requested to permit his body to be deposited under it, and that
the monument be so designed as to commemorate the great events of his military
and political life.

And be it further resolved, That there be a funeral procession from Congress
hall to the German Lutheran church, in memory of Genesis GEORGE WASHINGTON, on
Thursday the 26th inst, and that an oration be prepared at the request of
Congress, to be delivered before both Houses that day; and that the President
of the Senate, and Speaker of the House of Representatives, be desired to
request one of the members of Congress to prepare and deliver the same.

And be it further resolved, That it be recommended to the people of the United
States, to wear crape on their left arm, as mourning, for thirty days.

And be it further resolved, That the President of the United States be
requested to direct a copy of these resolutions to be transmitted to Mrs.
Washington, assuring her of the profound respect Congress will ever bear for
her person and character, of their condolence on the late affecting
dispensation of Providence, and entreating her assent to the interment of the
remains of General WASHINGTON in the manner expressed in the first resolution.

And be it further resolved, That the President of the United States be
requested to issue his proclamation, notifying to the people throughout the
United States, the recommendation contained in the third resolution.

THESE resolutions passed both Houses unanimously.

A Proclamation, BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA.
WHEREAS the Congress of the United States "in honor of the memory of Genesis
GEORGE WASHINGTON," have this day resolved, "That it be recommended to the
people of the United States, to wear crape on the left arm as mourning, for
thirty days;" and, "That the President of the United States be requested to
issue a proclamation, notifying to the people throughout the United States the
said recommendation." Now, therefore, I, JOHN ADAMS, President of the United
States, do hereby proclaim the same accordingly.

GIVEN under my hand and the seal of the United States, at Philadelphia, the
twenty-fourth day of December, in the year of our Lord, one thousand seven
hundred and ninety-nine, and of the independence of the United States the
twenty-fourth.

JOHN ADAMS.
By the President, TIMOTHY PICKERING,
Secretary of State.
Adjutant General's Office, New York, December 24, 1799.
MAJOR Genesis Hamilton, has received, through the Secretary of War, the following
order from the President of the United States.

THE President, with deep regret, announces to the army, the death of its
beloved chief, General GEORGE WASHINGTON. Sharing in the grief which every
heart must feel for so heavy and afflicting a public loss, and desirous to
express his high sense of the vast debt of gratitude which is due to the
virtues, talents and ever memorable services of the illustrious deceased, he
directs that funeral honors be paid to him at all the military stations, and
that the officers of the army and of the several corpse of volunteers, wear
crape on the left arm, by way of mourning, for six months. Major General
Hamilton will give the necessary orders for carrying into effect the foregoing
directions.

THE impressive terms, in which this great national calamity is announced by
the President, could receive no new force from any thing that might be added.
The voice of praise would in vain endeavor to exalt a character, unrivalled on
the lists of true glory. Words would in vain attempt to give utterance to that
profound and reverential grief, which will penetrate every American bosom, and
engage the sympathy of an admiring world. If the sad privilege of pre-eminence
in sorrow may justly be claimed by the companions in arms of our lamented
chief, their affections will spontaneously perform the dear, though painful
duty. It is only for me to mingle my tears, with those of my fellow soldiers,
cherishing with them the precious recollection, that while others are paying a
merited tribute to "the man of the age," we in particular, allied as we are to
him by a close tie, are called to mourn the irreparable loss of a kind and
venerable patron and father!

IN obedience to the directions of the President, the following funeral honors
will be paid at the several stations of the army.

AT day break sixteen guns will be fired in quick succession, and one gun at
the distance of each half hour until sun set.

DURING the procession of the troops to the place representing that of the
interment, and until the conclusion of the ceremonial, minute guns will be
fired.

THE bier will be received by the troops formed in line, presenting their arms,
and the officers, drums and colors saluting; after this the procession will
begin; the troops marching by platoons in inverted order, and with arms
reversed to the place of interment -- the drums muffled, and the music playing
a dead march.

THE bier carried by four sergeants, and attended by six pall-bearers, where
there is cavalry, will be preceded by the cavalry and will be followed by the
troops on foot. Where there is ^o cavalry, a detachment of infantry will
precede the bier, which itself will in every case be preceded by such of the
clergy as may be present. The officers of the general staff will immediately
succeed the bier.

WHERE a numerous body of citizens shall be united with the military in the
procession, the whole of the troops will precede the bier, which will then be
followed by the citizens.

WHEN arrived near the place of interment, the procession will halt. The troops
in front of the bier, will form in line, and opening their ranks will face
inwards, to admit the passage of the bier, which will then pass through the
ranks, the troops leaning on their arms reversed while the bier passes! When
the bier shall have passed, the troops will resume their position in line, and
reversing their arms, will remain leaning upon them until the ceremonial shall
be closed.

THE music will now perform a solemn air, after which the introductory, part of
this order shall be read.

AT the end of this, a detachment of infantry appointed for the purpose, will
advance and fire three vollies over the bier. The troops will then return; the
music playing the President's march, the drums previously unmuffled.

THE uniform companies of militia are invited to join in arms the volunteer
corpse.

THE commanders at particular stations, conforming generally to this plan, will
make such exceptions as will accommodate it to situation. At places where
processions of unarmed citizens shall take place, it is the wish of the
Major General that the military ceremonial should be united. And the particular
commanders at those places are authorized to vary the plan, so as to adapt it
to the circumstances.

BRIGADIER General Macpherson is charged to superintend the ceremonial in the
city of Philadelphia. Major Toussard will attend to Fort Mifflin, and will
cooperate with him.

THE day of performing the ceremonial at each station is left to the particular
commanders.

MAJOR General Pinckney will make such further arrangements within his district
as he shall deem expedient.

W. NORTH, Ad. Genesis

December 24, 1799.
THE Speaker informed the House, that in conformity to the second resolution
passed on Monday, Major General Lee had been appointed by the President of the
Senate, and the Speaker of the House of Representatives, to prepare and deliver
the oration in honor of our late illustrious commander in chief, on Thursday
next, which appointment he had been pleased to accept.

A MESSAGE was received from the President of the United States, notifying the
House that he had agreed to the resolutions passed on Monday, in honor of the
memory of General WASHINGTON, and deposited them among the rolls and records of
the United States.

Mr. MARSHALL, from the joint committee appointed to consider and report what
measures ought to be adopted in honor of the memory of Genesis WAHSINGTON, made
another report in part, which was unanimously agreed to by the House, in the
words following, to wit:

Resolved, by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States in
Congress assembled, That it be recommended to the people of the United States,
to assemble on the twenty-second day of February next, in such numbers and
manner as may be convenient, publicly to testify their grief for the death of
General GEORGE WASHINGTON, by suitable eulogies, orations, and discourses; or
by public prayers.

And be it further resolved, That the President of the United States be
requested to recommend the same, by a proclamation for that purpose.

A Proclamation.
BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA.
WHEREAS the Congress of the United States have this day resolved, "That it be
recommended to the people of the United States, to assemble on the
twenty-second day of February next, in such numbers and manner as may be
convenient, publicly to testify their grief for the death of Genesis GEORGE
WASHINGTON, by suitable eulogies, orations and discourses, or by public
prayers;" and, "That the President be requested to issue a proclamation for the
purpose of carrying the foregoing resolution into effect." Now, therefore, I,
JOHN ADAMS, President of the United States of America, de hereby proclaim the
same accordingly.

GIVEN under my hand and the seal of the United States, at Philadelphia, the
sixth day of January, in the year of our Lord, one thousand eight hundred, and
of the independence of the said states the twentyfourth.

JOHN ADAMS.
By the President, TIMOTHY PICKERING
Secretary of State.
PARTICULAR ACCOUNT O^ THE LATE ILLNESS AND DEATH OF George Washington.
Alexandria (Virg.) December 21, 1799.
SOME time in the night of Friday, the 10th instant, having been exposed to a
rain on the preceding day, General WASHINGTON was attacked with an inflammatory
affection of the upper part of the wind pipe, called in technical language
Cynache Trachealis. The disease commenced with a violent ague, accompanied with
some pain in the upper and fore part of the throat, a sense of stricture in the
same part, a cough, and a difficult, rather than a painful deglutition, which
were soon succeeded by fever and a quick and laborious respiration. The
necessity of blood-letting suggesting itself to the General, he procured a
bleeder in the neighborhood, who took from his arm in the night twelve or
fourteen ounces of blood. He could not by any means be prevailed on by the
family to send for the attending physician till the following morning, who
arrived at Mount Vernon at about 11 o'clock on Saturday. Discovering the case
to be highly alarming, and foreseeing the fatal tendency of the disease, two
consulting physicians were immediately sent for, who arrived, one at half after
three, and the other at four o'clock in the afternoon: in the mean time were
employed two pretty copious bleedings, a blister was applied to the part
affected, two moderate doses of calomel were given, and an injection was
administered, which operated on the lower intestines, but all without any
perceptible advantage, the respiration becoming still more difficult and
distressing. Upon the arrival of the first of the consulting physicians, it was
agreed, as there were yet no signs of accumulation in the bronchial vessels of
the lungs, to try the result of another bleeding, when about thirty-two ounces
of blood were drawn; without the smallest apparent alleviation of the disease.
Vapors of vinegar and water were frequently inhaled, ten grains of calomel
were given, succeeded by repeated doses of emetic tartar, amounting in all to
five or six grains, with no other effect than a copious discharge from the
bowels. The powers of life seemed now manifestly yielding to the force of the
disorder; blisters were applied to the extremities, together with a cataplasm
of bran and vinegar to the throat. Speaking, which was painful from the
beginning, now became almost impracticable; respiration grew more and more
contracted and imperfect, till half after 11 on Saturday night, retaining the
full possession of his intellect -- when he expired without a struggle.

HE was fully impressed at the beginning of his complaint, as well as through
every succeeding stage of it, that its conclusion would be mortal; submitting
to the several exertions made for his recovery, rather as a duty, than from any
expectation of their efficacy. He considered the operations of death upon his
system as coeval with the disease; and several hours before his death, after
repeated efforts to be understood, succeeded in expressing a desire that he
might be permitted to die without further interruption.

DURING the short period of his illness, he economized his time, in the
arrangement of such few concerns as required his attention, with the utmost
serenity; and anticipated his appreaching dissolution with every demonstration
of that equanimity for which his whole life has been so uniformly and
singularly conspicuous.

JAMES CRAICK, Attending Physician. ELISHA C. DICK, Consulting Physician.


Washington's Funeral.
Extract of a letter from a correspondent in Alexandria, dated Dec. 19, 1799.
YESTERDAY I attended the funeral of the savior of our country at Mount Vernon;
and had the honor of being one who carried his body to the vault. He was borne
by military gentlemen, and brethren of our lodge, of which he was formerly
master. I enclose you a sketch of the procession. To describe the scene is
impossible. The coffin bore his sword and apron; and the members of the lodge
walked as mourners. His horse was led, properly caprisoned, by two of his
servants, in mourning.

"As I helped place his body in the vault, and stood at the door while the
funeral service was performing, I had the best opportunity of observing the
countenances of all. Every one was affected, but none so much as his domestics
of all ages."

Interment.
George-Town, December 20, 1799.
ON Wednesday last, the mortal part of WASHINGTON the great -- the father of
his country and the friend of man, was consigned to the tomb, with solemn
honors and funeral pomp.

A MULTITUDE of persons assembled, from many miles around, at Mount Vernon, the
choice abode and last residence of the illustrious chief. There were the
groves, the spacious avenues, the beautiful and sublime scenes, the noble
mansion; but alas! the august inhabitant was now no more. That great soul was
gone. His mortal part was there indeed; but ah! how affecting! how awful the
spectacle of such worth and greatness, thus, to mortal eyes, fallen: yes!
fallen! fallen

IN the long and lofty portico, where often the hero walked in all his glory, now
lay the shrouded corpse. The countenance still composed and serene, seemed to
express the dignity of the spirit which lately dwelt in that lifeless form.
There those who paid the last sad honors to the benefactor of his country, took
an impressive, a farewell view.

ON the ornament, at the head of the coffin, was inscribed SURGE AD JUDICIUM;
about the middle of the coffin, GLORIA DEO; and on the silver plate,

Genesis George Washington, DEPARTED THIS LIFE, ON THE 14th DEC. 1799, AEt. 68.

BETWEEN three and four o'clock, the sound of artillery from a vessel in the
river, firing minute guns, awoke afresh our solemn sorrow; the corpse was
moved; a band of music with mournful melody, melted the soul into all the
tenderness of woe.

THE procession was formed and moved on in the following order: Cavalry, with
arms reversed. Guard, Infantry, Music, Clergy, The General's horse, with his
saddle, holsters, and pistols. Col. SIMMS, The Corpse. Col. GILPIN, Col.
RAMSAY, Col. MARSTELLER, Col. PAIN, Col. LITTLE. Mourners, Masonic Brethren,
Citizens.

WHEN the procession had arrived at the bottom of the elevated lawn, on the
banks of the Potomac, where the family vault is placed, the cavalry halted, the
infantry marched toward the Mount and formed the inlines; the clergy, the
masonic brothers, and the citizens descended to the vault, and the funeral
service of the church was performed. The firing was repeated from the vessel in
the river, and the sounds echoed from the woods and hills around.

THREE general discharges by the infantry, the cavalry, and eleven pieces of
artillery, which lined the banks of the Potomac back of the vault, paid the
last tribute to the entombed commander in chief of the armies of the United
States, and to the venerable departed hero.

THE sun was now sitting. Alas! the sun of glory was set forever. No -- the
name of WASHINGTON, the American President and General will triumph over death;
the unclouded, brightness of his glory will illuminate future ages.

President's Message.
MR. SHAW, secretary to the President, communicated the following message:

Gentlemen of the Senate, and of the House of Representatives,
IN compliance with the request in one of the resolutions of Congress of the
21st of December last, I transmitted a copy of those resolutions by my
secretary, Mr. Shaw, to Mrs. WASHINGTON, assuring her of the profound respect
Congress will ever bear to her person and character; of their condolence in the
late afflicting dispensation of Providence, and in-treating her assent to the
interment of the remains of General GEORGE WASHINGTON, in the manner expressed
in the first resolution. As the sentiments of that virtuous lady, not less
beloved by this nation than she is at present afflicted, can never be so well
expressed as in her own words; I transmit to Congress her original letter.

IT would be an attempt of too much delicacy to make any comments upon it; but
there can be no doubt, that the nation at large, as well as all the branches of
the government, will be highly gratified by any arrangement which may diminish
the sacrifice she makes of her individual feelings.

JOHN ADAMS.
United States, Jan. 8, 1800.

Mrs. Washington's Letter.
Mount Vernon, Dec. 31, 1799. SIR,
WHILE I feel with keenest anguish, the late dispensation of Divine Providence,
I cannot be insensible to the mournful tributes of respect and veneration,
which are paid to the memory of my dear deceased husband; and, as his best
services and most anxious wishes, were always devoted to the welfare and
happiness of his country, to know that they were truly appreciated, and
gratefully remembered, affords no inconsiderable consolation.

TAUGHT by the great example, which I have so long had before me, never to
oppose my private wishes to the public will, I must consent to the request made
by Congress, which you have had the goodness to transmit me, and in doing this,
I need not, I cannot say, what a sacrifice of individual feeling I make to a
sense of public duty.

WITH grateful acknowledgment, and unfeigned thanks for the personal respect,
and evidences of condolence, expressed by Congress and yourself.

I remain very respectfully, sir, your most obedient, and humble servant,
MARTHA WASHINGTON.

BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH OF Genesis George Washington.
BY JEDIDIAH MORSE, D. D. Pastor of the Church in CHARLESTOWN.
THE death of this great man, has rendered an account of his life particularly
desirable. To a nation whose feelings seem to be absorbed by this afflicting
event, whose attention is chiefly directed to the contemplation of the
resplendent virtues of the deceased father of his country, every circumstance
of his life has become interesting.

I HAVE not the vanity to assume to be the biographer of General WASHINGTON.
This arduous, honorable, and useful task, is probably assigned by proper
authority, to a man competent to its execution, and who is already, or will be,
in possession of all the requisite documents for so important a work. But
having heretofore given to the public, in a work The American Geography.
designed for their use, a brief sketch of his life, I hope they will not
consider it as presumption in me, if, with a view to satisfy, in some degree,
solicitous inquiries on the subject, and as a humble tribute to the memory of
the first of men, I revise and enlarge this sketch, and in an improved form, at
this moment of general feeling, offer it to their perusal.

THE late General WASHINGTON was born in the parish of Washington, Westmoreland
county, in Virginia, Feb. 22, 1732. He was the third son of Mr. AUGUSTINE
WASHINGTON, a planter or farmer of respectable talents, distinguished
reputation and large estate in Virginia. The ancestors of this gentleman, about
the year 1657, removed from Yorkshire in England to Virginia, and settled in
King George's county, where, at the commencement of our revolution, the General
had three brothers living, viz. Samuel, John and Charles, all gentlemen of
considerable landed property, and a sister, the wife of Col. Fielding Lewis.
SEE a letter, written at an early period of the American Revolution, by John
Bell, Esquire. of Maryland, to a friend in Europe, and published to the
Massachusetts Magazine, for March 1791.


THE General was the first fruit of a second marriage. His early education,
conducted by a private tutor, under the direction of his father, was such as
favored the production of an athletic and vigorous body, and the formation of a
correct and solid mind, Inhaling a pure mountain air, accustomed to the
healthful occupations of rural life, and to the manly toils of the chase, his
limbs expanded to an unusual, robust, but well proportioned and graceful size,
adapted to endure the fatigues of his future life, and to sustain the active
energies of his noble soul.

BY his tutor he was taught the rudiments of the Latin language, English
grammar, and the elements of the mathematics. At the age of ten years, his
father died, and the charge of a numerous family devolved on his eldest
brother, Mr. Lawrence Washington. This brother, a young gentleman of most
promising talents, had a captain's command in the colonial troops, employed
against Carthagena* under Admiral Vernon. On his return from this expedition,
he married the daughter of the Hon. William Fairfax, of Belvoir, and settled on
his patrimonial estate, which he called Mount Vernon, in honor of his admiral,
from whom he had received many civilities. He was afterward made
adjutant-general of the militia of Virginia, but did not long survive his
appointment. He left one daughter, who dying young, and his second brother also
having deceased without issue, the General succeeded to the family seat, and to
a very considerable landed estate.

IT is a circumstance which ought not to be here omitted, that, at the age of
fifteen, he was entered a midshipman on board a British ship of war stationed
on the coast of Virginia, and his baggage prepared for embarkation; but his
mother, then a widow, expressing her reluctance at his engaging in that
profession, the plan was abandoned.

THE office of adjutant-general, made vacant by the death of his brother, in
consequence of the extensive limits of the province, was now divided into three
districts; the future hero of America, before he had completed his twentieth
year, began his military service by a principal appointment in that department,
with the rank of Major.

WHEN he was little more than twenty years of age, an event occurred which
called forth his great talents into public notice and exercise. In 1753, the
French from Canada, aided by the Indians, whom they engaged for the purpose,
made inroads and encroachments upon the western frontiers, along the Allegany
and Ohio rivers. Orders were received from England, by the Governor LIEUT.
Governor Dinwiddie at this time administered the government.
and Council of Virginia, to repel by force these encroachments. It was however
thought a prudent preliminary step, to make an effort to prevent open
hostilities, by friendly and spirited remonstrances to the French, and
conciliatory overtures to the Indians. Major WASHINGTON was deputed to
undertake this important and perilous embassy. Accordingly he was dispatched by
the Governor, with a letter to the Commander in Chief of the French on the
Ohio, complaining of the infractions of the treaties subsisting between the two
crowns; and with instructions and plenary powers to treat with the Six Nations
and other tribes of Western Indians, and to secure their attachment to England.
He commenced his journey late in October, with about fifteen attendants, and
endured the fatigues, and performed the duties of his mission, with singular
fortitude, industry, intelligence and address. When he returned with Monsieur
de St. Piere's answer, and gave information of his success in his negociations
with the Indians, he received the approbation and thanks of his country. His
journal THIS Journal was published in the Massachusetts Magazine for June and
July 1789, from a copy sent to the writer of this, from his correspondent in
Virginia.
and report to Governor Dinwiddie, which were published at the time, early
announced to the world, that strength and correctness of mind, case and
manliness of style, and that judgment, method, and accuracy in doing business,
which have since characterised him in conducting more arduous affairs. His
journal for many years after, proved of essential service to travelers into
that western wilderness.

NOTWITHSTANDING the remonstrances made by the government of Virginia to the
French commander on the Ohio, through Major WASHINGTON, hostile operations in
that quarter were still continued, as part of a meditated plan of general
attack upon the then British colonies. In this state of things, orders were
received from the mother country, for the colonies to unite, and prepare to
defend themselves. The assembly of Virginia took the lead; and early in the
year 1754, voted a sum of money for the public service, and agreed to raise a
regiment of 400 men for the defense of the frontiers of that colony. Mr. Fry,
one of the professors of the college of William and Mary, was appointed Colonel
of this regiment, and Major WASHINGTON, then about twenty-three years of age,
received the commission of Lieut. Colonel. Col. Fry died shortly after his
appointment, and left his regiment and rank to the second in command.

COL. WASHINGTON now was indefatigable in his efforts to form his regiment, to
establish magazines, and open roads so as to pre-occupy the advantageous post
at the confluence of the Allegany and Monongahela rivers (now Pittsburgh) which
he had recommended for that purpose, in his report the preceding year.
Impressed with the necessity of expedition in accomplishing this important
object, without waiting for a detachment of independent regulars, and some
companies of provincials from the neighboring colonies, who were expected to
join him, he commenced his march in the month of May.

ON his way, at a place called Red Stone, he met a strong party of the French
and Indians, which he engaged and routed, after killing and capturing fifty of
the enemy. Among the prisoners was the celebrated Monsde la Force, and two
other officers, from whom Col. WASHINGTON received intelligence, that the
French forces on the Ohio consisted of upwards of 1000 regulars, and several
hundred Indians, and that they had already erected a fort at the post he had
intended to occupy, which they called Fort du Quesne. Upon this intelligence,
he took his station at a place called Great Meadows, for the convenience of
forage and supplies, where he built a temporary stockade, to cover his stores,
and named it Fort Necessity. Here he waited the arrival of expected succors
from New York and Ponnsylvania, but was joined by Capt. M'Kay's regulars. only,
which increased his force to about 400 effective men. He remained unmolested
till July, when he received information from his scouts, that a considerable
party of the enemy was approaching to reconnoitre his post; he sallied and
defeated them; but in return was attacked by an army of French and Indians,
computed to have been 1500 strong, under the command of the Sieur de Villiers.
The little garrison made a gallant defense, of several hours, during which they
killed nearly 200 of the enemy, and more than one third of their own number
were either killed or wounded. The French commander, discouraged by such bold
opposition, proposed a parley, which terminated in an honorable capitulation.
Col. WASHINGTON, at the head of his troops, quitted the Fort with the honors of
war, agreeable to the articles of capitulation, and carried with him his
military stores, and baggage: but the French commander either unable or
unwilling, did not restrain his Indian auxiliaries from plundering the
provincials, and making a considerable slaughter of men, cattle, and horses.
After this disaster, the remains of the Virginia regiment returned to
Alexandria to recruit.

THE British ambassador at the court of Versailles was directed to remonstrate
to the French government against the breach of the articles of capitulation
above mentioned: and this may be considered as the period when the French court
began to unmask, and to discover that the conduct of its governors and officers
in America, was in conformity to their orders. After this, warlike preparations
on the frontiers were made by the French with redoubled activity, and were
continued through the winter of 1754, and the spring of 1755.

DURING this period the government of Virginia raised an additional number of
troops, who built Fort Cumberland, and Fort Loudon, and formed a camp at Wills
Creek, a situation convenient for the annoyance of the enemy on the Ohio. In
all these services, and particularly in the erection of the forts, Col.
WASHINGTON was actively and principally employed.

AT this time, May 1755, Gen* Braddock arrived at Alexandria, from England,
with two veteran regiments from Ireland, to which were to be joi^ed the
independent and provincial corpse in America, and at the head of this army he
was to repel the invaders of the colonial frontiers. Upon a royal arrangement
of rank, by which "no officer who did not immediately derive his commission
from the king, could command one who did," Col. WASHINGTON resigned his
commission, and as a volunteer and extra Aid-de-Camp, joined Genesis Braddock. The
army marched directly for Fort du Quesne, by the route of Wills Creek. No
person was so well acquainted with this route as Col. WASHINGTON, and no other
officer in the colony, at this time, sustained so high and well established a
military reputation; and had his counsel been sufficiently regarded, there is
reason to believe the misfortunes which followed would have been prevented. In
his route, Genesis Braddock unexpectedly, and of consequence, unpreparedly, met a
large body of the enemy. Without detailing minutely the particulars of the hard
fought and bloody battle which ensued, and which terminated in the total defeat
of Braddock's army, which consisted of 2000 regular British forces, and nearly
800 provincials, I shall only say, in the words of the respectable and correct
writer, John Bell, Esquire.
to whom I am indebted for many of the facts contained in this sketch, that "it
is allowed on all sides, that the haughty behavior of Genesis Braddock, his high
contempt of the provincial officers and soldiers, and his disdainful obstinacy
in rejecting their advice, were the causes of this fatal disaster. With what
resolution and steadiness the provincials, and their gallant commander (Col.
WASHINGTON) behaved on this trying occasion, and in covering the confused
retreat of the army, SEE Capt. Orme's Letter to Gov. Dinwiddi^, and also the
other accounts of that day.
let every British officer and soldier confess, who were rescued from slaughter
on that calamitous day by their valor and conduct."

TO this information it is proper to add, that Col. WASHINGTON was the only
officer whose duty obliged him to be on horseback during the battle, who was
not either killed or wounded. Providence seemed to reserve him to save from
utter destruction the wreck of a defeated army. Having secured their passage
over the ford of the Monongahela, and finding the enemy did not pursue their
victory, Col. WASHINGTON hastened to concert measures for their further
security, with Col. Dunbar, who had remained some distance in the rear, with
the second division of the army and the heavy baggage. To effect this, he
traveled, with two guides all night, through a dreary wilderness,
notwithstanding the fatigues of the preceding day, and the enfeebled state of
his health, having but imperfectly recovered from sickness. So exhausted was he
in the morning, that he was obliged to be supported with cushions on his horse.
The public accounts of this affair, both in England and America, were not
parsimonious of applause for the essential service he rendered his country on
so trying an occasion.

NOT long after this time, the regulation of rank, which had been so injurious
to the colonial officers, was changed to their satisfaction, in consequence of
the discontent of the officers and the remonstrance of Col. WASHINGTON; and the
government of Virginia, impressed with a due sense of his merits, gave him, in
a new and extensive commission, the command of all the troops raised and to be
raised in that colony. This commission he held with signal credit to himself,
and advantage to his country, till 1759; when tranquillity being restored on
the frontiers of the middle colonies, and his constitution having become
extremely enfeebled and endangered by an inveterate pulmonary complaint, he
resigned his military appointment. Impartial historians will do justice to his
character, in detailing the judicious plans he suggested, and the system he
pursued for defending the frontiers, and his personal hazards, bravery and
atchievments, previously to the period of his resignation. Nor are authentic
documents wanting to show the tender regret which the Virginia line expressed
at parting with their Commander, and the affectionate regard which He
entertained for them.

FROM this period till the year 1775, he cultivated the arts of peace. Soon
after he resigned his commission in 1759, his health having been gradually
re-established, he married the present Mrs. WASHINGTON, then Mrs. MARTHA
CUSTIS, GENERAL and Mrs. WASHINGTON were both born in the same year.
an amiable and beautiful young widow, "with whom he had a fortune of twenty
thousand pounds sterling in her own right, besides her dower in one of the
principal estates in Virginia," Bell's Letter.
and settled as a Planter and Farmer at his favorite, delightful seat, the
far-famed Mount Vernon.

GENERAL WASHINGTON was the largest landholder, probably, in the United States.
Besides the large estates which came into his possession by his marriage, and
by the death of Mrs. WASHINGTON'S only daughter (amounting in the whole to
thirty thousand pounds sterling) he owned large tracts of excellent land in
different parts of the state, which, in early life, while he was Surveyor, he
had taken up for himself, or purchased of officers who had lands allotted them
for their services. He also made large additions to his estate at Mount Vernon;
which, in 1787, consisted of about nine thousand acres, under his own
cultivation. His income from his estates was reckoned, in 1776, to amount at
least to four thousand pounds sterling a year; and it was then supposed they
would have sold for more than one hundred and sixty thousand pounds Bell's
Letter.
of the same money, equal to upwards of 666,000 dollars. There can be no doubt,
that under his superintendance and admirable management, his property has since
much increased.

GENERAL WASHINGTON was not less distinguished as a Farmer, than as a Warrior
and a Statesman. He undertook every thing on a great scale, proportioned to his
great and comprehensive mind; and his exact and exemplary method in transacting
all his business, enabled him to accomplish more, and in a more perfect and
advantageous manner, than perhaps any other man of the age. He has raised seven
thousand bushels of wheat, and ten thousand of Indian corn in one year, on his
estate at Mount Vernon. In a succeeding year he raised two hundred lambs, sowed
twenty-seven bushels of flax-seed, and planted more than seven hundred bushels
of potatoes. At the same time he had manufactured under his eye, by his
domestics, linen and woollen cloth sufficient for his household, which
consisted of nearly a thousand souls. His land, designed for cultivation, he
had enclosed in lots of equal dimensions, and crops assigned to each for many
years. On Saturday in the afternoon, every week, he was accustomed to receive
reports from all his overseers (and these reports, I have been informed, were
received and attended to, constantly during the periods of his command of our
armies, and his presidency of the United States) which reports were correctly
registered in books kept for the purpose; so that, at the end of the year, he
was able accurately to ascertain the quantity of labor bestowed on each of the
several lots, and the amount of the produce. Order and economy were established
in all the departments within and without doors.

AGRICULTURE was his favorite employment, and he pursued it in a manner worthy
of himself. One great object which he ever kept in view, was to introduce or
augment the culture of those articles which he conceived would be the most
beneficial in their consequences to his country. Upon this principle, he early
gave up planting tobacco, and went altogether into the farming business. To
acquire and communicate practical knowledge, he corresponded with the
celebrated Mr. Arthur Young, of England, and with many agricultural gentlemen
in this country. As improvement was known to be his object, he was in the habit
of receiving rare seeds, and results of new projects from every quarter. He
likewise made copious notes, relative to his own experiments, the state of the
seasons, the nature of soils, of which he was an excellent judge, and the
effects of different kinds of manure, and such other topics, as tended to the
improvement of agriculture.

WHILE he was thus usefully occupied as a Farmer, and giving to all around him,
and to posterity, a noble example of industry, economy, and good management, he
was, at the same time, assiduous in serving the state. From the time he left
the army, in 1759, until the year 1774, he was constantly a member of assembly;
he was also a magistrate of the county in which he lived, and a judge of the
court. He was elected a delegate to the first Congress in 1774, and to that
which assembled in the year following.

IT was while he was a member of this assembly of the wisest men in America,
that he was, on the 15th of June, 1775, by their unanimous vote, appointed
Commander in Chief of all the forces raised, or to be raised for the defense of
the then colonies. He accepted his appointment; with what diffidence and
disinterestedness, his reply to the President of Congress, when his appointment
was announced to him, witnesses. "It was a fortunate circumstance, attending
his election, that it was accompanied with no competition, and followed by no
envy. That same general impulse on the public mind, which led the colonists to
agree in many other particulars pointed to him as the most proper person for
presiding over the military arrangements of America. Not only Congress, but the
inhabitants in the east and west, in the north and the south, as well before as
at the time of embodying a continental army, were in a great degree unanimous
in his favor." RAMSAY's Hist. Rev. vol. i. p. 192.
"The very high estimation he stood in for integrity and honor, his engaging in
the cause of his country from sentiment and a conviction of her wrongs; his
moderation in politics, his extensive property, and his approved abilities as a
military commander, were motives which obliged the choice of America to fall
upon him." Bell's Letter.


WE have now arrived at a period in the life of this great man, since which,
the events of it have been more conspicuous and more generally interesting; and
it is the less necessary to particularize them in this place, because they have
been often detailed, and are familiar to almost every person. I will only
observe, that General WASHINGTON arrived at the camp in Cambridge, and took the
supreme command of the American army, July 2, 1776. "He was received with that
heartfelt exultation, which superior merit alone can inspire, after having, in
his progress through the states, been honored with every mark of affection and
esteem which they conceived were due to the man, whom the whole continent
looked up to for safety and freedom." Bell's Letter.


IT is hoped posterity will be taught, in what manner he transformed an
undisciplined body of peasantry into a regular army of soldiers. Commentaries
on his campaigns would undoubtedly be highly interesting and instructive to
future generations. The conduct of the first campaign, in compelling the
British troops to abandon Boston by a bloodless victory, will merit a minute
narration. But a volume would scarcely contain the mortifications he
experienced, and the hazards to which he was exposed in 1776 and 1777, in
contending against the prowess of Britain, with an inadequate force. His good
destiny and consummate prudence, prevented want of success from producing want
of confidence on the part of the public; for want of success is apt to lead to
the adoption of pernicious counsels through the versatility of the people, or
the ambition of demagogues. Shortly after this period, sprang up the only cabal
that ever existed during his public life, to rob him of his reputation and
command. It proved as impotent in effect, as it was audacious in design. In the
three succeeding year the germ of discipline unfolded; and the resources of
America having been called into cooperation with the land and naval forces of
France, produced the glorious conclusion of the campaign in 1781. From this
time the gloom began to disappear from our political horizon, and the affairs
of the union proceeded in a meliorating train, until a peace was most ably
negociated by our ambassadors in Europe in 1783.

No person, who had not the advantage of being present when General WASHINGTON
received the intelligence of peace, and who did not accompany him to his
domestic retirement, can describe the relief which that joyful event brought to
his laboring mind, or the supreme satisfaction with which he withdrew to
private life. From his triumphal entry into New York, upon the evacuation of
that city by the British army, to his arrival at Mount Vernon, after the
resignation of his commissson to Congress, festive crowds impeded his passage
through all the populous towns, the devotion of a whole people pursued him with
prayers to Heaven for blessings on his head, while their gratitude sought the
most expressive language of manifesting itself to him as their common father
and benefactor. When he became a private citizen, he had the unusual felicity
to find that his native state was among the most zealous to do justice to his
merits; and that stronger demonstrations of affectionate esteem (if possible)
were given by the citizens of his neighborhood, than by any other description
of men on the continent. But he constantly declined accepting any compensation
for his services or provision for the augmented expenses incurred in
consequence of his public employment, although proposals were made him in the
most delicate manner, particularly by the states of Virginia and Pennsylvania.

THE virtuous simplicity which distinguished the private life of General
WASHINGTON, though less known than the dazzling splendour of his military
achievements, is not less edifying in example, or worthy the attention of his
countrymen. The conspicuous character he acted on the theater of human affairs,
the uniform dignity with which he sustained his part amidst difficulties of the
most discouraging nature, and the glory of having arrived through them at the
hour of triumph, made many official and literary persons on both sides of the
ocean, ambitious of a correspondence with him. These correspondencies
unavoidably engrossed a great portion of his time; and the communications
contained in them, combined with the numerous periodical publications and
newspapers which he perused, rendered him, as it were, the focus of political
intelligence for the new world. Nor were his conversations with wellinformed
men less conducive to bring him acquainted with the various events which
happened in different countries of the globe. Every foreigner of distinction,
who traveled in America, made it a point to visit him. Members of Congress and
other dignified personages, did not pass his house without calling to pay him
their respects. As another source of information it may be mentioned, that many
literary productions were sent to him annually by their authors in Europe; and
that there was scarcely one work written in America on any art, science, or
subject, which did not seek his protection, or which was not offered to him as
a token of gratitude. Mechanical inventions were frequently submitted to him
for his approbation, and natural curiosities presented for his investigation.
But the multiplicity of epistolary applications, often on the remains of some
business which happened when he was commander in chief; sometimes on subjects
foreign to his situation, frivolous in their nature, and intended merely to
gratify the vanity of the writers by drawing answers from him, was truly
distressing and almost incredible. His benignity in answering, perhaps,
increased the number. Had he not husbanded every moment to the best advantage,
it would not have been in his power to have noticed the vast variety of
subjects that claimed his attention.

IN this manner he spent his time, from the peace of 1783, till he was elected
a member of the convention who framed, in Philadelphia, in the summer of 1787,
the present Constitution of the United States. Of this convention of sages, he
was chosen President, and with his name he has sanctioned the Constitution of
their and his country's choice.

WHEN this Constitution, adopted by the nation, was to be organized and put in
operation, by an election of the proper officers, the United States, "steadfast
in their preference, with one voice summoned their beloved WASHINGTON,
unpractised as he was, in the duties of civil administration," to the chair of
government. He heard their voice "with veneration and love," and with that self
diffidence and modesty, which ever accompany pre-eminent merit, he obeyed their
summons. On the 30th of April, 1789, he was inaugurated President of the United
States, in the city of New York, amidst the acclamations of thousands of
spectators. "It seemed, by the number of witnesses," says one, who beheld the
interesting scene, "to be a solemn appeal to heaven and earth at once. Upon the
subject of this great and good man, I may perhaps be an enthusiast: but I
confess, I was under an awful and religious persuasion, that the gracious Ruler
of the Universe was looking down at that moment, with peculiar complacency, on
an act, which, to a part of his creatures, was so very important. Under this
impression, when the chancellor pronounced in a very feeling manner, 'Long live
GEORGE WASHINGTON,' my sensibility was would up to such a pitch, that I could
do no more than wave my hat with the rest, without the power of joining in the
repeated acclamations which rent the air."

IN the autumn after his induction into office, he visited the eastern states;
with how much delight and advantage to the people, and satisfaction to his own
mind, let the volume of their addresses and his answers testify.

WITH what dignity, wisdom, firmness, integrity, and high and general
approbation, he performed the duties of his most arduous, elevated, and
responsible office, during his eight years administration, his eulogists have
eloquently announced, and historians will record with pride and admiration.
"Commencing his administration, what heart is not charmed with the recollection
of the pure and wise principles announced by himself, as the basis of his
political life. He best understood the indissoluble union between virtue and
happiness, between duty and advantage, between the genuine maxims of an honest
and magnanimous policy, and the solid rewards of public prosperity and
individual felicity: watching with an equal and comprehensive eye over this
great assemblage of communities and interests, he laid the foundation of our
national policy, in the unerring and immutable principles of morality, based on
religion, exemplifying the preeminence of free government, by all the
attributes which win the affections of its citizens, or command the respect of
the world." MAJOR Genesis Henry Lee's Funeral Oration.


DURING his administration as our supreme executive magistrate, "his talents
and his virtues increased with his cares. His soul seemed not to bear the
limits of office a moment after the obligations of duty and patriotism withdrew
their restraints from his universal love. When the misguided savages of the
wilderness, after feeling his chastisement, had sued for peace; he seemed to
labor for their happiness as the common representative of mankind. Insurrection
was so struck at his countenance, that it fled from the shock of his arms.
Intrigue attempted to entangle him in her poisonous web, but he burst it with
gigantic strength, and crushed her labors. Anarchy looked out from her cavern,
and was dashed into oblivion, as we trust, forever. The nations of Europe saw
the wisdom of our laws, the vigor of our measures, the justice of our policy,
the firmness of our government, and acquiesced in the neutrality of our
station." JUDGE MINOT'S Eulogy, p. 15.


TWICE elected by the unanimous voice of his country to the Presidential chair,
when the period for a third election arrived, in September 1796, when the state
of his country was such that he considered it no longer necessary for him to
sacrifice his inclination to his duty, he announced to his fellow-citizens, in
an Address which will be immortal as his name, his determination to retire, and
requesting them not to consider him as a candidate for their future suffrages;
thus preventing "the anxious wishes of an affectionate people, from adding a
third unanimous testimonial of their unabated confidence in the man so long
enthroned in their hearts." Having spent forty-five years of his life in the
service of his country, he consoled himself with the hope that he was now
quitting forever "the boundless field of public action, incessant trouble and
high responsibility," in which he had so long acted a principal part: but this
fond hope was not realized. He had not yet arrived at the pinnacle of human
greatness. One ascending step yet remained untaken. From March 1797 to July
1798, he lived in peace at his beloved retreat, discharging the duties of a
private citizen with a condescension and greatness of mind peculiar to himself.
At the latter period, "when every thing we hold dear and sacred was seriously
threatened," GENERAL WASHINGTON's Letter of Acceptance.
the voice of his countrymen was raised to him, as the Instrument, under
Providence, for their protection: he heard it and instantly obeyed; and thus
advanced the last ascending step in the career of earthly glory. On this high
and commanding ground he stood, venerable in services as in years, the cement
and the bulwark of our nation, till the 14th of December 1799, when he was
summoned above to join that noble company of the "wise, who shall shine as the
brightness of the firmament, and as the stars forever and ever."

HIS last sickness was short and painful. On Thursday the 12th, he was abroad
on one of his plantations. The day was rainy and he took cold; which, on
Friday, produced a violent inflammation in the throat. The following night his
disease became very alarming, and he was urged to send to Alexandria for his
physician. His humanity for his servants prevented it till the next morning. At
11 o'clock on Saturday his physician arrived. It was too late. The hand of
death was already upon him. Though his distress was extreme, he was calm and
resigned. "He informed his attendants that his affairs were in good order; that
he had made his will, and that his public business was, but two days behind
hand." A very short time before he died, he said to his physician, " Doctor,
What is the clock? How long am I to remain in this situation?" The Doctor
replied, " Not long sir." He then rejoined with the firmest countenance, " I
have no fear, Doctor, to die." His breathing soon grew shorter; and presently
after he expired without a sigh or a groan.

" WHEN keenest anguish racked his mighty mind,
And the fond heart the joys of life resigned,
No guilt nor terror stretched its hard control,
No doubt obscured the sunshine of the soul.
Prepared for death, his calm and steady eye,
Looked fearless upward to a peaceful sky;
While wondering angels point the airy road,
Which leads the Christian to the Throne of God."
GENERAL WASHINGTON in his person was tall, upright, and well made; in his
manners easy and unaffected. His eyes were of a bluish cast, not prominent,
indicative of deep thoughtfulness, and when in action, on great occasions,
remarkably lively. His features strong, manly, and commanding; his temper
reserved and serious; his countenance grave, composed, and sensible. There was
in his whole appearance an unusual dignity and gracefulness which at once
secured for him profound respect, and cordial esteem. He seemed born to command
his fellow men. In his official capacity he received applicants for favors, and
answered their requests with so much ease, condescension and kindness, as that
each retired, believing himself a favorite of his chief. He had an excellent
and well cultivated understanding; a correct, discerning, and comprehensive
mind; a memory remarkably retentive: energetic passions under perfect control;
a judgment sober, deliberate, and sound. He was a man of the strictest honor
and honesty, fair and honorable in his dealings; and punctual to his
engagements. His disposition was mild, kind, and generous. Candor, sincerity,
moderation, and simplicity, were, in common, prominent features in his
character; but when an occasion called, he was capable of displaying the most
determined bravery, firmness, and independence. He was an affectionate husband,
a faithful friend, a humane master, and a father to the poor. He lived in the
unvarying habits of regularity, temperance, and industry. He steadily rose at
the dawn of day, and retired to rest usually at 9 o'clock in the evening. The
intermediate hours all had their proper business assigned them. In his
allotments for the revolving hours, religion was not forgotten. Feeling, what
he so often publicly acknowledged, his entire dependence on God, he daily, at
stated seasons, retired to his closet, to worship, at his footstool, and to ask
his divine blessing. He was remarkable for his strict observation of the
sabbath, and exemplary in his attendance on public worship.

OF his faith in the truth and excellence of the holy scriptures, he gave
evidence, not only by his excellent and most exemplary life, but in his
writings; especially when he ascribes the meliorated condition of mankind, and
the increased blessings of society, " above all, to the pure and benign light
of revelation;" and when he offers to God, his earnest prayer "that he would
most graciously be pleased to dispose us all to do justice, to love mercy, and
to demean ourselves with that charity, humility, and pacific temper of mind,
which were the characteristics of the divine author of our blessed religion;
without an humble imitation of whose example, in these things, we can never
hope to be a happy nation." SEE his Circular Letter, P. 49.
In an address to him, immediately after he commenced his Presidency over the
United States, from a venerable and respectable body of men, who were in the
best situation to know his religious character, and who, no doubt, expressed
what they knew, is the following testimony to his faith in christianity. "But
we derive a presage," say they, even more flattering, from the piety of your
character. Public virtue is the most certain mean of public felicity; and
religion is the surest basis of virtue. We therefore esteem it a peculiar
happiness to behold in our chief magistrate, a steady, uniform, avowed friend
of the christian religion; who has commenced his administration in rational and
exalted sentiments of piety, and who, in his private conduct, adorns the
doctrines of the gospel of Christ." Grounded on these pure and excellent
doctrines, to which his life was so conformable; copying, as he did, with such
exemplary strictness and uniformity, the precepts of Christ, we have strong
consolation and joy in believing, that ere this, he has heard from his God and
Savior, this enrapturing sentence, Well done good and faithful servant, enter
into the joy of your Lord.

WHAT a blessing to the world, what an honor to human nature, is a character
thus "throughout sublime?" What a bright exemplar for kings, for princes, for
rulers of every name, for warriors, for farmers, for christians, for mankind?
Thanks be to God for so rich a gift; praise to his name for bestowing it on our
nation, and thus distinguishing it above all others on the globe, and let all
the people of COLUMBIA, with one voice, say AMEN.

THE WILL OF Genesis George Washington;
IN THE NAME OF GOD -- AMEN.
I GEORGE WASHINGTON, of Mount Vernon, a citizen of the United States, and late
President of the same, ^o make, ordain, and declare this instrument which is
written with my own hand, IN the original manuscript, GEORGE WASHINGTON's name
was written at the bottom of every page.
and every page thereof subscribed with my name, to be my last WILL and
TESTAMENT, revoking all other Imprimis. All my debts of which there are but
few, and none of magnitude, are to be punctually and speedily paid, and the
legacies herein after bequeathed, are to be discharged as soon as circumstances
will permit, and in the manner directed.

Item. To my dearly beloved wife Martha Washington, I give and bequeath the
use, profit, and benefit, of my whole estate, real and personal, for the term
of her natural life, except such parts thereof as are specially disposed of
hereafter. My improved lot in the town of Alexandria, situated on Pit and
Cameron streets, I give to her and her heirs forever: as I also do my household
and kitchen furniture of every sort and kind, with the liquors and groceries
which may be on hand at the time of my decease, to be used and disposed of as
she may think proper.

Item. UPON the decease of my wife, it is my will and desire, that all the
slaves which I hold in my own right shall receive their freedom. To emancipate
them during her life, would, though earnestly wished by me, be attended with
such insuperable difficulties on account of their intermixture by marriages
with the dower negroes, as to excite the most painful sensations, if not
disagreeable consequences from the latter, while both descriptions are in the
occupancy of the same proprietor; it not being in my power, under the tenure by
which the dower negroes are held, to manumit them. And whereas, among those who
will receive freedom according to this devise, there may be some who from old
age or bodily infirmities, and others who, on account of their infancy, that
will be unable to support themselves, it is my will and desire that all who
come under the first and second description, shall be comfortably clothed and
fed by my heirs while they live; and that such of the latter description as
have no parents living, or if (...), are unable or unwilling to provide for
them, shall be bound by the court until they shall arrive at the age of
twenty-five years; and in cases where no record can be produced, whereby their
ages can be ascertained, the judgment of the court upon, its own view of the
subject, shall be adequate and final. The negrous thus bound, are (by their
masters or mistresses) to be taught to read and write, and to be brought upon
some useful occupation, agreeably to the laws of the commonwealth of Virginia,
providing for the support of orphan and other poor children. And I do hereby
expressly forbid the sale or transportation out of the said commonwealth of any
slave I may die possessed of under any pretense whatever. And I do moreover
most pointedly and most solemnly enjoin it upon my Executors hereafter named or
the survivors of them, to see that this clause respecting slaves and every part
thereof, be religiously fulfilled at the epoch at which it is directed to take
place, without evasion, neglect, or delay, after the crops which may then be on
the ground are harvested, particularly as it respects the aged and infirm;
seeing that a regular and permanent fund be established for their support as
long as there are subjects requiring it; not trusting to the uncertain
provision to be made by individuals: And to my mulatto man William (calling
himself William Lee) I give immediate freedom, or if he should prefer it (on
account of the accidents which have befallen him and which have rendered him
incapable of walking or of any active employment) to remain in the situation he
now is, it shall be optional in him to do so; in either case however, I allow
him an annuity of thirty dollars during his natural life, which shall be
independent of the victuals and clothes he has been accustomed to receive, if
he chooses the last alternative; but in full with his freedom, if he prefers the
first: and this I give him as a testimony of my sense of his attachment to me,
and for his faithful services during the revolutionary war.

Item. To the trustees, governors, or by whatsoever other name they may be
designated, of the academy in the town of Alexandria, I give and bequeath, in
trust, four thousand dollars, or, in other words, twenty of the shares which I
hold in the Bank of Alexandria, toward the support of a free school,
established at, and annexed to, the said academy, for the purpose of educating
such orphan children, or the children of such other poor and indigent persons
as are unable to accomplish it with their own means; and who, in the judgment
of the trustees of the said seminary, are best entitled to the benefit of this
donation. The aforesaid twenty shares I give and bequeath in perpituity; the
dividends only of which are to be drawn for, and applied by the said trustees,
for the time being, for the uses above mentioned; the stock to remain entire
and untouched, unless indications of failure of the said Bank should be so
apparent, or a discontinuance thereof, should render a removal of this fund
necessary. In either of these cases, the amount of the stock here devised is to
be vested in some other Bank, or public institution, whereby the interest may
with regularity and certainty be drawn, and applied as above: And, to prevent
misconception, my meaning is, and is hereby declared to be, that these twenty
shares are in lieu of, and not in addition to, the thousand pounds given by a
missive letter some years ago; in consequence whereof, an annuity of fifty
pounds has since been paid toward the support of this institution.

Item. WHEREAS by a law of the commonwealth of Virginia, enacted in the year
1785, the legislature thereof was pleased (as an evidence of its approbation of
the services I had rendered the public during the revolution, and partly I
believe in consideration of my having suggested the vast advantages which the
community would derive from the extension of its inland navigation under
legislative patronage) to present me with one hundred shares of one hundred
dollars each, in the incorporated company established for the purpose of
extending the navigation of James River from tide water to the mountains; and
also with fifty shares of one pound sterling each, in the corporation of
another company likewise established for the similar purpose of opening the
navigation of the river Potomac, from tide water to Fort Cumberland; the
acceptance of which, although the offer was highly honorable and grateful to my
feelings, was refused as inconsistent with a principle which I had adopted, and
had never departed from; namely, not to receive pecuniary compensation for any
services I could render my country, in its arduous struggle with Great Britain
for its rights; and because I had evaded similar propositions from other states
in the Union. Adding to this refusal, however, an intimation that, if it should
be the pleasure of the legislature to permit me to appropriate the said shares
to public uses, I would receive them on those terms with due sensibility; and
this it having consented to, in flattering terms, as will appear by a
subsequent law and sundry resolutions, in the most ample and honorable manner.
I proceed after this recital, for the more correct understanding of the case,
to declare -- that as it has always been a source of serious regrot with me to
see the youth of these United States sent to foreign countries for the purpose
of education, often before their minds are formed, or they had imbibed any
adequate ideas of the happiness of their own; contracting too frequently, not
only habits of dissipation and extravagance, but principles unfriendly to
republican government, and to the true and genuine liberties of mankind; which,
thereafter are rarely overcome. For these reasons, it has been my ardent wish
to see a plan devised on a liberal scale which would have a tendency to spread
systematic ideas through all parts of this rising empire, thereby to do away
local attachments and state prejudices, as far as the nature of things would,
or indeed ought to admit, from our national councils. -- Looking anxiously
forward to the accomplishment of so desirable an object as this is (in my
estimation) my mind has not been able to contemplate any plan more likely to
effect the mea^ure than the establishment of a university in a central part of
the United States, to which the youths of fortune and talents from all parts
thereof might be sent for the completion of their education in all the branches
of polite literature, in arts and sciences, in acquiring knowledge in the
principles of politics and good government, and (as a matter of infinite
importance in my judgment) by associating with each other, and forming
friendships in juvenile years, be enabled to free themselves in a proper degree
from those local prejudices and habitual jealousies which have just been
mentioned; and which, when carried to excess, are never-failing sources of
disquietude to the public mind, and pregmant of mischievous consequences to
this country. Under these impressions, so fully dilated,

Item. I GIVE and bequeath in perpetuity the fifty shares which I hold in the
Patomac Company (under the aforesaid acts of the legislature of Virginia)
toward the endowment of a University, to be established within the limits of
the district of Columbia, under the auspices of the general government, if that
government should incline to extend a fostering hand toward it; and until such
seminary is established, and the funds arising on these shares shall be
required for its support, my further will and desire is, that the profit
accruing therefrom shall, whenever the dividends are made, be laid out in
purchasing stock in the Bank of Columbia, or some other Bank, at the discretion
of my Executors, or by the Treasurer of the United States for the time being,
under the direction of Congress; provided that honorable body should patronize
the measure, and the dividends proceeding from the purchase of such stock is to
be vested in more stock, and so on, until a sum adequate to the accomplishment
of the object is obtained; of which I have not the smallest doubt, before many
years pass away, even if no aid or encouragement is given by legislative
authority, or from any other source.

Item. THE hundred shares which I hold in the James River Company, I have
given, and now confirm in perpetuity, to and for the use and benefit of Liberty
Hall Academy, in the county of Rockbridge, in the commonwealth of Virginia.

Item. I RELEASE, exhonerate, and discharge the estate of my deceased brother
Samuel Washington, from the payment of the money which is due to me for the
land I sold to Philip Pendleton (lying in the county of Berkeley) who assigned
the same to him, the said Samuel, who by agreement, was to pay me therefore:
And whereas, by some contract (the purport of which was never communicated to
me) between the said Samuel and his son Thornton Washington, the latter became
possessed of the aforesaid land, without any conveyance having passed from me,
either to the said Pendleton, the said Samuel, or the said Thornton, and
without any consideration having been made, by which neglect neither the legal
nor equitable title has been alienated; it rests therefore with me to declare
my intentions concerning the premises; and these are to give and bequeath the
said land to whomsoever the said Thornton Washington (who is also dead) devised
the same, or to his heirs forever, if he died intestate; exhonerating the
estate of the said Thornton, equally with that of the said Samuel, from payment
of the purchase money, which, with interest agreeably to the original contract
with the said Pendleton, would amount to more than a thousand pounds: And
whereas two other sons of my said deceased brother Samuel, namely, George
Steptoe Washington, and Lawrence Augustine Washington, were by the decease of
those to whose care they were committed, brought under my protection, and in
consequence have occasioned advances on my part for their education at college
and other schools, for their Board, clothing, and other incidental expenses,
to the amount of near five thousand dollars over and above the sums furnished
by their estate, which sum it may be inconvenient for them or their father's
estate to refund -- I do for these reasons, acquit them and the said estate
from the payment thereof -- my intention being that all accounts between them
and me, and their father's estate and me, shall stand balanced.

Item. THE balance due to me from the estate of Bartholomew Dandridge, deceased
(my wife's brother) and which amounted, on the first day of October 1795, to
four hundred and twenty-five pounds (as will appear by an account rendered by
his deceased son, John Dandridge, who was the acting executor of his father's
will) I release and acquit from the payment thereof; and the negroes (then
thirty-three in number) formerly belonging to the said estate, who were taken
in execution, sold and purchased in on my account, in the year (blank) and ever
since have remained in the possession and to the use of Mary, widow of the said
Bartholomew Dandridge, with their increase, it is my will and desire shall
continue to be in her possession, without paying hire, or making compensation
for the same, for the time past or to come, during her natural life. At the
expiration of which, I direct that all of them, who are forty years old and
upwards, shall receive their freedom; all under that age and above sixteen,
shall serve seven years, and no longer; and all under sixteen years, shall
serve until they are twenty-five years of age, and then be free: -- And to
avoid disputes respecting the ages of any of these negroes, they are to be
taken into the court of the county in which they reside, and the judgment
thereof, in this relation, shall be final, and record thereof made, which may
be adduced as evidence at any time thereafter, if disputes should arise
concerning the same -- And I further direct, that the heirs of the said
Bartholomew Dandridge shall equally share the benefits arising from the
services of the said negroes, according to the tenor of this devise, upon the
decease of their mother.

Item. IF Charles Carter, who intermarried with my niece Betty Lewis, is not
sufficiently secured in the title to the lots he had of me, in the town of
Fredericksburgh, it is my will and desire that my Executors shall make such
conveyances of them as the law requires, to render it perfect.

Item. TO my nephew William Augustine Washington (if he should conceive them to
be objects worth prosecuting) and to his heirs, a lot in the town of Manchester
(opposite to Richmond) No. 265, drawn on my sole account, and also the tenth of
one of two hundred acre lots, and two or three half acre lots, in the city and
vicinity of Richmond, drawn in partnership with nine others, all in the lottery
of the deceased William Byrd, are given; as is also a lot which I purchased of
John Hood, conveyed by William Willie and Samuel Gordon, trustees of the said
John Hood, numbered 139, in the town of Edinburgh, in the county of Prince
George, state of Virginia.

Item. To my nephew Bushrod Washington, I give and bequeath all the papers in
my possession, which relate to my civil and military administration of the
affairs of this country: I leave to him also, such of my private papers as are
worth preserving; and at the decease of my wife, and before, if she is not
inclined to retain them, I give and bequeath my library of books and pamphlets
of every kind.

Item. HAVING sold lands which I possessed in the state of Pennsylvania, and
part of a tract held in equal right with George Clinton, late governor of
New York, in the state of New York; my share of land and interest in the Great
Dismal Swamp, and a tract of land which I owned in the county of Gloucester --
withholding the legal titles thereto, until the consideration money should be
paid -- and having moreover leased, and conditionally sold (as will appear by
the tenor of the said leases) all my lands upon the Great Kenhawa, and a tract
upon Difficult Run, in the county of Loudon, it is my will and direction, that
whenever the contracts are fully and respectively complied with, according to
the spirit, true intent and meaning thereof, on the part of the purchasers,
their heirs or assigns, that then, and in that case, conveyances are to be
made, agreeable to the terms of the said contracts, and the money arising
therefrom, when paid, to be vested in Bank stock; the dividends whereof, as of
that also which is already vested therein, is to inure to my said wife during
her life, but the stock itself is to remain and be subject to the general
distribution hereafter directed.

Item. To the Earl of Buchan I recommit "the box made of the oak that sheltered
the great Sir William Wallace after the battle of Falkirk," presented to me by
his lordship, in terms too flattering for me to repeat, with a request "to pass
it, on the event of my decease, to the man in my country, who should appear to
merit it best, upon the same conditions that have induced him to send it to
me." Whether easy or not, to select the man who might comport with his
lordship's opinion in this respect, is not for me to say; but conceiving that
no disposition of this valuable curiosity can be more eligible than the
recommitment of it to his own cabinet, agreeably to the original design of the
Goldsmith's Company of Edinburgh, who presented it to him, and, at his request,
consented that it should be transferred to me: I do give and bequeath the same
to his lordship; and in case of his decease, to his heir, with my grateful
thanks for the distinguished honor of presenting it to me, and more especially
for the favorable sentiments with which he accompanied it.

Item. To my brother Charles Washington, I give and bequeath the gold headed
cane left me by Dr. Franklin, in his will. I add nothing to it, because of the
ample provision I have made for his issue. To the acquaintances and friends of
my juvenile years, Lawrence Washington and Robert Washington, of Chotanek, I
give my other two gold headed canes, having my arms engraved on them; and to
each (as they will be useful where they live) I leave one of the spy-glasses,
which constituted part of my equipage, during the late war. To my compatriot in
arms and old and intimate friend Dr. Craik, I give my bureau (or, as the
cabinet makers call it, tambour secretary) and the circular chair, an appendage
of my study. To Dr. David Stuart I give my large shaving and dressing table,
and my telescope. To the Reverend, now Bryan Lord Fairfax, I give a bible, in
three large folio volumes, with notes -- presented to me by the Rt. Rev. Thomas
Wilson, bishop of Sodor and Man. To General De La Fayette, I give a pair of
finely wrought steel pistols, taken from the enemy in the revolutionary war. To
my sisters-in-law Hannah Washington and Mildred Washington; to my friends
Eleanor Stuart. Hannah Washington, of Fairfield, and Elizabeth Washington of
Hayfield, I give each a mourning ring, of the value of one hundred dollars.
These bequests are not made for the intrinsic value of them, but as momentos of
my esteem and regard. To Tobias Lear I give the use of the farm which he now
holds, in virtue of a lease from me to him and his deceased wife (for and
during their natural lives) free from rent during his life; at the expiration
of which, it is to be disposed of as is herein after directed. To Sally B.
Haynie (a distant relation of mine) I give and bequeath three hundred dollars.
To Sarah Green, daughter of the deceased Thomas Bishop, and to Ann Walker,
daughter of John Alton, also deceased, I give each one hundred dollars, in
consideration of the attachment of their fathers to me; each of whom having
lived nearly forty years in my family. To each of my nephews William Augustine
Washington, George Lewis, George Steptoe Washington, Bushrod Washington, and
Samuel Washington, I give one of the swords or cutteaux, of which I may die
possessed: and they are to choose in the order they are named. -- These swords
are accompanied with an injunction not to unsheath them for the purpose of
shedding blood, except it be for self-defence, or in defense of their country
and its rights; and in the latter case, to keep them unsheathed, and prefer
falling with them in their hands to the relinquishment thereof.

AND HOW, having gone through these specific devises, with explanations for the
more correct understanding of the meaning and design of them, I proceed to the
distribution of the more important parts of my estate, in manner following:

FIRST. To my nephew Bushrod Washington and his heirs (partly in consideration
of an intimation to his deceased father, while we were bachelors, and he had
kindly undertaken to superintend my estate during my military services, in the
former war between Great Britain and France, that if I should fall therein,
Mount Vernon, then less extensive in domain than at present, should become his
property) I give and bequeath all that part thereof, which is comprehended in
the following limits, viz: Beginning at the ford of Dogue Run, near my mill,
and extending along the road, and bounded thereby, as it now goes and ever has
gone since my recollection of it, to the ford of Little Hunting Creek, at the
Gum Spring, until it comes to a knowl opposite to an old road which formerly
passed through the lower field of muddyhole farm; at which, on the north side
of the said road, are three red or Spanish oaks, marked as a corner, and a
stone placed; thence by a line of trees to be marked rect-angular to the back
line or outer boundary of the tract between Thomson Mason and myself; thence
with that line easterly (now double ditching with a post and rail fence
thereon) to the run of Little Hunting Creek; thence with that run which is the
boundary between the lands of the late Humphrey Peake and me, to the tide water
of the said creek; thence by that water to Potomac river; thence with the river
to the mouth of Dogue Creek; and thence with the said Dogue Creek to the place
of beginning at the aforesaid ford, containing upwards of four thousand acres,
be the same more or less, together with the mansion house, and all other
buildings and improvements thereon. SECOND -- In consideration of the
consanguinity between them and my wife, being as nearly related to her as to
myself; as on account of the affection I had for, and the obligation I was
under to their father when living, who, from his youth had attached himself to
my person, and followed my fortunes through the vicissitudes of the late
revolution, afterward devoting his time to the superintendance of my private
concerns for many years, whilst my public employments rendered it impracticable
for me to do it myself, thereby affording me essential services, and always
performing them in a manner the most filial and respectful: for these reasons,
I say, I give and bequeath to George Fayette Washington and Lawrence Augustine
Washington, and their heirs, my estate east of Little Hunting Creek, lying on
the river Potomac, including the farm of three hundred and sixty acres, leased
to Tobias Lear, as noticed before, and containing in the whole, by deed, two
thousand and twenty-seven acres, be it more or less; which said estate it is my
will and desire should be equitably and advantageously divided between them,
according to quantity, quality, and other circumstances, when the youngest
shall have arrived at the age of twenty-one years, by three judicious and
disinterested men; one to be chosen by each of the brothers, and the third by
these two. In the mean time, if the termination of my wife's interest therein
should have ceased, the profits arising therefrom are to be applied for their
joint uses and benefit. THIRD -- And whereas it has always been my intention,
since my expectation of having issue has ceased, to consider the grand children
of my wife, in the same light as I do my own relations, and to act a friendly
part by them, more especially by the two whom we have raised from their
earliest infancy, namely, Eleanor Park Custis and George Washington Park
Custis: and whereas the former of these has lately intermarried with Lawrence
Lewis, a son of my deceased sister Betty Lewis, by which union the inducement
to provide for them both has been increased; wherefore I give and bequeath to
the said Lawrence Lewis and Eleanor Park Lewis, his wife, and their heirs, the
residue of my Mount Vernon estate, not already devised to my nephew Bushrod
Washington, comprehended within the following description, viz. All the land
north of the road leading from the ford of Dogue Run to the Gum Spring, as
described in the devise of the other part of the tract, to Bushrod Washington,
until it comes to the stone and three red or Spanish oaks on the knowl; thence
with the rect-angular line to the back line (between Mr. Mason and me) thence
with that line westerly along the new double ditch to Dogue Run by the tumbling
dam of my mill; thence with the said run to the ford aforementioned; to which I
add all the land I possess west of the said Dogue Run and Dogue Creek, bounded
easterly and southerly thereby; together with the mill, distillery, and all
other houses and improvements on the premises, making together about two
thousand acres, be it more or less. FOURTH -- Actuated by the principle already
mentioned, I give and bequeath to George Washington Park Custis, the grandson
of my wife, and my ward, and to his heirs, the tract I hold on Four Mile Run in
the vicinity of Alexandria, containing one thousand two hundred acres, more or
less, and my entire square, number twenty-one, in the city of Washington. FIFTH
-- All the rest and residue of my estate, real and personal, not disposed of in
manner aforesaid, in whatsoever consisting, wheresoever lying, and whenever
found, a schedule of which as far as is recollected, with a reasonable estimate
of its value, is hereunto annexed, I desire may be sold by my Executors at such
times, in such manner, and on such credits (if an equal, valid, and
satisfactory distribution of the specific property cannot be made without) as
in their judgment shall be most conducive to the interest of the parties
concerned, and the moneys arising therefrom to be divided into twenty-three
equal parts, and applied as follows: viz. To William Augustine Washington,
Elizabeth Spotswood, Jane Thornton, and the heirs of Ann Ashton, son and
daughters of my deceased brother Augustine Washington, I give and bequeath four
parts, that is, one part to each of them. To Fielding Lewis, George Lewis,
Robert Lewis, Howell Lewis, and Betty Carter, sons and daughter of my deceased
sister Betty Lewis, I give and bequeath five other parts, one to each of them.
To George Steptoe Washington, Lawrence Augustine Washington, Harriot Parks, and
the heirs of Thornton Washington, sons and daughter of my deceased brother
Samuel Washington, I give and bequeath the other four parts, one part to each
of them. To Corbin Washington, and the heirs of Jane Washington, son and
daughter of my deceased brother John Augustine Washington, I give and bequeath
two parts, one to each of them. To Samuel Washington, Frances Ball, and Mildred
Hammond, son and daughters of my brother Charles Washington, I give and
bequeath three parts, one part to each of them: and to George Fayette
Washington Charles Augustine Washington, and Maria Washington, sons and
daughter of my deceased nephew George Augustine Washington, I give one other
part, that is, to each a third of that part. To Elizabeth Park Law, Martha Park
Peter, and Eleanor Park Lewis, I give and bequeath three other parts, that is,
a part to each of them: and to my nephew Bushrod Washington and Lawrence Lewis,
and to my (...), the grandson of my wife, I give and bequeath one other part,
that is, a third thereof to each of them. -- And if it should so happen, that
any of the persons whose names are here enumerated (unknown to me) should now
be dead, or should die before me, that in either of these cases, the heirs of
such deceased persons shall, notwithstanding, devise all the benefits of the
bequest, in the same manner as if he or she was actually living at the time;
and by way of advice, I recommend it to my Executors not to be precipitate in
disposing of the landed property (therein directed to be sold) if from
temporary causes the sale thereof should be dull; experience having fully
evinced that the price of land (especially above the falls of the rivers, and
on the western waters) have been progressively rising, and cannot be long
checked in its increasing value. And I particularly recommend it to such of the
legatees (under this clause of my WILL) as can make it convenient, to take each
a share of my stock in the Potomac Company, in preference to the amount of what
it might sell for, being thoroughly convinced myself, that no uses to which the
money can be applied, will be so productive as the tolls arising from this
navigation, when in full operation (and this from the nature of things it must
be ere long) and more especially if that of the Shenandoah is added thereto.

THE family vault at Mount Vernon requiring repairs, and being improperly
situated besides, I desire that a new one, of brick, and upon a larger scale,
may be built at the foot of what is commonly called the Vineyard Enclosure, on
the ground which is marked out; in which my remains, with those of my deceased
relations (now in the old vault) and such others of my family as may choose to
be entombed there, may be deposited. And it is my express desire, that my
corpse may be interred in a private manner, without parade or funeral oration.

LASTLY, I constitute and appoint my dearly beloved wife Martha Washington, my
nephews William Augustine Washington, Bushrod Washington, George Steptoe
Washington, Samuel Washington, and Lawrence Lewis, and my ward George
Washington Park Custis (when he shall have arrived at the age of twenty years)
Executrix and Executors of this WILL and TESTAMENT; in the construction of
which, it will readily be perceived, that no professional character has been
consulted, or has had any agency in the draught; and that although it has
occupied many of my leisure hours to digest, and to throw it into its present
form, it may, notwithstanding, appear crude and incorrect; but having
endeavored to be plain and explicit in all the devises, even at the expense of
prolixity, perhaps of tautology, I hope and trust that no disputes will arise
concerning them; but if, contrary to expectation, the case should be otherwise,
from the want of legal expression, or the usual technical terms, or because too
much or too little has been said on any of the devises, to be consonant with
law, my will and direction expressly is, that all disputes (if unhappily any
should arise) shall be decided by three impartial and intelligent men, known
for their probity and good understanding; two to be chosen by the disputants,
each having the choice of one, and the third by those two; which three men thus
chosen, shall, unfettered by law or legal constructions, declare the sense of
the testator's intentions: and such decision is, to all intents and purposes,
to be as binding on the parties as if it had been given in the supreme court of
the United States.

IN WITNESS of all, and of each of the things herein contained, I have set my
hand and seal, this ninth day of July, in the year one thousand seven hundred
and ninety -- IT appears the testator omitted the word "Nine."
and of the independence of the United States the twenty-fourth.

George Washington. ( seal.)

Schedule
Of property comprehended in the foregoing WILL, which is directed to be sold,
and some of it conditionally is sold; with descriptive and explanatory notes
thereto.

IN VIRGINIA.
acres. price. dollars. Loudon co. Difficult Run, 300 6,666 a Loudon and
Fauquier, Ashby's Beut, 2481 10 d. 24,810 b. Chattin's Run, 885 8 7,080 b.
Berkely, S. ^o^k of Bouliskin, 1600 Head of Evan's m. 453 In Wormley's line,
183 2236 20 44,720 c Frederick, bo't from Mercer, 571 20 11,420 d Hampshire, on
Potomac river above B. 210 15 3,600 e Gloucester, on North river, 400 about
3,600 f Nansemond, near Suffold, one third of 1,119 acres, 373 8 2,984 g Great
Dismal Swamp, my dividend thereof, about 20,000 h Ohio river, Round Bottom, ^87
Little Kanhawa, 2314 2901 Sixteen miles lower down, 2448 Opposite Big Bent,
4395 dollars. 8700 ^^ 97,440 i GREAT KANHAWA.
Near the North West, 10,180 East side above, 7,276 Mouth of Cole river, 2,000
Opposite thereto, 2,950 3,075 Burning Spring, 125 200,000 k MARYLAND.
Charles County, 600 6 3,600 l Montgomery County, 519 12 6,229 m PENNSYLVANIA.
Great Meadows, 234 5 1,404 n NEW YORK.
Mohawk river, about 1000 6 6,000 o NORTH WEST TERRITORY.
On little Miami, 339 On little Miami, 977 On little Miami, 1235 3251 5 15,25^^
^t KENTUCKY.
Rough Creek, 3000 Rough Creek, adjoining, 2000 5000 2 10,000 q LOTS, viz. CITY
OF WASHINGTON.
Two near the capitol, square 634, cost 963 dollars, and with buildings, 15,000
r Nos. 5, 12, 13, and 14, the three last water lots on the Eastern Branch, in
square 667, containing together 34,438 square feet, at 12 cents, 4,132 s
ALEXANDRIA.
Corner of Pit and Prince streets, half an acre laid out into buildings, three
or four of which are let on ground rent at three dollars per foot, 4,000 t
WINCHESTER.
A lot in the town of half an acre, and another in the commons of about six
acres supposed, 400 u BATH, OR WARM SPRINGS.
Two well situated, and had buildings to the amount of 150l. 800 v STOCK.
UNITED STATES.
Six per cent. 3,746 Six per cent. deferred, 1,873 2,500 Three per cent, 2,946
2,500 6,246 w POTOMAC COMPANY.
Twenty-four shares, cost each 100l. sterling, 10,666 x JAMES RIVER COMPANY.
Five shares, each cost 100 dollars, 500 y BANK OF COLUMBIA.
One hundred and seventy shares, cost 40 dollars each, 6,800 z BANK OF
ALEXANDRIA.
Besides 20 shares to the free school -- 5 1,000 STOCK LIVING, viz.
One covering horse, five carriage horses, four riding horse, six brood mares,
20 working horses and mares, 2 covering jacks, and 3 young ones, 10 she asses,
42 working mules, 15 younger ones, ^29 head of horned cattle, 640 head of
sheep, and a large stock of hogs, the precise number unknown.My manager has
estimated this live stock at 7,000l. but I shall set it down in order to make a
round sum, at 15,658 Aggregate amount, 530,000

Notes.
a. THIS tract, for the size of it, is valuable, more for its situation than
the quality of its soil, though that is good for farming; with a considerable
proportion of ground, that might very easily be improved into meadow. It lies
on the great road from the City of Washington, Alexandria, and George-Town, to
Leesburgh and Winchester, at Difficult Bridge, nineteen miles from Alexandria,
less from the City and George-Town, and not more than three from Matildaville,
at the great falls of Potomac. There is a valuable seat on the premises, and
the whole is conditionally sold for the sum annexed in the schedule.

b. WHAT the selling prices of lands in the vicinity of those two tracts are, I
know not; but compared with those above the ridge, and others below them, the
value annexed will appear moderate; a less one would not obtain them from me.

c. THE surrounding land not superior in soil, situation, or properties of any
sort, sells currently at from twenty to thirty dollars an acre. The lowest
price is affixed to these.

d. THE observations made in the last note, apply equally to this tract, being
in the vicinity of them, and of similar quality, although it lies in another
county.

e. THIS tract, though small, is extremely valuable It lies on Potomac river,
about twelve miles above the town of Bath (or Warm Springs) and is in the shape
of a horse-shoe, the river running almost around it. Two hundred acres of it
are rich low grounds, with a great abundance of the largest and finest walnut
trees, which, with the produce of the soil, might (by means of the improved
navigation of the Potomac) be brought to a shipping port with more ease, and at
a smaller expense, than that which is transported thirty miles only by land.

f. THIS tract is of second rate Gloucester low grounds. It has no improvements
thereon, but lies on navigable water, abounding in fish and oysters. It was
received in payment of a debt (carrying interest) and valued, in the year 1789,
by an impartial gentleman, at 800l. -- N. B. It has been sold, and there is due
thereon a balance equal to what is annexed in the schedule.

g. THESE 373 acres are the third part of undivided purchases made by the
deceased Fielding Lewis, Thomas Walker, and myself, on full conviction that
they would become valuable. -- The land lies on the road from Suffolk to
Norfolk, touches (if I am not mistaken) some part of the navigable water of
Nansemond river; the rich Dismal Swamp is capable of great improvement, and,
from its situation, must become extremely valuable.

h. THIS is an undivided interest which I held in the great Dismal Swamp
Company, containing about 4,000 acres, with my part of the plantation and stock
thereon, belonging to the Company in the said Swamp.

i. THESE several tracts of land are of the first quality on the Ohio river, in
the parts where they are situated being almost, if not altogether, river
bottoms. The smallest of these tracts is actually sold at ten dollars an acre,
but the consideration therefore not received. The rest are equally valuable, and
will sell as high; especially that which lies just below the Little Kanhawa,
and is opposite to a thick settlement on the west side the river. The four
tracts have an aggregate breadth upon the river of sixteen miles, and are
bounded thereby that distance.

k. THESE tracts are situated on the Great Kanhawa river, and the first four
are bounded thereby for more than 40 miles. It is acknowledged by all who have
seen them (and of the tract containing 10, 990 acres, which I have been on
myself, I can assert) that there is no richer or more valuable land in all that
region. They are conditionally sold for the sum mentioned in the schedule, that
is 200,000 dollars, and if the terms of that sale is not complied with, they
will command considerably more. -- The tract, of which the 125 acres is a
moiety, was taken up by General Andrew Lewis and myself, for and on account of
a bitumenous spring which it contains, of so inflamable a nature, as to burn as
freely as spirits, and is nearly as difficult to extinguish.

l. I AM but little acquainted with this land, although I have once been on it.
It was received (many years since) in discharge of a debt due to me from Daniel
Jenifer Adams, at the value annexed thereto, and must be worth more. It is very
level -- lies near the river Potomac.

m. THIS tract lies about 30 miles above the city of Washington, not for from
Kittoctan. It is good farming land, and, by those who are well acquainted with
it, I am informed that it would sell at twelve or fifteen dollars per acre.

n. THIS land is valuable on account of its local situation and other
properties. It affords an exceeding good stand on Braddock's road from Fort
Cumberland to Pittsburg; and, besides a fertile soil, possesses a large
quantity of natural meadow, fit for the scythe. It is distinguished by the
appellation of the Great Meadows, where the first action with the French, in
the year 1754, was fought.

o. THIS is the moiety of about 2000 acres which remains unsold, of 6071 acres
on the Mohawk river (Montgomery county) in a patent granted to Daniel Coxe, in
the township of Coxeborough and Carolina, as will appear by deed, from Marinus
Willet and wife, to George Clinton (late governor of New York) and myself. The
latter sales have been at six dollars an acre* and what remains unsold will
fetch that or more.

p. THE quality of these lands and their situation, may be known by the
surveyor's certificates, which are filed along with the patents. They lie in
the vicinity of Cincinnati; one tract near the mouth of the little Miami;
another seven, and the third ten miles up the same. I have been informed that
they will readily command more than they are estimated at.

q. FOR the description of those tracts in detail, see General Spotswood's
letters, filed with the other papers relating to them. Besides the general good
quality of the land, there is a valuable bank of iron ore thereon, which, when
the settlement becomes more populous (and settlers are moving that way very
fast) will be found very valuable, as the Rough Creek, a branch of Green River,
affords ample water for furnaces and forges.

LOTS, viz. CITY OF WASHINGTON.
r. THE two lots near the capitol, in square 634, cost me 963 dollars only; but
in this price I was favored, on condition that I should build two brick houses,
three story high each: without this reduction the selling prices of these lots
would have cost me about 1350 dollars. These lots, with the buildings on them,
when completed, will stand me in 15,000 dollars at least.

s. LOTS Nos. 5, 12, 13, and 14, on the eastern branch, are advantageously
situated on the water, and although many lots much less convenient have sold a
great deal higher, I will rate these at 12 cents the square foot only.

ALEXANDRIA.
t. FOR this lot, though unimproved, I have refused 3500 dollars. It has since
been laid off into proper sized lots for building on, three or four of which
are let on ground rent for ever, at three dollars a foot on the street, and
this price is asked for both fronts on Pit and Prince street.

WINCHESTER.
u. As neither the lot in the town or common have any improvements on them, it
is not easy to fix a price; but as both are well situated, it is presumed the
price annexed to them in the schedule is a reasonable valuation.

BATH.
v. THE lots in Bath (two adjoining) cost me to the best of my recollection
between 50 and 60 pounds, 20 years ago; and the buildings thereon 150l. more.
-- Whether property there has increased or decreased in its value, and in what
condition the houses are, I am ignorant -- but suppose they are not valued too
high.

STOCK.
w. THESE are the sums which are actually funded, and though no more in the
aggregate than 7,566 dollars, stand me in at least ten thousand pounds,
Virginia money; being the amount of bonded and other debts due to me, and
discharged during the war, when money had depreciated in that rateand was so
settled by public authority.

x. THE value annexed to these shares is what they actually cost me, and is the
price affixed by law; and although the present selling price is under par, my
advice to the Legatees (for whose benefit they are intended, especially those
who can afford to lie out of the money) is that each should take and hold one
-- there being a moral certainty of a great and increasing profit arising from
them in the course of a few years.

y. IT is supposed that the shares in the James River Company must also be
productive: But of this I can give no decided opinion, for want of more
accurate information.

z. THESE are the nominal prices of the shares in the Banks of Alexandria and
Columbia; the selling prices vary according to circumstances; but as the stock
usually divides from eight to ten per cent per annum, they must be worth the
former, at least, so long as the Banks are conceived to be secure, although
circumstances may sometimes make them below it.

THE value of the live stock depends more upon the quality than quantity of the
different species of it; and this again upon the demand and judgment, or fancy
of purchasers.

George Washington,
MOUNT VERNON, July 9, 1799.
A DISCOURSE, By DAVID TAPPAN, S. T. D. HOLLIS PROFESSOR OF DIVINITY; DELIVERED
BEFORE THE UNIVERSITY IN CAMBRIDGE, FEB. 21, 1800, IN SOLEMN COMMEMORATION OF
Genesis George Washington.
WHILE the American family, in one great funeral procession, is mourning its
deceased father; while every description of its members is emulous to honor him
by a tribute as various and unrivalled as his merits; this ancient University,
who was an early witness and subject of his protecting virtues, now presents at
his tomb her humble, yet fervent oblation. Led on by our respected collegiate
head, we have paid to departed worth those academic honors, which elegiac
poetry, music, and eloquence could bestow. THIS discourse was preceded by an
introductory address in latin, by the President -- an elegiac poem -- and a
funeral oration.
It remains that we hallow and consummate our offering by those moral and
religious sentiments, which the word of God and a corresponding act of devotion
are fitted to inspire. Such sentiments peculiarly become the profession of the
speaker, the character of a christian seminary, and the pre-eminent virtue of
the man we deplore.

THE records of frail and uninspired mortals have in vain been searched for a
complete archetype of our illustrious WASHINGTON. So finished a copy was
evidently borrowed from a higher original. It was the image, as well as
production of Him, who is the great exemplar and source of perfection. Indeed
every degree of excellence in a created mind is at once the offspring and
likeness of infinite intelligence and goodness. Yet certain personages have
occasionally adorned the theater of our world, who have been extraordinary
ministers and representatives of deity. To such characters divine inspiration,
as well as human sentiment and feeling, applies the glorious epithet of Gods
upon earth. While the justness of this application, in the present instance, is
attested by an admiring world; the sudden removal of the object admired
qualifies our respect for his greatness by the impression of his frailty, and
forbids our deifying the creature at the expense of the Creator.

To add light and force to these sentiments, let me call your attention to that
declaration of the Most High respecting his political vicegerents here below;

I have said, ye are Gods; but ye shall die like men.

I HAVE said, ye are Gods. The name God, usually denotes the underived and all
perfect Being, possessing unlimited power, understanding, and benevolence;
whose infinite greatness imparts light, strength, and majesty to his goodness;
while his unbounded goodness gives equal beauty and dignity to his greatness.
The union of both qualifies and engages Him to promote his own glory in
connection with the highest good of that universe, which the same attributes
called into existence. Since the character of the supreme divinity thus
combines the greatest ability and disposition to communicate happiness with the
regular and constant exertion of both; the title of gods, by a bold and
significant figure, is conferred on those subordinate beings, who inherit from
Him large portions of these godlike qualities, and employ them for the divine
purpose of extensive good. Thus celestial principalities and earthly rulers are
styled gods, because their inherent or delegated powers, their allotted or
actual services, peculiarly represent the majesty and beneficence of the Most
High. When this character is given to men in dignified stations, it imports
that both their duty and glory consist in cooperating the design, imitating
the purity, and reflecting the luster of the divine administration. I AM
sensible that as the Hebrew word, translated God, strictly denotes the power
and authority of the Most High, rather than his whole character; so the same
title, when given to rulers, may primarily refer to that portion or image of
divine power, with which they are invested. But as the omnipotence of the
Supreme Ruler is ever employed by goodness, and governed by rectitude; so his
vicegerents fulfill the object of their commission, and the true import of their
title, only by copying the moral character and measures of their sovereign.


IN this view, what human being, not assisted by miraculous interposition, ever
possessed a higher claim to this distinction, than our departed benefactor? The
union of his intrinsic qualities and destined services fills our imaginations
with an idea so august, that a minute detail would but diminish its splendour
and force.

YOU will not expect from the speaker, especially at this late hour, the
needless and presumptuous effort, to do justice to a character, on which the
best resources of American gratitude, genius, and taste, have already been
exhausted. Nor will you look for a vain attempt to rouse, in any high degree,
those poignant sensibilities, which, after repeated and forcible exercise, have
been softened by the kind hand of time into mournful resignation. The subject
and occasion however demand a sober and instructive application of our inspired
motto to the life and death of our beloved patriot. If, in this application, we
sometimes adopt the bold, but warranted style of the text; you will consider us
not as paying divine honors to WASHINGTON, but as chiefly aiming to glorify the
Supreme Ruler through the medium of his favorite minister.

IT was the high destiny of WASHINGTON, to be selected in the counsels of
Heaven, as its leading agent in the most glorious and beneficent work, which
perhaps was ever accomplished in the political world. This peculiar allotment
gives him a marked pre-eminence in the annals of human greatness. Though
existing or future patriots may possibly rival him in other respects; yet to
him was eminently consigned the province of severing the new world from the
old, and of erecting the former into an independent, stable, and glorious
fabric of liberty and happiness.

THE same unerring wisdom, which had appointed him to this work, gradually
ripened him for its execution by a nice adjustment of his birth and education,
of his bodily and mental constitution, of his early fortunes and pursuits. In
these previous steps we recognize the same invisible hand, which by similar
arrangements prepared the ancient deliverer and lawgiver of Israel for the
great scenes of his public life. In the bodily constitution of our hero were
united a vigor, firmness, and dignity, which at once represented and supported
the energy and greatness of his mind; and which seemed to designate him for
high command and arduous enterprise. His intellectual furniture combined a
clear and comprehensive understanding, a correct and cultivated taste, a pro^pt
and retentive memory, a sound and deliberate judgment. He conceived and
expressed his sentiments with justness, precision, and strength. He formed and
executed his plans with circumspection, policy, and vigor. The productions of
his pen were uniformly excellent. They furnish an eminent model of chaste and
perspicuous, of concise and elegant composition. Their matter and style are
ever appropriate to the subject and occasion. They exhibit, in the most
unaffected and diversified manner, not only the inexhausted resources of his
genius, but the steady and elevated goodness of his heart.

As the greatness of God, rightly understood, involves, and indeed is
principally formed by infinite rectitude; so his departed minister was chiefly
ennobled by the majesty of his virtue. His avowed and sublime principles of
morality and piety enlarged his understanding, and exalted his affections. They
originated some of his great qualities, and imparted direction, vigor, and
beauty to all. They supported a constant propriety and dignity both of
sentiment and action in his individual, domestic, and public capacities. His
unusual command of appetite and passion made the serenity, clearness, and
uniformity of his mind resemble those of superior beings. His investigation,
discernment, and practical observance of truth, rectitude, and honor were never
known to be either obstructed by pleasure, relaxed by indolence, disturbed by
resentment, controuled by fear, intercepted by interest, or borne down by
ambition. In short, the splendour of his character arose, not so much from the
striking predominance of any one virtue, as from the singular union and culture
of all, and the wonderful adaptation of his leading moral qualities to his
peculiar and arduous situations.

THIS bright assemblage of virtues strikes us with less astonishment, when we
add that their possessor was, both in faith and practice, a christian. Whatever
inflence we ascribe to the peculiar structure of his mind and his polished
education; yet as christian principles were early interwoven with this
structure and education, they must, under the divine blessing, have principally
contributed to his excellent character. Agreeably, in his circular letter at
the close of the revolutionary war, he ascribes the meliorated condition of
mankind "above all other causes, to the pure and benign light of revelation;"
and earnestly prays that God "would most graciously be pleased to dispose us
all to demean ourselves with that charity, humility, and pacific temper of
mind, which were the characteristics of the Divine Author of our blessed
religion; with out a humble imitation of whose example, we can never hope to be
a happy nation." When we compare this solemn testimony in favor of the gospel
with his exemplary regard to its public institutions, and his uncommon display
of its excellent spirit; can we avoid the conclusion, that his eminent
character was chiefly produced by its heavenly doctrines; by "a humble
imitation of the perfect example" it proposes; and above all, by the gracious
and promised influence of its " divine author?" Well may he be ranked among
earthly Gods, who to other great accomplishments united a "humble," yet near
resemblance of Him, who is the standard of human perfection, and the express
image of divine glory.

THE Author of nature and grace, having thus prepared his chosen servant, by
enduing him with a large portion of internal greatness, at length by his
providence raised him to a corresponding sphere of external dignity. The voice
of God speaking in the unanimous appointment of a great and enlightened people,
created him their military leader, and afterward their political head. He
accepted and fulfilled each of these appointments with a spirit of humility and
disinterestedness, of patriotism and devotion, which consecrated all his
virtues and energies to God and his country. To the godlike, but hazardous
purpose of saving and blessing his nation, he readily sacrificed his comfort
and interest, and cheerfully offered his reputation and life. His spirit and
conduct in pursuing this object, uniformly comported with its excellent nature.

AMID the singular discouragements and vicissitudes of a long, fluctuating, and
distressing war, his mind, leaning on its own greatness, on the purity of his
motives, the rectitude of the cause, and the approbation of his God, seemed to
gather strength from surrounding weakness, courage from danger, and hope from
despondency. Happy in his conscious integrity, and alive only to his country's
interest and honor, he anxiously covered her infirmities and perils even from
her own view; he resigned personal character and feeling to her credit and
welfare; he enlivened her confidence, and repelled her foes, by needful but
feigned appearances of strength, and prospects of victory. While we trace his
military career, we admire that uncommon and diversified greatness, which could
at once conceal and varnish, endure and surmount, yea finally bend to the
public good, so many circumstances of perplexity, alarm, and disgrace. We
admire that greatness, which effectually influenced the civil authorities,
while it yielded them the most delicate respect and the firmest support; which
animated the great mass of the people, and upheld the national Union, without
ever stepping over the line of decorum or official propriety. We venerate that
controuling genius and virtue, which from raw, shifting, and discordant
materials, and amid the most trying and obstinate difficulties, could create
and harmonize, encourage and protect the armies of our infant nation; and
which, under the visible auspices of an almighty leader, conducted them through
a great and terrible wilderness, to the promised land of triumphant freedom,
peace, and independence. We reverence that sublime spirit, which, at the close
of the war, spurned the allurement of empire, and crushed the embryo of
rebellion; and which, after giving its excellent parting advice and benediction
to the beloved soldiers and citizens of America, exemplified to the world the
precious maxim, that true ambition and glory are completed in humble and
disinterested virtue.

IN a word, the character of our hero seemed to border as closely on
perfection, as human infirmity would permit. Its multifarious and exquisite
texture was admirably fitted to his destination. The God of WASHINGTON and of
America, appears to have united in him those seemingly incompatible virtues and
talents, which had been singly distributed among preceding warriors, because
their combined efficiency and example were eminently required, to form a
lasting center of union for our nation; to support the interests, and retrieve
the honor of our degraded nature; and to instruct mankind in that true heroism,
which liberty and christianity alone can inspire. THE singular trials, virtues,
talents, and services of our hero, during the late war, are best seen in his
Official Letters. These, compared with his conduct, display an unparallelled
union of coolness and animation; of caution and vigor; of modesty and
decision; of philanthropy and bravery; of humility and ambition; of
comprehensive discernment and patriotic ardor; of prudent, yet heroic patience
and enterprise; of fortitude in distress, moderation in victory, and equanimity
in all the changes of fortune.


THE political character of WASHINGTON is too fresh in your minds, to need a
particular delineation. You remember, you still feel the universal transport,
which hailed him as our first executive magistrate. You recollect with
exultation the pure and sublime maxims, on which he founded his auspicious
administration, and the steady magnanimity, which marked his adherence to them.
While such maxims and conduct reflected equal honor on his understanding and
heart; while they illustrated the transcendent beauty and dignity of christian
policy: they gave, at a critical period, the most salutary direction to our new
political machine, and afforded a precious example to all succeeding patriots.
Who can fully estimate the mass of public good derived from a magistrate, whose
name reconciled the clashing views and feelings of party; whose sanction
enforced a system of needful and just, of liberal and vigorous measures; whose
comprehensive mind rose superior to the selfish and subtle policy of his native
state, and to every local and partial consideration, and equally cherished all
the members of our complex republic; whose enlightened and vigilant zeal
constantly superintended both our internal and external interests, and at a
very delicate crisis not only placed, but steadily kept us on the high ground
of pacific, independent, and prosperous neutrality? How great was that spirit,
which, like a majestic rock in the ocean, stood firm and lofty on its own base
against the dashing billows of domestic and foreign opposition! How glorious
was that character, which, amid the mutual rage and ^^^mination of parties,
extorted a universal testimony to its own undeviating integrity! How amiable
and dignified was that policy, which, while it courted and attentively weighed
every decent expression of public opinion, and gratefully enjoyed every mark of
popular favor, could calmly sacrifice both to conscious duty and the national
interest!

IN a word, the conduct of our late President, was a humble and visible
representation of the divine government in the uniform purity of its
principles, measures, and objects. He approved himself the vicegerent of God by
his profound wisdom, impartial justice, unsuspected uprightness, and steady
consistency; by his disinterested and universal love; by his intense,
unwearied, and successful exertions for the common good.

IN the course of his public life the supreme divinity delighted to honor him
by affording opportunity to exhibit with advantage all his talents and virtues;
by leading him to a happy use of such opportunity; and by crowning his energies
with signal success. What the Romans called felicitas, and christians style the
blessing of Heaven, remarkably attended him, especially in cases of unusual
importance, embarrassment, or danger. In these instances, a guardian God
appeared to watch, with the most tender solicitude, over his counsels, actions,
and fortunes; protecting him from every weakness or contingence, which might
either defeat his projects, or tarnish his glory. With respect to him,
Providence seemed to say to misfortune and to malice, touch not mine anointed,
and do my servant no harm.

CORRESPONDING with this divine patronage were the tokens of human confidence
and admiration. With respect to these, this favorite of Heaven was a matchless,
though distant representative of Him, who claims the unbounded confidence and
admiration of the universe. To borrow the words of President ADAMS at the
commencement of our federal government -- "If we look over the catalogue of the
first magistrates of nations, whether they have been denominated presidents or
consuls, kings or princes; where shall we find one, who has so completely
united all hearts and all voices in his favor; and who enjoyed the esteem and
admiration of foreign nations and fellow-citizens with equal unanimity?" The
same well informed and excellent judge both of men and things, though himself
the first in station, and ranking high in the public esteem, yet with equal
sincerity and greatness of mind pronounces his departed brother "the most
illustrious, admired, and beloved personage, which the country ever produced."

THIS pre-eminent glory was exceedingly heightened by the temperate
sensibility, with which it was received and supported; by the disinterested and
patriotic use, to which it was applied; by that unaffected piety, which
constantly transferred to the deity the honor of all our national blessings,
and devoutly resorted to Him for their continuance; by that oppressed modesty,
which a second time eagerly withdrew from the gaze of public admiration to the
shade of rural retirement; and by that enlightened paternal affection, which,
on retiring, bequeathed to America and the world an invaluable treasure of
political and moral wisdom.

BUT the climax of human greatness was not yet completed. In the evening of a
long, toilsome, and glorious day, he again dutifully resigns his comfort and
fame to the anxieties and contingencies of a military employment. He descends
from the honors and habits of our first citizen to a subordinate station. He
supports and even enjoys the elevation of the man, who had long occupied under
him a secondary department, and lends to his great measures his own important
approbation and efficiency. How magnificent the spectacle! How inestimable the
example! How inspiring the event! On this eminence he stood, when like Moses on
the top of Pisgah, he was suddenly translated, as we all believe, to celestial
and eternal honors.

THIS event, so mournful to our world, realizes to the utmost that dark shade
in the portrait of earthly gods -- but ye shall die like men. Death shall
reduce you to a level with vulgar mortals. Ye shall die, not as the beasts that
perish, but, like other men, as accountable and immortal beings, who must
inherit the just and everlasting recompense of their present conduct.

THY death, O virtuous sage, has indeed linked thy fate to that of mortals. Yet
thy dying, as well as living greatness, has raised thee above the ordinary
level. It has proclaimed thee a christian conqueror. It has visibly exemplified
and sealed thy future glory. It has consecrated thy character, instructed thy
fellow-men, and honored thy God. No judicious reader will understand the above
expressions as implying, that mere fortitude, or even transport in the hour of
death, is a certain evidence of vital christianity, or sure pledge of future
felicity. This would be a very loose and dangerous assertion. But such dying
composure as our WASHINGTON exhibited, when preceded by such a life, a life too
expressly and uniformly governed by the principles of revealed religion, may
well be styled christian magnanimity; and to the eye of faith and charity it
appears the harbinger of celestial glory.


Do any ask, why those, whom God himself has thus exalted, are subjected to the
same lot with the meanest and even vilest of our race? The answer is, the
former, as well as the latter, inherit both the moral and physical causes of
death. These causes, by a just and necessary influence, terminate in
dissolution. This catastrophe cannot be prevented by the greatest combination
of courage and policy, of power and fame, of virtue and usefulness. It cannot
be averted by the united prayers and tears of a nation or a world. The moral
good, which this allotment is fitted to produce, is beyond calculation. A
serious prospect of death and its consequences, teaches those who are called
gods, a sober estimate, a virtuous and beneficent use of their mental and
exterior dignity. It instructs them to erect the fabric of their greatness on
the broad and durable base of superior goodness; which alone can give them
peace in death, and glory beyond it. It teaches the multitude to regard the
higher powers with a veneration and confidence, tempered by sympathy and
candor for their human imperfections and burdens, and by a solemn sense of
their uncertain continuance and approaching fate. As the expected removal of
the great ones of the earth is thus pregnant with useful instruction, so their
actual decease fulfils the most extensive purposes of good. It arrests and
consigns to merited infamy and punishment, those baleful monsters, who, by
abusing great powers, have corrupted, oppressed, or desolated the world; and
whom the arm of human juslice was unable to reach. It transplants to a happier
region those eminent ministers of divine goodness, whose talents, virtues, and
services, could not be fully matured and rewarded in this inhospitable and
unthankful world. It advances them to spheres of employment and fruition, equal
to their sublime capacities and dispositions, suited to their peculiar
geniusses and habits, and forever enlarging with their active and immortal
spirits.

WHILE the death of the great and good thus enhances their dignity, happiness,
and usefulness in the empire of Jehovah; it impresses many excellent lessons on
the surviving inhabitants of the earth. Let me briefly apply this remark to the
present occasion.

BY suddenly removing from us such a man as WASHINGTON, at a crisis like the
present, how forcibly does the Supreme Ruler teach us his own sovereignty and
independence, and inculcate the duty of implicit and entire submission to his
disposals! How pathetically does he admonish us of the vanity of human glory
and dependence! How earnestly does he call us to seek and confide in a friend,
who can never forsake us! How solemnly does he exhort us to show both our piety
and patriotism by securing to our beloved country and posterity his own
almighty and unfailing protection!

WHEN persons uncommonly estimable and greatly beloved, ascend from earth to
Heaven, how strongly are our affections carried upward with them! How
powerfully are we incited to prepare for a speedy and everlasting junction with
such great and virtuous spirits! With what rapture do we anticipate the day,
which will unite us to their society! What sublime ideas do we form of that
world, which is their native element, their eternal home! These impressions are
greatly heightened, if such characters rise to that invisible abode in the
vigor of their endowments and services, while their glory is fresh and
complete. As their removal amid such circumstances forbids the supposition,
that virtue and ability so strong, progressive, and useful are suddenly
extinguished: so it impresses a peculiar conviction both of the reality and
excellence of their future destination. In this view we perceive a special
beauty and utility in the sudden translation of Enoch in the midst of vigorous
piety and goodness; in the departure of Moses, while the force and patriotic
exertion of his bodily and mental energies were as yet unabated; and in the
exit of WASHINGTON in the full splendour of his talents, virtues, and fame.

WHAT then remains, but that we celebrate the illustrious dead with that grief
and joy, humility and thanksgiving, emulation and improvement, which such a
life and death are fitted to produce?

LET our sorrow and mutual condolence bear some due proportion to the greatness
of our loss. Let us mourn the heavy bereavement, which liberty and order,
science and religion, America and the world, have sustained by the death of
their common friend and protector. Let us respectfully sympathize with our
President, who has lost his early brother and firmest support; with our federal
government, which so greatly owed its existence, preservation, and success, to
the name and efficiency of WASHINGTON; with the American union, which, in
critical periods, found him its chief and effectual cement; with the military
forces of our country, of which he was the directing and animating spirit,
while his single presence and reputation surrounded us with walls and bulwarks.

AMID numberless objects of sympathy we see one, which rivets and almost
appropriates our respectful, our tenderest grief. The Wife of WASHINGTON! What
a charm does that sound convey! Disconsolate, yet dignified woman! We love and
revere thee, both for thy own sake, and for the sake of thy departed husband.
His soul, while he lived, was divided between thee and us. He was equally
amiable, as thy partner and our benefactor. We thank thee for thy soothing
attentions to him, while wearing out his life for us. We thank thee for thy
tenderness and greatness at his death. Thou have indeed profited by his
example. In thee America still sees and embraces her WASHINGTON. May the
sublime idea of his past virtues and present reward; may the tears and eulogies
of grateful millions; may the peculiar presence of his and thy God; may the
dear hope of shortly rejoining him in his glorified state, descend into thy
afflicted heart, as the refreshing dew on the mountain of Zion!

WHILE we thus lament our deceased patriot; let us notice, with pious
humiliation, the rebuke of Providence in suddenly withdrawing so great a
blessing; and acknowledge, with penitence, that national ingratitude and guilt,
which had forfeited its continuance. Let us view, with awful concern, the gap
which this event has opened for the entrance of public calamities; and the dark
presage of impending judgments, which Heaven seems to exhibit by recalling its
beloved minister.

AT the same time let our tears be intermixed and ennobled by that sublime
spirit of gratitude and joy, which the dignity of the occasion requires. Let us
exult in the thought, that our nature and our country, that our government,
liberty, and religion have been adorned by so distinguished a subject and
patron. Let us draw fresh materials for patriotic triumph and religious
thanksgiving from every page in the history of WASHINGTON; and from every
benefit, which Heaven has conferred upon us, and bequeathed to our children,
through the medium of his services, writings and example. Among the innumerable
sources of consolation and praise, presented by his life, let us gratefully
adore the divine goodness in protracting it to a vigorous, useful, and
honorable old age; in protecting its decline from that abasement and obscurity,
in which the sun of human glory so frequently sets. Let us give thanks, that a
body and mind so energetic and noble were not doomed to long disease and pain,
to mortifying inactivity and dotage; that the last stages of so glorious a life
were attended with no circumstance, which in the least diminished its splendour;
that our beloved patriot did not fall, as many great and good men have done, by
the hand either of foreign hostility, or of domestic envy, ingratitude, or
treachery; that his death, though kindly sudden, did not deprive him of the
honor, nor the world of the example, of a rational and glorious triumph over
the king of terrors. Let us devoutly glory in the thought, that our great
countryman was lent to mankind, to instruct them both how to live and how to
die; that, while his spirit still lives to itself, to the universe, and to God,
he also survives on earth in his excellent pattern and counsels, in the fruits
of his labors, the affections of his country, and the records of immortal fame;
that this his surviving existence is our peculiar and unlading inheritance;
that its blessed effects will, we trust in God, be successively propagated from
age to age, and thus continually add fresh glory to his memory on earth, and to
his spirit in heaven.

WHAT matter of thankful joy, that in addition to the other means of education,
with which this age abounds, Providence has opened to our children a volume so
pure and instructive, as the life of WASHINGTON! Ye American parents, and
teachers of youth! Study this volume; become masters of its important contents;
transcribe them into your own hearts and lives; and thus convey them with
happiest effect to your children and pupils. Often lead them to the tomb of
their venerable father, and say; 'Here lies the man, who loved liberty and his
country; who loved us and you far better than his own comfort, reputation, and
life. Here sleeps the hero and statesman, whom your God and the God of your
fathers raised up and singularly qualified to be our successful leader both in
war and peace. Here rests the citizen and christian, whose piety and morality
solicit universal esteem and imitation. Read then his history, and learn to
believe in Providence; to be thankful for its favors; to admire and emulate its
virtuous and illustrious agent!'

ESPECIALLY let the youthful votaries of the liberal arts honor their deceased
patron, not merely by fervent celebrations, but by correspondent practice. The
man, whom we commemorate, though formed to be great without the assistance of
public education, was yet a liberal possessor and friend of science. He
protected this University from British spoilers. He gave it his warm
benediction, when, as our common father, he made his visit to the eastern
states. He fervently recommended the interests of learning to the national
legislature. While living, he cherished literary institutions by his bounty;
and at his death appropriated large legacies to the support of several
academies, and especially of a central Columbian University. His reasons for
this last devise display a mind so correct, patriotic, and noble, as must
greatly recommend him to the friends of learning and of America, even though
his favorite plan at present be thought inexpedient. I need not add that his
attachment to science and her children has been warmly reciprocated. The sons
of this our Alma Matter have long dwelt on his name with filial, unabating
rapture. They have loaded his natal day with their united blessings. They have
eagerly decorated our exhibitions with his laurels. The muses have never tired
in singing his praises. The anniversary of his birth again approaches. "But ah,
how changed!" It is shrouded in sackcloth. Its joy-inspiring patron has fled.

YE bereaved members of this University! The death of the man, whom ye once
fondly celebrated, has not dissolved but enhanced and sealed your obligations
to his memory. While your hearts pant to fulfill these obligations, permit me,
as his humble organ, and your friendly monitor, to assist you in the arduous
effort. As this seminary was designed to be the nursery of true greatness, your
standard of dignity should be early and correctly adjusted. You have often
heard and echoed the maxim, that moral grandeur makes the mighty man. Here you
behold this abstract principle embodied, yea formed into a living soul. The
character of our patriot, whether cursorily viewed, or philosophically
analyzed; though we see it covered with intellectual and adventitious glory;
yet seizes and almost confines our admiration by its predominant goodness. We
admire its other qualities, chiefly because they were the offspring, the
handmaids, or exhibiters of his heaven-born virtue. Why are you enraptured with
its military splendour? Because it was a sublime display of the policy and
enterprise, the courage and triumph of goodness. Why do you extol his political
greatness? Because through the correct medium of impartial, just, and extended
philanthropy, he clearly discerned the rights, duties, and interests both of
his own and of foreign nations; and because the strength of his virtue made him
resolutely follow this moral perception. Why does the whole life of WASHINGTON
at once awe and delight you? Because it was uniformly superior to the
littleness of vanity and pride, of selfish ambition and avarice, of habitual
vice even in its most fashionable and seducing forms; because he ever sought
the noblest ends by the purest means; because all his waking hours were
methodically and intensely employed in this godlike pursuit. Can you
contemplate such a character without trampling under foot that spurious
greatness, which the world has annexed to most of its renowned heroes and
sages, and emperors, and gods? Figure to yourselves a man concentrating as far
as possible, all the qualities, actions, and fortunes of our patron, excepting
his goodness; suppose this splendid combination to be connected with an unjust
cause or unworthy motives, with private immorality or public villainy; you
cannot but spurn its possessor, even though his exploits have providentially
saved a country or a world. You may indeed be astonished at his energies and
atchievments, just as we admire some grand, tremendous, or useful prodigy in
nature. But, while the transient sight of so huge and misshapen a monster may
delight your curiosity, you cannot but dread and shun his unwieldy greatness,
and wish him either chained or exterminated. IT is pleasing to observe that the
life of WASHINGTON has in some degree changed the dialect of mankind. We now
almost instinctively apply the epithet great to high moral excellence, rather
than to superiority of intellect or of fortune. The best eulogists of our hero
almost appropriate this title to his self-denying and exalted virtue. They and
all their readers consider him, as pre-eminently great in firmly defending our
independence against France, in voluntarily relinquishing the chair of
government, in accepting a subordinate command, etc. May we not hope that the
time is at hand, when this dignified appellation will be wholly alienated from
exalted libertines and villians, robbers and murderers, blasphemers and
atheists; and be exclusively applied to characters resembling the American
WASHINGTON?


YOUR historic and classical reading, my young friends, has doubtless
anticipated me in deriving fresh laurels for our hero from the contrasted vices
or defects of the greatest characters both of ancient and modern times. I must
however observe, that his life presents a model of excellence superior, not
only to the real, but even to the fabulous heroes of paganism. Survey the
fictitious portraits, drawn by those two great masters, Virgil and Homer.
Compare the romantic hero of the Eneid with the real hero of America. How
unfeeling and spiritless, how inconsistent and unlovely on the whole, does the
former appear in the comparison! Look into the Iliad. Though you justly admire
the grandeur of its sentiments and images; yet can you find one spotless or
uniformly great character in the whole group of its heroes and deities? Does
not even mighty Jupiter force your contempt and aversion? Do you not laugh at
his foibles, and detest his vices, in spite of his terrible thunder bolts? Yes,
the collected dignity of all the heathen gods and goddesses, vanishes before
the pure and beneficent luster of WASHINGTON.

How shall we account for this fact? We can trace it to no adequate source, but
that from which he derives the present melioration of mankind, viz. the pure
and benign light of revelation. As the countries, which wanted this light,
could furnish no refined or finished models of virtue, from which to copy; so
the moral conceptions of the copyists were too defective and gross, for the
exhibition of a perfect ideal character. The christian religion therefore
receives new luster from its transcendent influence upon the character of our
virtuous sage, as well as from his avowed belief and earnest recommendation of
its divine principles. You cannot despise this religion, without insulting the
ashes of a man, whom you are forever bound to love and revere. You cannot
reject it, without renouncing the precious assurance, that the most beloved of
human benefactors is now inheriting a reward equal to his matchless services;
and that, if you imitate his virtues, you will shortly associate with him, and
other kindred spirits, in a world of perfect gratitude, benevolence, and joy.
How inestimable is that system, which can exalt frail humanity to such
greatness of character, and to such glorious prospects; and yet restrain us
from deifying the most excellent creature, by pointing our views to an object
infinitely greater! How ought we to love that revelation, which confers such
dignity and happiness on the present and future existence of our admired
citizen; which enables us to rank him far above the most adored objects of
other religions, and to pay him the highest subordinate honors; while it
reserves our supreme affection and sacred worship to his and our Father and
Redeemer!

WHILE the life of our illustrious patriot thus sets before you the criterion
of dignity, it distinctly points out the several ingredients, which compose it.
It teaches you to unite benevolence with self-love, patriotism with friendship,
private integrity with public splendour, and devout piety with all. It teaches
you the real existence, import, and beauty of disinterested affection; of that
principle, which, while it allows a sober pursuit and enjoyment of personal
pleasure, advantage, and fame, habitually subjects, and cheerfully sacrifices
them to a far greater and dearer object, the general good. It instructs you in
the falsehood and littleness of that philosophy, which derides every appearance
of public benevolence or personal self denial, as the mask and engine of an
interested or aspiring policy. It calls upon you to render your public
education the soil and nutriment of public virtue. It exhorts you to seek
eminence in knowledge, not merely as the instrument of academic distinction, of
mental luxury, or of future wealth, applause, or preferment; but as the mean of
extensive service to your Creator, and to his rational family. It directs you
to pursue, to enjoy, and to apply scientific or worldly superiority with that
humble, equal, and beneficent mind, which added such luster to his. Whenever
you are tempted to lose the man, the gentleman, or the christian, in the proud
intoxication of real of fancied greatness; let the exalted, yet lowly image of
WASHINGTON repel the sordid temptation. Behold him displaying the father and
the brother to the meanest soldier and citizen of his country; yea to the
lowest member of his family. Read his last will; and see his anxious, tender,
and effectual provision for the liberation of all his African servants, for the
comfort of such of them, as are either aged and infirm, or united by the sacred
ties of marriage, and for the useful education of their infant offspring. This
provision, added to his corresponding humanity, while living, and the filial
tears shed by his domestics on his tomb, erect one of the noblest monuments to
his fame. These are monuments infinitely superior to those loud but
hypocritical clamors for liberty and equality, which distinguish many nominal
patriots and real tyrants of the present day.

Do you ask, by what steps, by what mysterious charm this eminent personage
acquired such greatness? The answer is short; he began early to live by rule.
His wisdom and virtue were not the offspring, nor the sport of instinctive,
capricious, or romantic feeling, like that refined sensibility which is
occasionally enraptured with a beautiful, or melted by a tragic fiction, while
it displays no steady, active, and useful benevolence. His great seize
and actions resulted from certain deliberate and virtuous principles, which his
reason and conscience prescribed, and to which he steadily and immovably
adhered! The splendour of his character arose, not so much from the superior
abstract excellence of these principles, as from their commanding and uniform
influence upon his conduct. Be encouraged by this example to propose to
yourselves a high pitch of excellence, and to pursue similar measures for its
attainment. Like him, bring your imaginations, appetites, and feelings, however
impetuous, under the tranquil empire of reason. Like him, cherish a solemn
sense of the worth of time; of the importance of method in its distribution,
and of diligence in its improvement. Let his example instruct you to assign to
every study, to every action, its proper rank and opportunity, and to observe
this arrangement with punctuality and perseverance. Let it teach us all to make
the discharge of our several duties keep pace with the current of our lives;
that, if the last messenger, as in his case, should suddenly arrive, no
unfinished business, temporal or spiritual, may disturb our dying pillow, or
our future account, What dignity and peace must attend such a plan of life,
completed by such a death! What godlike pleasure, as well as glory, must our
late benefactor have enjoyed in the conscious exercise of goodness so steady,
successful, and applauded! How solacing to his bereaved connexions, and perhaps
to his ascended spirit, is the heartfelt tribute of millions, made happy and
grateful by his virtuous deeds! How powerfully do these reflections urge you,
even from motives of pleasure and honor, to go, and do likewise! At the same
time, the example of the deceased recommends devout and constant vigilance, as
the best support, under God, of an excellent character. A NEAR relative and
intimate friend of WASHINGTON informs us, that he had his daily and regular
hour of private devotion, from which no company, business, or amusement could
divert him. We have similar assurances of his secret piety even amid the cares
and temptations of military life. These anecdotes perfectly accord with that
humble and devout spirit, which steadily marked his visible conduct, and
distinguished even his political addresses. His inaugural speech to Congress in
1789 is a signal display of this spirit. It strongly expresses his sense of his
own deficiencies, his faith in divine communications to the human mind, and his
prayerful dependence upon them. Sound philosophy, as well as christianity,
justifies a belief, that his wisdom and virtue as a man, his conduct and
success as our hero and statesman, were eminently indebted to his habitual
devotion. If any admirers of our departed sage despise or neglect prayer and
other offices of piety, they are requested to consider, that however they may
honor him with their lips, they pointedly reproach him by their actions. They
pour contempt both on his past precepts and example on earth, and his present
employment in heaven. As their souls are not congenial with his, they cannot
reasonably hope to associate with him and other kindred spirits in the region
of pure and everlasting devotion.


YOUR patience will indulge me in adding that the extraordinary affection and
honor, paid to an eminent man, IF any good christians, who dread idolatry, view
with anxiety the unequalled and long continued honors, paid at the tomb of
WASHINGTON; they are desired to consider that he, while living, constantly
declined every other reward; and that it peculiarly becomes a free and happy
nation to offer to her great patriots the generous tribute of public
veneration; a tribute so congenial and gratifying to that pure love of country,
which finds its best recomperse in her reciprocal and grateful affection. While
other rewards please and nourish little and mercenary passions; this is a
spontaneous and sublime homage paid to superior goodness, and of course has the
happiest influence in recommending and encouraging that private and patriotic
virtue, which is the basis and life of a republic. Sound policy, therefore, as
well as natural justice and gratitude, enjoins it as a great republican duty,
to bestow upon transcendent merit the highest tokens of respect; especially,
when the removal of the object has precluded every suspicion of hollow and
selfish adulation. We may add that piety imposes the same obligation; for "if
we love not our human benefactor whom we have seen; how can we love our
infinite benefactor, when we have not soon?"
not only furnish a noble incentive to emulation, but exhibit the strong
propensity of mankind to reverence and love superior wisdom and goodness. If a
person, possessing these qualities, be our benefactor, ruler, or guardian
friend; this endearing connection heightens our affectionate veneration, and
awakens our gratitude and joy. Can we, then without violating our nature and
reason, as well as religion, withhold our highest reverence and grateful
affection from a father and governor infinitely great and good; of whom our
earthly benefactor was the imperfect image and offspring, given and long
continued to us, as the chosen medium of divine benefits, and a pattern of
correspondent piety? Shall not our fervent celebration of derived excellence
and beneficence, enforce a still higher tribute to the all perfect original?
Shall those overflowings of heart, those ardent testimonies of grateful
admiration, which human greatness and goodness command, be ridiculed, as
foolish superstition or enthusiasm, when paid to the infinite summary and
fountain of good? Shall the lovers of WASHINGTON affect to dissolve that
connection between morality and religion, which his living example and dying
legacy have solemnly confirmed? Shall we manifest our respect for him by
honoring his written counsels, his natal anniversary, and even his name and
likeness? And shall we not treat with equal, yea far superior veneration, the
inspired code, the consecrated day, and the glorious name of the Lord our God?
Shall we not piously regard his prime minister, his perfect representative, his
best beloved Son? Shall we not honor Him, whom our hero devoutly copied and
earnestly recommended; and to whom this ancient seminary was expressly devoted?
-- Blessed be God, though we find no parallel to our deceased patriot in the
archives of paganism; yet the doctrines and institutions of christianity
announce, Behold a greater than WASHINGTON is here. While therefore we
celebrate our political and mortal savior, let us not forget our spiritual and
immortal deliverer. If we forget thee, O divine philanthropist, let our right
hands forget their cunning. If we do not remember thee, let our tongues cleave
to the roofs of our mouths. In the contemplation of thy glorious person and
example, thy wonderful labors, sufferings, and achievements, we would throw
open our hearts to receive and cathrone thee. Lift up your heads, O ye gates;
and be ye lifted up, ye everlasting doors; that the king of glory may come in.

FINALLY the death of a wise and good parent tenderly calls on the mourning
children to bury in his grave their little domestic animosities; to unite in
observing his parting counsels, and in revering those whom he befriended and
honored, or who inherit his likeness and authority. Let us then deposit at the
tomb of our common father all our political contentions. Let us there leave our
solemn vow, that, in conformity to his example and advice, we will be united
and independent Americans; that we will defend and transmit to our children
that glorious inheritance which his toils purchased and secured. Let our
respect for his memory confirm our attachment to his excellent successor: who
was not only one with him in the sincerest friendship, but in political
principle, in christian piety and virtue, in enlightened, magnanimous, and long
tried patriotism, in eminent services and blessings to his country; and who has
equally honored himself and his predecessor by exemplary sorrow and admiration
at his death. Let not our grief for the dead render us unjust to the living.
Let it not beget despondency, nor distrustful anxiety for the public safety.
Though the part which was assigned to the deceased, and for which He was
peculiarly qualified, was pre-eminently great; yet it would be a reproach both
to ourselves and to our God, to say that the constitution and happiness of our
country hang on so uncertain a thread, as the life of any individual. Let us
rather say that the infinitely wise director of our political drama has
recalled its most conspicuous actor, after finishing his part, in order to give
other performers a better opportunity to honor themselves and their country by
similar displays both of talents and virtues. Let us devoutly hope that the
guardian God of America will not forsake the work, which He has so gloriously
begun. In the faithful discharge of our respective duties, let us trust in his
all-sufficient Providence and Spirit, in connection with the prolific genius of
our country, and the inspiring example of its deceased patron, to bless us with
a long succession of emulating worthies; who will build on the same noble
foundation, and under the divine benediction will make our Israel a name and a
praise in the earth.

FINIS.
SUBSCRIBERS' NAMES.
A. ARDEN, Richard D. Adams, William Alexander, George Abeel, Garrit B. Alley,
Seth Arden, Mrs. J. Abbot, Samuel Abeel, Rev. John N. Agnel, Hyacinthe Allen,
Henry Anderson, Peter Amorey, James Abbatt, Robert Anderson, Anthony L.
Allison, John Astor, Henry Arnold, Moses Amos, Richard Armstrong, Nathaniel
Allen, Robert Ackerman, John D. Arents, Stephen Alexander, Andrew
B. --
Bogert, C. I. Baehr, Christian Baehr, Daniel Bleecker, Anthony Bleecker,
Leonard Bayard, William Barnewall, George Beaumont, Arthur B^rras, George G.
Boyd, Robert Bessonett, John P. Barnes, Undrel Bostwick, Shadrick Benjamin, E.
Bowers, John M. Beebee, Samuel Benson, Robert Brown, David Brooks, John B.
Boales, John Bolin, Edward Bailey, Benjamin Bedell, Jacob Bement, George
Bailie, William Bishop, John Brown, Wheeler Belding, Ann Black, John Barnum,
Samuel Buck, Walter Brown, James Baldwin, Aaron Banvard, Daniel Bassford,
William Burdges, William Boyce, Abraham Burger, Mary Barney, John P. Bogert,
Henry Barker, Joshua Billings, Henry Buys, Peter Bryson, William Bury, Henry
Bogert, James Banta, John Byron, William Brenneysen, Charles Blauvelt, John
Bogert, Andrew Blackey, Thomas Bogert, Abraham Boyd, Joseph Briggs, Gabriel
Buskirk, Lawrence Bird, Mary Braster, John G. Board, James Boston, Jacob
Bradford, William L. Burrowe, Samuel Beaty, William Brinckerhoff, Peter Broom,
W. Temple Burr, Samuel, jun. Banker, Evert Bridgeu, Charles Bartow, Anthony
Bartow, Theodusius Bloodgood, Natheniel Brower, Dr. A. Billopp, T. Buckley,
Abel Bayard, Nicholas S. Bogert, Rudolphus Bowne, Robert Benson, John Bowne,
Samuel Backhouse, Edward Bogardus, Robert Butler, William, and co. Bancker,
John K. Bruce, William Barberic, John Betts, John Bartow, Thomas Bliss, Beza
Eliot Bunn, John Brett, Robert M. Bailey, James Branatt, James W. Bunn, Reuben
Borduzatt, Anthony M. Brower, Nicholas B. Beach, Abraham Burr, Isaac
C. --
Clarkson, Genesis M. Cox, T. B. Chadwell, Mrs. Hannah Cowley, Wm. Campbell,
Duncan Carter, Robert Codwise, George Clark, Ransom Carpenter, Stephen Crygier,
Aaron Church, James, M. D. Cutting, Charles Chevalie, John A. Cozine, Oliver I.
Colden, Cadwallader D. Conolly, William Clark, T. B. Camson, Mrs. Cellins,
Rachel Cowdrey, Samuel Cannon, David Clark, John Constable, James Cromwell,
Oliver Crosser, Gasper Cutler, Benjamin Crygier, John C. Carpenter, Assa
Campbell, James Carpenter, Thomas Cock, Stephen Coals, James Cock, Joseph
Cuningham, Richard Cozine, John R. Crook, Joseph Carpenter, Benjamin Collins,
Joshua Cuningham, David Cole, John Coleman, Silas Crumpton, William Crane,
Timothy B. Codington, Moses Cromwell, Samuel Corning, Amos Cannor, John Cox,
Thomas Chadwich, James D Crane, Isaac B. Campbell, John Child's, Evander
Carpenter, Abel Cooper, Stephen Codington, -- Car, Joseph Carry, George Conklin,
Matthias Cooper, Cornelius Camp, John D.
D. --
Dumbolten, Gad Demster, James Dalglith, Benjamin Dickson, Abraham De Peys'er.
Nicholas Dodge, John Dunscomb, Daniel Dieterich, George Dominick, Francis
Drake, Samuel Daniels, David ^. Diggens, Augustus Denning, Win. Davison, Henry
Dun, Robert Delavan, Daniel Dalrimple, Paul Davis, William Dorgan, Timothy
Doyle, Thomas Dally, Elizabeth Durning, Daniel R. Dando, Stephen De Wint,
Christian Duffie, John Daniel, John Duryee, Richard Drummond, Peter Dally,
William Drake, Thomas Degray, Michael Darey, P. Darey, John Day, Cornelius
Dick, Thomas Davis, David Day, Abraham Dod, Moses
E. --
Edgar, William Ellison, Thomas Eastmond, John Edwards, Miss M. Evans, Thomas
Edwards, James Everson, George Eagles, William Eckert, Frederick
F. --
Freeman, A^ron Fitch, Mrs. Forsyth, Jacob Furman, Gabriel Falkenhan, Samuel
Ferrers, John Ferguson, Daniel Ferres, Elijah Ferdun, Thomas Foster, ^ Gir^^d
Fitch, ^ North Frost, Edward Fich, Nicholas Ferguson, De^^^^^ Frost, William
Fardon, Thomas Freeland, John Fo^^^er, John Fos^ett, William Fre^^^, John
Fitzpaterick, -- Fa^^, George Ferguson, James Fl^^k, John Ford, Charles Fosser,
John Ferdon, John Francisco, John Fox, John
G. --
Gallarcher, George Griffin, Peter Garoute, -- Glover, John I. Grant, Daniel
Green, John Graham, Elijah Giles, Aquila Goodeve, John Grahem, Levi Goodrich,
Charles W. Griswold, Jedidiah Gould, John Griffin, Henry Guion, Monmouth H.
Grenzebach, John Gibson, David Golden, James Gardner, Tristram Green, James
Gilmore, John Guion, Isaac Guernsey, Levi Gunton, Joseph
H. --
Hamilton, Mrs. Hendricks, Harman Hon^, John Hudson, John T. Hegeman, Adrian
Hoogland, John Hyer, Jacob Havens, Renssibau Hosford, John Hurtin, John H.
Heyer, Isaac Hardenbrook, William, jun. Hopkins, Mrs. Hubbard, David G.
Henderson, William Halsted, John T. Hill, William Halsey, John Hopkins, Samuel
M. Hartshorne, William, jun. Heyer, Cornelius Harriman, William Hall, Fitch
Hitchcock, Daniel M. Hopkins, Edmund Hunt, Haydock Huyler, John Heddin, Zadock
Hervey, Cornelius Henry, John S. Holmes, Edward Heath, Collins, Hitchcock,
Daniel Hustace, Mrs. Hartman, Lewis Herbert, Samuel Hogan, W. Hawkin, Matthew
Hughes, Owen Hawes, Comfort Hamilton, William Hopkins, John Hicks, Eliza
Harriot, David Harned, Jasper Horn, Joseph Holden, Asa Herbert, Henry Hammond,
Elijah Hatfield, Eli^^ Hopper, Albert Hutton, George Hicfield, John Halsey,
Jacob Halsey, Isaac
J. --
James, George James, Polloeh Jones, I. jun. Johnson, Patten Jones, John S.
Johnson, John Jackson, Henry Jackson, Eliza Johnson, William Johnson, John
K. --
Kuypers, Geradus Keese, John Kirkpatrick, A. Kirby, William Knox, John Kissam,
John B. Kent, William Kirk, John King, Ann King, Cornelius Keyser, Jacob Kirby,
Peter Koair, Cornelius King, William
L. --
Linn, William Little, B. Lawrence, John B. Lawrence, T. jun. Latham, John
Lawrence, J. jun. Lorillard, Jacob Lawrence, Thomas Lovett, William Ludiow, J.
B. Lord, Daniel, M. D. Linkleter, James Lesconflain, John Lockwood, Carry
Ludlow, Thomas C. Lansing, J. J. Lawrence, Jonathan Leonard, John W.
Livingston, William A. Lloyd, John L. Lamplin, George Lloyd, Joseph Lawrence,
Silas Lion, Stephen Livering, Samuel Losey, William Laplace, John Laing, Joseph
Lispensard, Anthony Ludlam, Joseph Labrey, Joseph Leaycraft, John K. Lewis,
William Letts, Caty Lion, Joseph Launy, David Lot, Andrew
M. --
M'M^^^an, Robert M'Cready, James, jun. M'Vicker, John M'Corntick, Hugh
M'Cready, John M'Allister, John M'Millan, Alexander M'Donald, Alexander
M'Caull, Henry M'Cready, Thomas M'Danna, James M'Intosh, James M'Harrion, Eliza
M'Phee, William Mulligan, John Mulligan, John, jun. Messerve, William Maghee,
John Mead, Jacob Murrey, John Merritt, Isaac Morey, Luther M'Farlane, John
M'Kie, John Merrifield, William Morse, John Mildeberger, John M'Quire, Thomas
More, Jacob M'Lear, James M'Kie, Thomas M'Clung, Anthony Munro, Peter Jay
Moore, John I. Mulligan, John W. Masterton, Henry Moncrieffe, Thomas B.
Minturn, Benjamin G. Manwaring, Gurdon M'Lean, Hugh Megarry, Thomas Millen,
Quintin Morrison, Martin Mahony, Charles Miller, Thomas Malcom, Samuel B.
Miller, Silvanus Mott and -- Moore, Benjamin Musin, H. Motley, Mrs. Mount, John
Mayhew, Thaddeus Meeks, Joseph Morris, John Muir, William Morris, James Morton,
Jacob Moses, David Moore, William Miller, William G. Mead, Nicholas Morrison,
Nathaniel Mason, Rev. John Mower, James B. Minshull, John Manoit, George
Mulcheran, Richard Munson, Daniel Morgan, David Mason, John Miller, William
Merriam, T. Montgomery, John Michael, George Macomb, James
N. --
Not, John
O. --
Ogden, S. Ogden, Thomas L. Oakley, James Ogden, Andrew Ogilvie, Peter Ogden,
George Ortly, Henry Ogden, Rufus Oakley, Benjamin Ogilvie, Gabriel
P. --
Phoebus, Thomas Penson and Housman Pollock, James Peek, Walter Pougol, John P.
Pain, James W. Phoenix, Thomas Pope, Lemuel Phillips, A. Pierpont, Hezekiah B.
Post, Wright Pell, William Provost, Samuel Phillips, William Phillips,
Frederick Peter's and Gedney Peacock, Alexander Patterson, Morris Phillips,
David Pinckney, Elijah Pentz, Adam Palmer, Thomas Pelton, Catharine Perry, Mary
Price, Stephen Pulis, John Post, Peter Post, John Purdy, William Pecker,
William Perkins, William Post, William
R. --
Ray, Cornelius Room, Jacob Richards, George Rezeare, Jacob Robinson,
Sylvester Rogers, N. Raymond, Andrew Rich, Thomas Reynolds, Hezekiah Rapelye,
Barnard Reynolds, I. Rollinson, William Rose, Isaac Ritter, John P. Rose,
Andrew Randecker, John Ryer, Moses Rich, Samuel Ring, Elias Ruckel, Samuel
Randle, Jonah Reed, Luther Ring, John Rushang, Peter Romain, Simeon Ricker,
James Robertson, Stephen Richardson, Mary Riley, David
S. --
Slote, John Stagg, Daniel Stanton, George Seaman, Benjamin Smith, Nathaniel
Smith, Daniel Stephens, Reuben Seypher, James Sanford, John Skeaight, William
Sipkins, Thomas Smith, James Shepherd, John Swan, William Smith, Andrew Sharp,
Peter Skeleton, Joseph Smith, Gershom Simmons, William Skinner, Henry Storm,
Garrit Suydam, John Stuart, H. Seaman, Thomas Stagg, Peter Sibell, John
Skellin, Simeon Skimeall, Valentine Stringham, James S. Sherwood, Isaac
Standerwick, William Storm, Francis Sheabrans, Daniel Secor, Joshua Spicer,
Francis Smith, John Smith, Luther Smith, Thomas Stevens, Peter Stanton, Henry
Stevenson, John Smith, William Silvester, Reuben Silvester, Abraham Secor,
Abraham Spader, Daniel See, Daniel Saunder, Henry Slymels, Peter Stevenson,
David Saunders, Alexander Seymoure, Zachariah Seaman, Sarah Salter, Thomas
Stillwell, Stephen Scott, George Smith, Mehitabel Shanawolf, Sarah Smith,
Elkanah Smith, Edmund Stewart and Jones Sehunkhu, John Still, James Strong,
Benjamin Strou^, James Saltu^, Francis Semanton, Jacob Stuyvesant, Peter Gerard
Stockholm, Andrew Sherwood, Benjamin I. Sanford, John Swan, Charles Smyth,
Andrew Stansbury, Arthur I. Somerindyke, M. Simson, Solomon Striker, Dennis
Seton, Charles Stevens, John Stevenson, Cornelius Seton, William M. Sterling,
James Smith, Caleb Scott, William M. Sim, William Scriba, George Scott, Richard
T. --
Townsend, George Thompson, Joseph Tucker, Richard I. Talman, Peter Trivett,
James Tillou, Francis Tompkins, Daniel D. Torrey, William Tibbals, Norman
Theriot, Gabriel Tibbals, Lincoln Terhune, Richard Tyree, James Titus, Gilbert
Tailor, John Train, Daniel N. Tooker, Lucretia Tailor, Hellen Titus, Charles
Timpson, Cornelius Trenton, Peter Tiebout, Anthony
U. --
Underhill, Samuel Utt, John Utt, David
V. --
Vandewater, William Varick, Richard Van Nest, Abraham Van Sinderen, --
Vandervoort, Peter L. Vanderbilt, John Vandyke, Francis Verplanck, Carrolina
Verplanck, Judith Van Ness, William P. Voss, Mrs. C. Van Hook, Isaac Veitch,
Walter Van Zuyck, O. W. Van Solingen, Henry M. Van Dewater, John Vanwinkle,
Peter Varick, Abraham Vroom, George Vanderberg, Caleb Van Degruaff, A. S.
Vandenburgh, John Van Buskirk, Lucas Vooris, John Van Zile, James Van Buren,
James Var Will, John
W. --
Wardell, John Wendover, Hercules Watson, James Walege, M. G. Walton, James, D.
L. Wickham, Samuel Willett, Marinus Wilkie, Edward Werts, Joshua Warner,
William Watson, William Weston, Lemuel Winthrop, William White, Henry
Wilkinson, Cothine Walter, Peter Winter, I. Walker, Charles W. Walsh, Michael
Webb, Joseph Hays Walton, Abraham M. Wilson, John Ward, John Whitney, Asea
Waterman, Jedidiah White, George Wilt, Jacob A. Warner, William Winchell, James
Winchester, Charles Wheeler, Samuel White, Francis Wilson, William Weeks, Levi
Wade, Stephen Whitehead, David Wight, John M. Waldron, Joseph Wright, James
Walt, Gawn Waring, William Wilson, John Winchip, Samuel Woodruff, Elisha
Wentworth, Joseph White, John Wy^koff, Cornelius P.
Y. --
Young, James.
BROOKLYN.
Hicks, Jacob Fish, Daniel Fisher, John Richardson, Gideon Nichols, Isaac Ross,
David Lynch, Cornelius Moore, Lambert Bury, Peter Rhodes, Daniel Cromwell,
Benjamin Conklin, Joseph
NEWARK.
Alling, Isaac Beach, Joseph
BUSHWICK.
Low, Benjamin Hunt, William Beach, William Beadle, Henry
NEWTON.
Snedeker, James Riker, Samuel Blackwell, Samuel Hare, Samuel Hare, Amos
Strong, Solomon Suydam, James Asop, Thomas
HANOVER.
Miller, David Bates, William
UNION CAMP.
C^^, Joseph Wallace, John Kip, Cornelius All, John
WOODBRIDGE.
Marsh, Nathaniel.

