AN EULOGY ON THE EXCELLENT CHARACTER OF George Washington, LATE COMMANDER IN
CHIEF OF THE AMERICAN ARMIES, AND THE FIRST PRESIDENT UNDER THE FEDERAL
CONSTITUTION: Who departed this Life December the 14th, 1799, in the 68th Year
of his Age; PRONOUNCED FEBRUARY 22, MDCCC. BEING THE ANNIVERSARY OF HIS BIRTH,
AND THE DAY RECOMMENDED BY CONGRESS TO TESTIFY THE NATIONAL GRIEF FOR HIS DEATH.

BY BENJAMIN WADSWORTH, A. M. PASTOR OF THE FIRST CHURCH IN DANVERS.

A Great Man fallen -- in Israel. --

DAVID. The memory of the just is blessed. --

SOLOMON. Published by the general desire of the hearers.

PRINTED BY JOSHUA CUSHING, SALEM. 1800.

EULOGY.
PATRIOTIC FRIENDS AND MOURNEIS!
AUSPICIOUS was the day, which announced to the world the birth of our
illustrious and beloved WASHINGTON. Veneration and esteem for his character,
and gratitude for his public services, have enrolled it amongst the
anniversaries of AMERICA. Often, on its return, have her early patriots and
heroes rallied round the standard of Liberty, with cheerful hearts and smiling
countenances, to enjoy the grateful festivity. While they indulged to pleasing
reflections, extolling his virtues, expatiating on his indefatigable labors,
and recounting to their sons the various occurrences of the late revolution,
the hardships they endured, the dangers they escaped, and the precious blood
and treasure their liberties cost, the thought, that this GREAT FATHER of his
country still lived, consummated their social enjoyment. This they celebrated
as one of their happiest days.

THE revolving seasons have completed their circuits. The day has again dawned;
and we are assembled. But the scene! Oh! how reversed! Instead of songs of joy,
and festive entertainments, our eyes behold the sabled desk, our ears are
accosted with the woeful knell and funeral dirges, and a whole nation is
shrouded in mourning. WASHINGTON IS NO MORE. Not the dear partner of his life
only, the faithful domestics, his particular circle of friends, and those in
public life; but COLUMBIA, humanity, virtue and the world feel the shock, and
weep. Tears, on such a solemn occasion, are not weakness, but a virtue, a
patriotic virtue: for it is thus a grateful nation embalms the memory of the
MAN, whom all esteemed, and all delighted to honor.

COULD eminence of character, noble achievements, or the affections of his
country, have privileged above mortality, this man had not died. In him united
true magnanimity with more than princely, with republican virtues. He was an
ornament to human nature, an honor to this western world. What mere man ever
proved a greater national blessing, or left behind a more excellently finished
character?

WHEN so much endeared worth draws off the stage, decency and our feelings
sanction the custom, in ages past, of commemorating brilliant virtue, and
transmitting heroic deeds to posterity. The death of great and good men has
always been lamented, as a public calamity. Did not all Israel weep for Moses?
and all Judah and Jerusalem for king Hezekiah? UNITED AMERICA* all alive to
affection and gratitude, through every state, with all her millions of hearts
and tongues, pays her departed WASHINGTON, this day, her voluntary tribute of
tender grief; eulogizing his sublime virtues, proclaiming the distinguished
actions of his life, and holding up to view his amiable example.

WHILE, with the affectionate tear swelling in the eye, we unite to deplore the
loss of this GREAT FRIEND and BENEFACTOR of his country, let us indulge the
melancholy pleasure of contemplating some of the leading traits of a character,
which the world, with one consent, admires, esteems and reveres; a pre-eminent
character, in which stand concentrated and displayed the virtues of the
MILITARY HERO, of the PATRIOTIC STATESMAN, and of the PRIVATE CITIZEN.

SIMPLE narration here is the highest eulogy.

WASHINGTON THE GREAT descended from a virtuous and respectable family. The
place famed for his nativity is the parish called Washington, in the county of
Westmoreland, and state of Virginia. And the day, signalized in our calendar by
that happy event, is February 22d, 1732.

DESIGNED by Heaven for a distinguished Actor on the great theater of the
world, the SUPREME PARENT of all was bountiful to him in the gifts of nature.
His form was majestic and graceful. His countenance mingled gravity with
mildness, and wore impressive tokens of penetration, prudence and fortitude.
His disposition was gentle, but firm; modest, but courageous; cheerful, yet
reserved; active and persevering. True genius he possessed, accompanied with
sound judgment; and great energy of mind, tempered with cool deliberation. His
education, though private, was upon a liberal and extensive plan, and
peculiarly favorable to virtuous morals. And his YOUTHFUL EXERCISES conspired
to add firmness to his constitution, and vigor to his mental system.

FORMED to figure, no sooner did opportunity present, than he exhibited
convincing specimens of superior abilities. Before his arrival at the age of
twenty, he commenced a military life, in the respectable rank of Major. Being a
confidential character, in 1753 he was charged with a special message of
remonstrance to the French, upon their depredations on the western British
frontiers; and at the same time entrusted with full authority to treat with the
savage natives. The important commission he fulfilled in such a masterly
manner, as at once evinced his great talents and virtues.

AT the age of about twenty-three, he was advanced to the office of Lieutenant
Colonel; and soon after, to that of Colonel. In the war which ensued, he was an
active and valiant officer. The policy of his measures, and his spirited
exertions, never failed to do him honor. Redstone witnessed his prowess, and
furnished trophies of victory. But his conduct, at the memorable time of Genesis
Braddock's defeat, obtained the applause both of Great Britain and the
colonies. In that unhappy engagement he was a volunteer, and extra Aid-de-Camp.
Acquainted with the Indian mode of fighting, and apprehensive of danger, he
solicited leave to precede the regular troops, and scour the woods with a
party. Had he been permitted, that slaughtered army had probably been saved.
But the haughty General contemptuously denied his request. The consequence was,
he was surprised by an attack, principally of Indians in ambuscade. A bloody
scene ensued. Braddock fell; and all was confusion. But, amidst the general
consternation, under the direction and influence of young WASHINGTON, the
militia covered the retreat of the remains of the British army, and prevented
their entire destruction. And we may add, through the whole of that last French
war, so far as his health admitted, he was unwearied in contributing to the
support of the common cause.

UPON the restoration of tranquillity to the middle frontiers, after resigning
his commission in 1759, he sat down to cultivate the peaceful arts, as a
farmer, at MOUNT VERNON. There he amused himself with agricultural employments,
till the commencement of the American revolution. During that interval, he was
a civil "Magistrate, a Judge of the Court, and constantly a Member of the
Assembly."

AS time rolled on, great events unfolded. At length the meditated subjugation
of the American colonies to the parent country excited a general alarm, and
enkindled the flames of liberty. This rising SON OF FAME immediately espoused
the cause of his injured country, and took a decided part in her favor.

ESTABLISHED in his reputation, and possessing the confidence of the people, he
ranks amongst those famous sages and patriots who constituted the first
Continental Congress, in 1774. There he breathed such pure patriotism;
discovered such knowledge of human nature and government, and of the state of
his country, and the arts of defense; and the virtues of his heart beamed so
conspicuously, that the delegates from every part of the Union were struck with
his greatness, and charmed with his goodness. He was likewise elected a member
of the second renowned Congress, the next year.

PUBLIC difficulties increased, and the times grew more distressing. On April
19th, 1775, the revolutionary war began. An army was soon raised to defend the
rights and liberties of America; and on June 15th, following, GEORGE WASHINGTON
was unanimously appointed COMMANDER IN CHIEF. Powerful and regularly trained to
war was the enemy he had to encounter, and vast were the disadvantages under
which his infant country labored. What were undisciplined troops, without
ammunition, provision, clothing or money, to face an army of veterans? But
when, to be a freeman or a slave, was the only alternative, not the most
difficult nor dangerous prospects could discourage a mind like his. Confiding
in the righteousness of his cause, and the God of armies, he did not hesitate
to risk his fortune, his character and life; and, with that self-dissidence,
which is always an attendant on real worth, he accepted the important trust.

ALL eyes looked up to him; and never was the GENERAL played off to greater
advantage. Should we follow him from the renowned heights encircling Boston,
through all the perilous and trying scenes of the revolution, till he obtained
the final decisive victory over Cornwallis, at Yorktown, we should find, under
all the different aspects of public affairs, he uniformly acted the same great
part. What a mixture of painful and pleasing reflections springs up in our
minds at the recollection of the various occurrences and events which took
place at Long Island and New Jersey, at Trenton and Princeton, at Morristown,
Brandywine, Germantown and Monmouth! We trembled, and rejoiced; but he
preserved a steady firmness. Threats could not intimidate, filthy lucre could
not bribe him. He was brave in danger, and compassionate to the sons of
distress. Prosperity did not make him arrogant, nor did he sink under
adversity. Even in the darkest hour, when a general despondency hovered over
the public mind, and thousands were ready to give up the cause as lost,
self-collected and self-possessed, he remained unmoved. And when resources
sailed, retiring within himself, his ingenuity seemed to supply all defects,
and his presence inspired heroic ardour.

DEFENSE, and not conquest, was his object. To effect that, and not sacrifice
life, was his ambition. For him it was therefore reserved to teach the world
the defensive art of war, refined upon principles of humanity: the true art of
maneuvring and reconnoitring so dexterously, though sometimes reduced to a
little band, as to frustrate the enemy's subtlest schemes, without hazarding an
engagement: the secret art of improving the favorable moment, and captivating
whole armies, without deluging the land in blood. How many more have fallen in
a single battle in Europe, than fell during the whole American contest!

NO General ever more entirely possessed the affections of his army. To this
happy circumstance it is to be attributed, that at a very critical juncture,
when their engagements were expiring, and the enemy, flushed with high
expectations, were anticipating triumph, at his animated and pathetic request,
they maintained their posts, though in a destitute situation, and surrounded
with extreme difficulties. The snow, crimsoned by their footsteps, witnessed
their readiness to attend him to victory, or to death.

THROUGH a severe struggle for liberty, this great DEFENDER of his country
astonished his enemies by the regular discipline which he established and
maintained, by his judicious arrangements, and by his consummate skill in
evading, and vigorous exertions in the hour of battle. His heart, his tongue,
his pen, his sword, were all employed. Convinced at length of the
impracticability of subduing the freeborn sons of America, the PARENT COUNTRY
gave up the contest, and the glorious peace of 1783 succeeded. WASHINGTON
conquered, and a nation was born. Blessed with peace and independence, from St.
Croix to the remotest boundaries of Georgia, United America proclaimed his
praise.

THE great end of the military establishment was no sooner obtained, than to
disband the army became an important object. Having gloriously accomplished
their arduous work, they expected compensation for their labors and
sufferings. Gladly would CONGRESS have discharged all arrears; but the state of
the national finances rendered it impossible. Discontents arose, became
alarming, and perhaps had embroiled the YOUNG REPUBLIC in civil war, had not
their beloved GENERAL, by a spirited, patriotic Address, calmed their minds,
and prevailed with them to return peaceably to their respective homes. But,
VIRTUOUS PATRIOT! having at every stage of the war paid a sacred deference to
the civil authority, he would not at its close have his arms disgraced by
rising in opposition to it.

THE freedom and sovereignty of his country being established, the triumphant
WASHINGTON, December 23d, 1783, cheerfully resigned his conquering sword, and
with it his high commission, to the NATIONAL COUNCIL. The same day he filled
the first military station, and voluntarily took the rank of a common citizen.
What sublime patriotism! what august magnanimity! Then, amidst the
congratulations and blessings of a renovated nation, he retired to his
delightful MOUNT VERNON, to participate the tranquillity and happiness of
domestic life.

HERE he consummated one career of glory, quitted the field with unspotted
fame, and immortalized his character.

UNITED AMERICA felt her SOVEREIGNTY, and rose at once to high respectability
on the list of nations. The sun of republican glory shone with full-orbed rays.
Our political horizon was clear, and the prospect bright and promising. But,
alas! soon the clouds began to gather, and a tempest to arise.

THE Confederation, that recommendatory form of government, which proved
sufficient during the war, while the enthusiastic spirit of liberty prevailed,
was found to want energy in a time of peace. Through the influence of designing
men, in 1786, a rebellion was fomented in the western part of this State, which
threatened to involve the Union in war. Alarmed at the situation of the
country, a Convention was formed in 1787, for the general purpose of consulting
the public good. Here the wisdom of a WASHINGTON was required. He was
accordingly chosen one of the members, and accepted their invitation to
preside. After four months' deliberation, our most excellent FEDERAL
CONSTITUTION was completed; and, being sanctioned by his approbation, it was
ratified by the people

WHEN that new system came into operation, who so worthy to be the Supreme
Executive Magistrate, as the MAN who had defended and saved his devoted
country? WASHINGTON, without a dissenting voice, was elected PRESIDENT OF THE
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA. To him the call of his country was the call of
Heaven. Though independent in his circumstances, he relinquished the charms of
rural retreat for the cares and burdens of high responsibility. April 30th,
1789, he was inaugurated at New York; and with a modest dignity peculiar to
himself ascended the Chair of State.

THE ensuing autumn he favored these Eastern States with a paternal, circular
visit. What heartfelt satisfaction it afforded, their unfeigned testimonials
evinced.

WITH him at the head of its Supreme Council, the nation was happy. Political
dissensions subsided, and general prosperity smiled. At the periodical
election, the united suffrages of a free and enlightened people continued him
in that exalted station. Had it not been for the restless savages of the
wilderness, and the intrigues of foreign emissaries, and internal foes, our
national tranquillity had been uninterrupted: but from these sources originated
a complication of evils. To HIS vigilance, wise moderation, and pacific
disposition, we are greatly obligated for averting the impending judgments.
Uniting the arm of power with the voice of clemency, he concluded an honorable
peace with the Indian tribes. When, at the instigation of the enemies of
government, a formidable insurrection arose in the state of Pennsylvania,
mingling mercy and energy, he taught succeeding ages how to quell a tumult. By
an early declaration of neutrality, he happily prevented America being involved
in the wars of Europe. When the subtle, intriguing, systematic Genet and his
accomplices were unwearied in their endeavors to divide the people from their
government, and precipitate hostilities with Great Britain, his conciliatory
measures frustrated their machiavelian policy. And when an attempt was made by
the national LEGISLATIVE to encroach on the EXECUTIVE branch of government, he
boldly interposed, and preserved the balance between the constitutional powers.

PATRIOTISM seemed the ruling passion of his soul. A single eye to America's
true interest influenced all his foreign intercourse and negotiations, and
indeed the whole of his administration. No lucrative motives, no party spirit,
no bigoted zeal, perverted his judgment. The scales of justice he poised with
even hand. And knowing the importance of good morals and examples to the
community, he paid attention to true dignity of character as a recommendatory
qualification for promotion.

EIGHT years he shone in the first seat of government, the admiration of other
nations, the glory of his own; till the political ferment was allayed, and by
the smiles of Heaven he saw America the happiest of all countries, the land of
rational liberty, the seat of science, and every order of citizens enjoying
unprecedented prosperity. There no doubt he had continued to shine, had he not
declined a re-election. But, advanced in years, and no pressing necessity
demanding his public labors, he chose to retire again to the pleasing walks of
private life, to share in common with his countrymen the advantages of that
government, which he had been so successful in establishing. Crowned with the
double thanks and blessings of all ranks, his favorite rural seat welcomed his
return. There he contemplated spending the evening of life in peace, without
the most distant thought of ever being called to office again.

BUT this PATRIOTIC FATHER would not withdraw from public life, without
bequeathing his country an invaluable legacy, in his VALEDICTORY ADDRESS. There
stands recorded a system of principles and precepts, worthy to be inscribed on
every American heart; a system, which, duly regarded, must terminate in the
consummation of republican glory.

THUS he exemplified the ACCOMPLISHED STATESMAN, as illustriously as he had
before the INVINCIBLE HERO.

AT the peaceful close of his wise administration, how natural to expect
prosperous and happy days! But oh! the mutability and uncertainty of all human
affairs! No sooner had he begun to enjoy retirement, than the distracted state
of European politics alarmed the world; and the hostile proceedings of the
DIRECTORY of France endangered the peace and independence of America. To
support her dignity, military preparations by land, as well as an armed
neutrality at sea, became necessary. On the VENERABLE WASHINGTON all hearts
were fixed, to take the charge of the army. One grade more of glory awaited
him. He was accordingly the second time, with perfect unanimity, appointed to
the chief military command in 1798. Patriotism glowed too fervently in his
heart, to decline acceptance. To his honor be it recorded, his commission he
received from his SUCCESSOR IN OFFICE. Though grown old in serving his country,
this mighty Chieftain was ready to spend his last breath in her cause. A
general joy announced his welcome to office, and martial fire began to kindle.
With such a GENERAL, who but pronounced American arms invincible? Had necessity
called him to the field, every patriotic heart and every resource had been at
his command. While his name, more mighty than a host, had struck terror through
the boldest enemy, how must it have inspired the brave sons of liberty with
redoubled heroism! -- But here, alas! here closes one of the most endeared and
valuable of lives. Gods on earth die like men. WASHINGTON himself must die. And
he died the same GREAT MAN he lived. This high office he honored, when the
SUPREME LORD OF LIFE issued his higher orders. Readily he obeyed; and, December
the 14th, 1799, without a groan, " closed his own eyes, and died."

AND has his great mind fled? Does he rank no more on the list of frail
mortals? Will he no longer guide our public councils, no more lead on our
armies to victory? Heaven has so decreed. What mingled emotions struggle in our
hearts! His mourning country thinks no tokens of honor too much to confer on
his memory. The world resounds with his praises. Generations to come will rise
up in succession, and call him blessed.

THIS greatly beloved of men was likewise an object of special divine
guardianship. Numerous were the imminent dangers he escaped, and signal the
deliverances he experienced. His God not only nerved his arm, but covered his
head in the day of battle. In devout acknowledgment for his providential
preservation, it is worthy of remark, that in "June, 1776, a plot was
meditated, under the direction of Gov. Tryon," and "managed by the then Mayor"
of New York, to take away General WASHINGTON'S life, "either by poison or
assassination; and Thomas Hickey, one of his lifeguard, was engaged in it."
But the conspiracy was seasonably discovered, and he "was tried by a court
martial, found guilty, and executed." Heaven protects her favorites!

WASHINGTON is a name that will always bear superior rank in the temple of
fame. Should we contrast his merits with the warriors, sages and politicians of
former or present times, he would but gather brilliancy from their defects.
View him at the head of a small, unexperienced, fluctuating army, laboring
under almost every embarrassment, and yet maintaining his cause against one of
the most powerful nations of the earth; and how diminutively does Xerxes
appear, though he commanded the greatest military force that ever marched into
the field! how despicable all the ancient conquerors of the world! Their
victories only added to the miseries of mankind. And what are the modern
leaders of armies in Europe? That once happy land, they have converted into a
field of blood. -- When opposed to the wise men of Greece and Rome, his luster
obscures their feeble rays. -- And should we look into the moral and political
systems of antiquity, how imperfect were all the productions of Hermes, Minos
and Lycurgus, of Numa, Solon and Confucius, in compare with his morals and
politics? And who in latter days will boast a competition with him? If ever he
was equalled, it must be by Moses, the Jewish Lawgiver. He was confessedly
under divine inspiration, and we would be spared an invidious comparison of
merits: but all must acknowledge, that in many respects there is a striking
resemblance between these two great national DELIVERERS and SAVIORS.

ILLUSTRIOUS characters are too often shaded with some gross mistakes, or
stained by flagrant vices: but WASHINGTON'S will ever stand on record, a
brilliant exception. Through all the vicissitudes of war and peace, nothing
occurred to eclipse his increasing glory, or fully his reputation. Every new
sphere of action gained him a fresh wreath of laurels. -- Not the most perfect
virtue indeed is security against the envenomed tongue of slander. There was a
time when groundless jealousy, or party rage, wished to depose him, and the pen
of infamy attacked his measures: but his uniform wisdom, virtue and fidelity
confounded their madness and folly. Neither malice nor envy could support the
shadow of a charge against him. He had no enemies but the enemies of his
country and good government; and their defamation was public fame.

TO these general strokes we would add that disinterested benevolence, which
graced his public character. Through the whole revolutionary scenes, both as
GENERAL and PRESIDENT, his generous heart declined all personal compensation
for services. His vast fortune superseded all necessity; and a consciousness of
promoting the general welfare was itself ample satisfaction. Where in the
annals of history shall we trace such exalted generosity, such patriotic
philanthropy! -- Love of fame, it is granted, has wrought wonders. But no man
ever appeared to be less under the influence of this passion. Besides, had this
been his motive, after finishing so glorious a military life, who at such a
crisis would have hazarded the uncertain issue of another probation?

THE field he did not enter to conquer territory, to destroy his enemies, or to
acquire renown; nor did he accept the reins of government to gratify ambition,
and soar in grandeur: but he united the PATRIOT and HERO, to oppose tyranny, to
guard COLUMBIA's birthright, and transmit to posterity the liberties GOD and
nature gave. Her cause he vindicated upon such general principles, as involve
the prerogatives of human nature. He is therefore justly entitled to the high
appellation of the ASSERTOR of natural rights, the DEFENDER of liberty, the
SUPPORTER of a free government, and the FRIEND of man.

WHILE we dwell on such lovely greatness, how does the afflicting thought
return and melt our hearts -- HE sleeps in dust! But though dead, he still
lives. He lives in medals and statues, in monuments and portraits, in the song
of poets, and page of history; but, to nobler purpose, in virtuous example and
in the affections of grateful millions. Nor does he only live; HE speaks, and
will bless mankind to the remotest ages, in his admirable " system of political
morality," equally celebrated for sublimity of sentiment, and elegance of style.

THIS first of HEROES and PATRIOTS was advanced to the highest stations UNITED
AMERICA afforded, and he dignified every office he sustained. But he did not
figure only in the field and the cabinet; his personal virtues were as amiable
as his public were illustrious.

FROM the noisy parade of war, and dazzling splendor of court equipage, let us
retire to Mount Vernon, and contemplate WASHINGTON as a PRIVATE CITIZEN.

VIEWED in the occupation of a husbandman, all was neat, elegant, and on an
extensive and useful plan. Probably not a man in the Union exceeded him in a
landed interest, or made more judicious observations and arrangements.
Agriculture was his delightful business; and improvement in this honorable
branch of living, he considered as an important object. His attention of course
was turned to the different qualities of soil, and the best manner and means of
cultivation. The knowledge he obtained in this art, he readily communicated,
and recommended frequent and diversified experiments, as the only way to carry
it to perfection. As a man, he was a pattern of meekness, temperance, sobriety
and benevolence, invariably acting upon the genuine principles of truth, honor
and righteousness. As the head of a family, he maintained regularity and due
subordination, mingling economy with liberal hospitality. As a husband, he was
kind, tender and affectionate. As a father, he had no children but the patrons
of virtue and liberty, and these he defended and nurtured at the hazard of his
life and property. As a master, his humanity and reasonable commands engaged
the love and obedience of his servants. As a neighbor, he was peaceable,
obliging, and abounded in acts and offices of kindness. As a friend, he was
sincere, faithful and confidential. As a benefactor to the poor, he manifested
a tender heart, and flowing generosity. As a member of society, he consulted
not his own separate interest, but the common good. As one of the community, he
was an exemplary subject, public spirited, and punctually conformed to the laws
of the land. In a word, his heart appeared a seat of the virtues; and his
manners displayed a noble simplicity, and graceful dignity, in the true
republican taste.

BUT the crown of all his glory was his PIETY. WASHINGTON was a CHRISTIAN -- a
professed friend to christianity. With all his greatness, he did not disdain to
be accounted the humble disciple of a CRUCIFIED NAZARENE: and his life was a
practical comment on the power of religion. A divine providence he acknowledged
in all his successes, and gave the glory to GOD. Stated seasons of retirement
for devotion he was known daily to observe. The christian sabbath he strictly
regarded, and practiced attendance on public worship. Divine institutions were
sacred in his esteem, and he was a communicant at the LORD'S TABLE. Educated in
the Episcopal Church, he retained that form of worship; but extended candor
and liberality of sentiment to the virtuous and good of every nation and
religion. Thus by his exemplary life he discountenanced atheism, infidelity,
and all immoralities; and recommended the practice of virtue and piety to the
world.

THIS is the man whose birth we this day commemorate, and whose death we mourn.
He was great without ostentation, and good without superstition. -- Should it
be said, So exalted a character speaks something more than man, I would reply,
It rather proclaims the true dignity of man, as it unites real goodness to true
greatness, and proves that human virtue may be greatly sublimated and refined.
What is not our nature capable of exemplifying? It may sink into the lowest
depths of vice and wretchedness, or it may rise to eminent seize in moral
goodness. -- To deny him the imperfections of humanity, would create a just
suspicion that all was but empty panegyric, and a piece of state policy. By
universal consent, he is entitled to one of the greatest and best of human
characters; but his modesty would blush, and his piety, even in heaven, be
shocked, could he know he was styled on earth more than man.

WE would not detract from the honors due to a vigorous and persevering
CONGRESS, and to a brave and determined ARMY; nor depreciate the abilities and
merits of his CO-PATRIOTS and HEROES. They did worthily; and procured to
themselves immortal fame. The pen of history will do justice to their memories.
But it never wounded their most delicate sensibilities to yield up the palm to
WASHINGTON.

WHILE we eulogize talents so great, virtues so resplendent, and deeds so
noble, let it not be thought too foreign from the present solemnity, to
moralize the instructive theme. FRIENDS OF RELIGION! Let not our grief prevent
devout effusions of gratitude to Heaven, for raising up this great DELIVERER of
the oppressed, and GUARDIAN OF LIBERTY. Surely it was because GOD had a favor
for our land, that he capacitated him for such a great part in life, and
brought him upon the stage at the critical period of public exigency. Divine
Providence stands confessed in the union of all hearts in him, in the wisdom
and valor which marked all his proceedings, and in the success attending them.
He was a great instrument in the hand of God of our national independence and
prosperity; and never perhaps was more glory due to one man. But it is no
disparagement to his worth to look beyond all secondary causes, and ascribe
supreme glory to the GREAT OVERRULING POWER.

RELIGION teaches us likewise to attend to the providence of GOD, in the time
and manner of his departure. He was not cut down at an early age, nor in the
midst of his days; but he filled up a long life of service and glory. And he
died, not by treachery and artifice under cover of friendship, as Abner fell;
not by an open enemy, as sons of valor often prematurely fall; nor by his own
hand, in a paroxysm of despair, as blood-thirsty conquerors sometimes
ignominiously die: but, as frail humanity is ordinarily doomed to close life,
by natural disease. HE blessed his country, and died in peace, on a bed of
virtue and honor, surrounded with his dearest connexions and friends -- And
where else would a good man wish to die?

THE disorder which Heaven commissioned over his life was an inflammation of
the throat; in technical style, " Cynache Trachealis." Sudden indeed and
violent was the attack, as if the King of Terrors was conscious of some mighty
task, jealous of his superior power or policy, and unwilling his dear country
should have opportunity to raise one petition for his life. -- Was it then
reserved for this grim Tyrant of our race to conquer so much greatness? No.
Such honor was too great. It was not death, but WASHINGTON, who conquered. His
last and greatest victory was over the fear of death. His triumph he sung,
when, with entire composure and resignation, he proclaimed, in the audience of
weeping friends, "I HAVE NO FEAR TO DIE."

HAVING lived his day, and faithfully performed the great work assigned him,
acquiescing in the divine will, he consigned his weary limbs to the peaceful
tomb, where his conquering LORD and Master lay; there to sleep, till he should
come again, and clothe them with a glorious immortality. His GREAT SOUL we
contemplate removed to higher spheres, and nobler scenes of action; not
destined to join the Caligulas, the Neros, the Robespierres; but advanced to
the highest rank of worthies in the pure realms of peace and glory. May a
double portion of his excellent spirit ever rest on his successors in office!

HEIRS OF MORTALITY! With what pathetic energy does WASHINGTON's death preach
to America and the world, a serious lecture on human frailty! "Dust to dust,"
is the common doom of our fallen nature. In every age, philosophers,
politicians and warriors have come upon the stage, acted their parts, and then
retired. Distinctions of birth, of rank and fortune, personal accomplishments
and mighty achievements, avail not here. The great, the good, and all, must
die. Who can dwell on so much greatness laid in dust, and not self-appropriate
the solemn scene? To be prepared, comprehends the whole duty of life. "Cease
from man," and feel your dependence on God.

REPUBLICAN CITIZENS! Virtue is the stability of our government, and good
examples are replete with moral instruction. Insensibly they charm the heart,
and possess a constraining influence over the life. The Christian Exemplar
alone is perfect, and worthy to be our supreme standard: but what we justly
admire and esteem in others, deserves our imitation. And where shall we find a
fairer, brighter, or more excellent human pattern, than the life of WASHINGTON?
It comprises a rich assemblage of public and private virtues, accommodated to
the highest and lowest walks of life. Formed upon the true sublime, it commands
universal admiration. MAY WASHINGTON BE THE MODEL OF OUR NATIONAL CHARACTER!

AMERICAN YOUTH! To fire your ambition, and excite a virtuous emulation, we
would hold him up to your view. Would you shun the vices and follies of your
age? would you rise to eminence in your day, and prove blessings to your
country and the world? would you rejoice the hearts of your friends? would you
be wise and good, great and happy? would you live esteemed, and die lamented?
Follow his amiable and virtuous example. Remember his paternal advice. Imbibe
his republican principles; and let his precious legacy be your political
oracle. When to you it falls to guide the helm of state, make that your pole
star and compass. He lived not for himself only, but for you and posterity
after you, for America and the human race.

SONS AND DAUGHTERS OF LIBERTY! Behold a revolutionizing world! Under the
ostensible color of freedom, fraternity and the rights of man, desolation and
slaughter are displayed amongst the ancient nations of Europe, on such a
sanguinary scale of terror, as makes all the fine feelings of humanity shudder,
remonstrate and agonize. See there, attempts, at once to subvert all religion
and government. View the human heart unprincipled, and mechanically petrified.
Thanks to Heaven! you are blessed with a happier lot, than to inhabit climes
unfriendly to virtue. You are no degraded race of bondmen and vassals. United
America is the land of peace and enjoyment. Here you realize the sweets of
liberty, and refined society. No country ever presented prospects more
favorable to posterity. But, reflect and consider how much you are indebted to
WASHINGTON for your distinguished privileges; and, while all parties mingle
tears at his departure, let his name serve as a talisman, and prove an
indissoluble bond of union to all.

FRIENDS OF PEACE AND GOOD GOVERNMENT! Could this GREAT FATHER of liberty
witness the solemnities of this day, and address us from the abodes of
immortality, with AMERICA still engraven on his heart, would he not, with more
than mortal eloquence, sanction his former counsels, enjoining a charge, on all
her citizens, containing sentiments like these? Banish forever from your public
counsels and your hearts, all party spirit, and all disorganizing and
demoralizing principles. Watch with eagle-eye against encroachments on your
rights and privileges, as men and christians; but never indulge unreasonable
jealousies of the rulers of your own choice. Keep your elections free and
uncorrupted. Support public credit, and the dignity of your Federal and State
Governments. Promote literary institutions, agriculture and manufactures.
Preserve national faith and justice. Encourage industry, frugality and
improvements. Guard against foreign influence and intrigue, and all undue
national attachments and antipathies. Never be entangled in the politics of
foreign powers. Cultivate harmony and commercial intercourse with all the
world, upon the great principles of truth and righteousness. Study peace with
all nations: but be, at all times, prepared for war. Let your union be
perpetual. And remember, RELIGION and MORALITY are the foundation of national
greatness, as well as of personal excellence. Practice therefore the moral and
social virtues, and live up to the true spirit of christianity. -- This is the
best eulogy you can pronounce on my memory, the surest evidence of gratitude
and affection. Thus you will secure the blessing of Heaven, and always sustain
the rank of a great and free, a respected and happy nation.

FELLOW CITIZENS! Affection delights to dwell on departed friends and
benefactors. There is a consolation, a luxury, in tears. How then shall we
close the affecting theme! Must COLUMBIA be inconsolable? Shall the tide of
grief forever flow! This would in effect impeach the ways of Providence. Surely
what God does must be right; and resignation to his will is a duty. Though
WASHINGTON is not, it is enough HIS GOD never dies. Thanks to his name! ADAMS
and a large catalogue of worthies still live. Never yet has this
highly-favoured land wanted for patriotic fathers and martial sons. With our
plaintive strains let us mingle fervent supplications, that he would still
remember in mercy his American Israel, and raise up a perpetual succession of
illustrious STATESMEN and HEROES. O THOU SUPREME DISPOSER of nations, states
and kingdoms! ever keep UNITED AMERICA under thy special protection. Be "a wall
of fire round about," and the "glory in the midst" of her. May her politics be
always sound, her morals pure, her greatness increasing. And may she never want
for WASHINGTONS to direct her councils and command her armies, "till sun and
moon, and time and death, shall be no more."


