A NARRATIVE OF THE Horrid Murder and Piracy COMMITTED ON BOARD THE SCHOONER
ELIZA, OF PHILADELPHIA, ON THE HIGH SEAS, BY THREE FOREIGNERS, Who were tried
before the Circuit Court of the United States, on Monday, the 21st April, 1800;
TOGETHER WITH AN ACCOUNT OF THE SURPRISING RECAPTURE OF THE SAID SCHOONER, BY
CAPTAIN WHELAND, The only person who escaped from their Barbarity.

FROM FOLWELL'S PRESS, No. 63, North Front-street. (Copy-Right secured
according to Law.)

NARRATIVE OF A VOYAGE FROM PHILADELPHIA TO ST. BARTHOLOMEWS.
BY WILLIAM WHELAND.
ON the 27th day of August, 1799, I set sail from the port of Philadelphia, on
board the schooner Eliza, bound for St. Thomas's: American seamen being at that
time very hard to be obtained, I was under the necessity of shipping three
foreigners; so that my crew consisted of two Americans, Thomas Croft, (whom I
afterward appointed mate,) and Jacob Suster, together with the three
foreigners, who entered with me by the names of Joseph Baker, Joseph Brous and
Peter Peterson. The name of our supercargo was Charles Rey, a French gentleman,
who had long resided in the is]and of St. Domingo, and had borne the commission
of general in the armies of his Catholic majesty, previous to the revolution;
but, like many others of his unfortunate countrymen, was under the necessity of
seeking an asylum in America, when the Negroes had seized upon the government
of that island.

In this country he married an amiable young lady, of Baltimore, of French
extraction, with whom he lived in the most perfect state of conjugal felicity,
and by whom he had one child. He occasionally resided at Philadelphia and
Baltimore; in both of which places, he had endeared himself to a numerous
circle of acquaintance, by the cheerfulness of his conversation and the suavity
of his manners: his fortunes, however, began, to be considerably impaired, by
disappointments in his remittances from St. Domingo, and other real losses to a
great amount; he resolved, therefore, to go out supercargo, with a view of
regaining, if possible, some part of his immense property in the island, and to
provide for a beloved wife and increasing family.

Neither Mr. Rey nor myself had a good opinion of the three foreigners. They
seemed to us to be men of an implacable and revengeful spirit; for, soon after
we had sailed, in going down the river, one of them, Peterson, alias Louis
Lacroix, having refused to obey the orders of the mate, I struck him; on seeing
this, Baker came to his assistance, and Mr. Rey stepped forward to protect me;
when I had given Baker a good beating, they both promised to do their duty like
good men, if I would forgive them, which I immediately promised to do; after
which they behaved themselves for 14 days very well, and there was no more
dispute until the 12th of September, being in latitude 28, 30, N. and in
longitude 60, 00, W. At about 10 o'clock, P. M. it being the mate's watch on
deck, Mr. Rey and myself had gone to sleep in our births, one on each side of
the cabin. It appears that the three desperadoes, Baker, Brous and Peterson,
availed themselves of an opportunity, while the mate was a-sleep on deck, to
give him a blow on the head with an axe: but, as no person was on deck at that
time, except the mate and the three ruffians, a circumstantial account of the
murder of the mate cannot be obtained. Certain it is, however, that he was
murdered and thrown overboard. By their account afterward to me, Brous is
said to have given him the first blow, and Baker, alias Boulanger, the second,
which finished his existence; but, by their confession in Philadelphia, before
judge Peter's, it is said, that the mate and Brous, having some quarrel, and
Brous declaring himself the master of the vessel, and the mate his prisoner of
war, the mate struck him, which caused Brous, alias Berouce, in his own
defense, to lift up an axe, and give him a blow on the head: This was a bad
plea of self-defence, as the mate was obviously justified in striking a man who
acknowledged his intention of turning pirate, and taking the vessel.

As soon as Thomas Croft, the mate, was dispatched, and while he lay lifeless
on the deck, they entered the cabin, and, approaching the birth where I lay
asleep, one of them struck me one blow over the head, and another over the arm,
with an axe, and immediately I received a stab in the arm with a sword. Upon
which, I sprung up, and seized my pistols, which were under my head; at the
same time, Charles Rey, awaking from his sleep by the noise which this
circumstance occasioned, jumped out of his birth, and cried out in French, what
is the matter? And seeing that I was assailed by the three villains, by the
blood on my face and arm, he snatched a pistol suddenly from my hand, and
turning upon them, they retreated from the cabin; but, in his attempt to follow
them, he received a severe blow over the head with the pump brake, which laid
him on the cabin floor; however, he soon recovered a little, but, as it was
dark, neither of us durst make a second attempt to go up from the cabin, through
fear of meeting with a similar reception. No words can describe the horrors of
my situation for nearly half an hour: my wounds were extremely painful, and I
was almost covered with blood, while Mr. Rey seemed a little delirious from the
blow he had received on his head, and I expected every moment to be overpowered
by the ruffians, and finally murdered. We were in this situation, when Mr. Rey,
seeing light on deck, sprung up in a fit of desperation to make a second
effort, when he received another mortal blow on the head.

Thinking that my generous friend, Mr. Rey, was murdered, and seeing myself
covered with blood, I wrenched the pistol, with some difficulty, from his
dying-grasp, and putting myself in a posture of defense, I begged they would
spare my life. Not knowing, at that moment, that the mate was murdered, I
imagined the whole crew had risen against me, until those murderers informed
me, that all, except myself, were killed, -- bidding me come on deck, which I
refused, as I was apprehensive that if I did, I should be immediately murdered.
They then ordered me to hand them up liquor, which I was incapable of doing, on
account of the wounds which I had already received; nevertheless, as they saw
me armed with pistols, they were afraid of entering the cabin. A kind of parley
then took place betwixt us, in which it was agreed, that I should navigate the
vessel to the Spanish Main, on condition that they would spare my life. Under
an assurance of sparing their lives, they entered the cabin, supplied
themselves with liquor, and removed Mr. Rey upon deck: he was still in life;
but it was impossible, even with medical aid, that he could have recovered. He
appeared insensible to every thing that was going forward after his last fatal
wound. These monsters, eager to finish the diabolical work they had begun,
hastened to throw him overboard, although there was evident signs of life. But
these wretches were not yet satiated with blood. Jacob Suster, the remaining
seaman, who had not joined in the conspiracy, and who had been asleep in the
fore-castle during this scene of horror, was now called aft, under a pretense
that I wanted him; but, no sooner had he advanced within reach of these
wretches, than he was knocked down with an axe, and immediately thrown into the
sea. At that time we had light winds, and the vessel was making very little
way, so that I could distinctly hear his groans for at least eight or ten
minutes.

Jacob Suster was not known to me previous to his entering on board the
schooner; but, from his shipment to the hour of his death, his behavior was
that of a good and faithful seaman. He was born in Germantown, in the state of
Pennsylvania, where his parents, I am informed, now reside.

When these villains had finished their work of murder, and conscious of their
own incapacity to navigate the vessel, they came into the cabin, and dressed my
wounds: they then proceeded to wash off the blood from the floor of the cabin
and from the deck, which, when they had finished, they began, as soon as
morning appeared, to pillage the property of the deceased.

When daylight appeared, and perceiving that they considered their own safety
to depend upon my knowledge of navigation, I began to have some hopes that my
life would be spared, and even that the vessel might be regained; but, though I
found my pistols serviceable to me in keeping them off, I was apprehensive,
that, in case of another conflict, they might be used against myself; I,
therefore, threw my pistols overboard secretly, -- a circumstance which they
never found out; for they always understood that I had them in my possession.

In this situation, in mutual fear of each other, we proceeded as they supposed
toward the Spanish Main, but in this I deceived them, by telling them that a
strong current set in to the westward, and that we must keep a more easterly
course, which we did, but without discovering a sail. During this time, though
the weather was generally moderate, the sails and rigging not being well
trimmed, received considerable damage; for, I was not capable of handling a
rope myself, and they were not under my subjection or orders; besides, when my
arm, which I had constantly kept in a sling, began to grow better, I
endeavored to conceal it as much as possible from them, thinking that my
security consisted, in a great measure, on their ideas of my weakness. In the
mean while, their principal occupation was in rifling the vessel, breaking open
packages, in search of any thing valuable, or for barrels of hams or other
provisions; whilst I was on the watch for an opportunity to overcome them, and
get possession of the vessel.

This opportunity presented on the 21st September, on the ninth day after the
murderers had got possession of the vessel. Two of them, Peterson, alias La
Croix, and Baker, alias Boulanger, went down the fore-scuttle to bring up some
hams, while Brous was stooping down to make a fire in the cabcush; I
immediately seized a club that lay near me, with my left hand, my right being
still in a sling, and gave Brous, a severe blow on the back of the head, which
laid him flat on the deck; I attempted a second blow, but missed him. Mr. Rey's
bull-dog seeing me engaged, flew, barking to my assistance, which so much
deterred Brous from turning upon me, that he run aft, and got up the shrouds; I
immediately snatched up an axe, and ran to the fore-scuttle, slipping my arm
from the sling, and forgetting my wounds, lifted up the axe, as in act to
strike the two that were there, and whose heads were then above the deck,
attempting to come out; but the moment they saw the axe over their heads, they
sunk down into the hold, and I instantly shut the skuttle over them; and, to
make it more secure, I dragged a small anchor from the bow, by means of a rope
round the windlass, and laid it over the skuttle.

Having now Peterson and Baker secured, I proceeded to Brous, who was on the
shrouds; at first he had no intention of yielding, but cried out to his
companions that they might come aft into the cabin, and proceed that way to his
assistance, while those below were vociferating loudly to him; but, being in
French, I did not perfectly understand.

But, when Brous saw himself entirely at my mercy, he supplicated with great
earnestness, that I would spare his life, which I promised to do, on condition
that he would come down and submit himself to be confined, and behave in every
respect as I directed him. He was some time before he could be persuaded to
believe that I would spare him: However, on my further assurances, he was
prevailed on to come down; as soon as he was on deck, he fell on his knees,
took me by the hand, and kissed it several times, making, at the same time, the
most solemn protestations of submission. I then ordered him to put his hands
behind him, that I might tie them, which he instantly complied with; I then got
a chain, and chained him upon deck to the ring-bolts. Brous being thus secured,
I set about taking the necessary precautions for preserving what I had gained;
I, therefore, went into the cabin, and brought up biscuit and other provisions,
together with my quadrant, books, etc. and secured the cabin, lest they might
force a passage that way.

I now saw that I had an arduous task to accomplish, to navigate a schooner
alone, and to watch my prisoners; from whom (if they had accomplished their
intents) I could expect no mercy; but, when I compared it with what I had
already suffered, it appeared a pleasure. The most difficult part I thought was
over, and that I had only to suffer some privations, to trust to the protection
of the Almighty, and my own vigilance. When I regained possession of the
schooner, I found myself in latitude 25 degrees. North, and in longitude 60 degrees.
West. My prisoners below had plenty of provisions; but they were in darkness,
and had no water. To prevent them making any attempts to regain their liberty,
I did not think it proper to drive them to desperation; but to show them that I
was willing to let them live, and enjoy as many comforts as was consistent with
my own safety: I burnt a hole with a spike, in the fore-scuttle, through which
I could pour water and other refreshments; so that, after several attempts to
break through, and believing that I had killed Brous, and thrown him overboard,
they desisted, and seemed to submit to their fate. As for Brous, who was on
deck, I suffered him, at meal times, to have the partial use of his limbs, to
change his position, etc. but I would by no means suffer him to speak aloud, or
be for a moment totally unfettered; for, my greatest fears were from his
getting loose, and suddenly surprising me, while I was in a slumber; for, I
never lay down, or had any profound sleep while they were under my charge.

On the 4th of October, being thirteen days after the recapture of the vessel,
Providence during all that time having blessed me with favorable weather,
except one gale, which lasted twenty-four hours, I discovered the island of St.
Bartholomew's, and at 7, P. M. was off the harbor; and, by the assistance of a
Swedish schooner, anchored to the leeward of the harbor, and at 10, P. M. John
Peterson, Esquire. commander of his Swedish majesty's brig Housare, sent his barge,
with two officers and ten men, to my assistance, in which he was joined by A.
Campbell, Esquire commander of the United States brig Eagle, and, on the 5th
instant, anchored safe in port; and after being moored, I landed, and entered a
protest against the prisoners, for murder and piracy, with Job Wall, Esquire consul
for the United States of America, who had the murderers put in irons, on board
of the aforesaid United States brig Eagle, with orders to be delivered up to
Thomas Tingey, Esquire commander of the United States ship Ganges, and commodore of
the leeward station.

After delivering up my prisoners to captain Campbell, I was politely treated
by the merchants and other inhabitants of the island; but, the government made
a claim of salvage, for the assistance the Swedish brig had given me, in
bringing the vessel to her anchorage. However, I resisted the claim thus set
up, and showed that it was contrary to the treaty with Sweden; but was obliged
to pay two hundred dollars to the sailors of the Swedish brig for their
assistance. Soon after I sold my cargo, and purchased another of sugars, and
having hired fresh hands, I sailed from St. Bartholomew's on the 4th November,
and arrived at Gloucester-Point the 25th of the same month.

When the prisoners were brought to Philadelphia, they underwent an examination
before judge Peter's, in which they confessed the piracy and murder, differing
very little in the detail of the circumstances from the foregoing narrative:
The plea which they set up in their defense was, that they were French
prisoners, and in the service of the French Republic: That one of them, Brous,
alias La Roche, bore a commission under that government, and therefore they had
a right to make prize of an American vessel, and to kill any person that
resisted the attempt. But, the judge having considered that they entered
voluntarily into the American service, objected to their plea, and ordered them
to prison for trial. Peterson, alias La Croix, has not the least appearance of
being a Frenchman, though he speaks bad French, having been probably on board a
French ship, and it is more likely that he is a Dane or a Swede. As for
Boulanger, alias Baker, we have good authority to say, that he is a Canadian,
that he was born at Les-trois-riviers, of a creditable family, and was a
soldier in a regiment called the Royal Canadians, in the service of his
Britannic majesty, from which he deserted in the spring of 1799, and came into
New York state, by the way of Lake Champlain; so that it is not probable that
he was ever in the service of France, or at sea before this fatal voyage. And
it is highly probable that Brous, alias La Roche, is also a Canadian.

Their trial came on in the circuit court of the United States, before judges
Chase and Peter's, on Monday, the 21st April; they having for council, Messrs.
Dallas, Moylan and Duponceau; the only evidence against them was myself, and
their hardened conduct; and judge Peter's, who was called upon to give the
substance of their examination before him, previous to their commitment for
trial, the jury, after retiring a short time, brought in a verdict of GUILTY.

Sentences of Death was passed upon them on Friday, the 25 th April, and they
are ordered for Execution on the 9 th May.

I thought it my duty, not only from repeated solicitations, but that I might
be relieved from numerous verbal narrations, to send this to Mr. Folwell's
press. I have no emolument in its publication; and so far from setting down
"aught in malice," I forgive them, as they are my fellow creatures; but they
must abide by the lenient laws of my country; and hope their God, who is my
God, will be merciful.

WILLIAM WHELAND.
Philadelphia, April 27, 1800.

