G. WASHINGTON.


A HISTORY OF THE LIFE AND DEATH, VIRTUES AND EXPLOITS, OF General George
Washington, FAITHFULLY TAKEN FROM AUTHENTIC DOCUMENTS, AND, NOW, IN A SECOND
EDITION IMPROVED, RESPECTFULLY OFFERED TO THE PERUSAL OF HIS COUNTRYMEN; AS
ALSO, ALL OTHERS WHO WISH TO SEE HUMAN NATURE IN ITS MOST FINISHED FORM.

Price, 25 Cents.

A life, how glorious, to his country led!
Beloved while living, as revered now dead.
May his example, virtuous deeds inspire!
Let future ages read it, and admire!
BY THE REV. M. L. WEEMS, OF LODGE NO. 50 -- DUMFRIES.

Philadelphia: REPRINTED BY JOHN BIOREN, NO. 83 CHESTNUT STREET, FOR THE AUTHOR.

[ Entered according to Law.]

DEDICATION. TO MRS. MARTHA WASHINGTON, THE ILLUSTRIOUS RELICT OF GENERAL
GEORGE WASHINGTON.
Very Honored Madam,
THE author hopes he shall escape the charge of presumption for dedicating this
little book to you, as it treats of one, to whom, you, of all on earth, were,
and still are, the most tenderly related. One of my reasons for writing this
sketch of your husband's life, and virtues, is derived from those virtues
themselves, which are such true brilliants as to assure me, that even in my
simple style, like diamonds on the earth, they will so play their part at
sparkling, that many an honest youth shall long to place them in the casket of
his own bosom.

Should it contribute, in any wise, to diffuse the spirit of WASHINGTON -- in
any degree to promote those virtues, which rendered him the greatest, because
the most serviceable of mankind -- Should it serve to sooth the sorrows of
Washington's dear Relict, during her short separation from that best of
husbands, now brightest of ^aints -- And O! should it be so favored as to
suggest to the children, now that their father is dead, the great duty of
burying their quarrels, and of heartily uniting to love, and to promote each
other's good -- It will be matter of great joy to one, who can sincerely
subscri^^^ himself the lover of all, who, fear God, honor the President (Adams
or Jefferson,) revere the laws, and are not given to change.

May God's everlasting consolations attend the bosom friend of WASHINGTON! is
the prayer of orphand America; and the prayer of

HONORED MADAM, Your Sincere, though Unknown Friend, M. L. WEEMS.
February 22 d, 1800.
THE LIFE OF GEORGE WASHINGTON, Esquire.
THIS truly great man, the third son of a Mr. Augustine Washington, was born in
Westmoreland county, Virginia, on the 22d day of February, 1732. He was the
first son of a second marriage; a circumstance which ought, in all conscience,
to quiet the minds of those who have their doubts with respect to the
lawfulness of second marriages. His education was of the private and proper
sort. Dead languages, pride, and pedantry, had no charms for him who always
preferred sense to ^ound, the kernel to the shell. A grammatical knowledge of
his mother tongue -- the mathematics -- geography -- history -- natural and
moral philosophy, were the valuable objects of his youthful studies: And in
these he made the proficiency of one who always loved to go deep. At school he
was remarkable for good nature and c^ndour; qualities which gave him so
entirely the hearts of his young companions, that a reference to him was the
usual mode of deciding all differences. After leaving his tutor he acted, for a
few years, as a county surveyor, in which profession, his industry, as also the
neatness and regularity with which he did every thing, were universally admired.

In 1753, the French and Indians began to make inroads on our western frontiers
along the Ohio. Governor Dinwiddie was in a peck of troubles, to get a letter
of remonstrance to their commander in chief. He had applied to several young
gentlemen of his acquaintance; but they were all so exceedingly tender of their
night-caps, they could not be prevailed on, for love or money, to venture out
among the savages. WASHINGTON happening to hear of it, instantly waited on his
excellency, and offered his services, but not without being afraid l^^t his
want of a beard should go against him. However, the governor was so charmed
with his modesty and manly air, that he never asked (...) a syllable about his
age, but, after thanking him for "a noble youth," and insisting on his taking a
glass of wine with him, slipped a commission into his hand. The next day,
accompanied by an interpreter and a couple of servants, he set out on his
expedition, which was, from start to pole, as disagreeable and dangerous as any
thing Hercules himself could have wished. Soaking rains, chilling blasts,
roaring floods, pathless woods, and mountains clad in snows opposed his course;
but opposed in vain -- The glorious ambition to serve his country imparted an
animation to his nerves, which rendered him superior to all difficulties, and
happier far than the little souls he left behind him in Williamsburg, fidling
and feasting in the Rawleigh. Note. A (...) in Williamsburg, christened
Rawleigh, in honor, I suppose, (...) Walter.


Returning homewards, he was waylaid and shot at by a French Indian, and though
the copper-coloured ruffian was not 15 steps distant when he fired at him, yet
not even so much as the smell of lead passed on the clothes of our young hero;
so true still is the promise on record in the good old book, viz.

" The hosts of God encamp around
The dwellings of the just;
And mighty angels wait on all,
Who in his mercy trust."
On his return to Williamsburg it was found that he had executed his
negociations, both with the French and Indians, with so much fidelity and
judgment, that he received the heartiest thanks of the governor and council for
the very important services he had done his country.

HE was now (in the 20th year of his age) appointed major and adjutant general
of the Virginia forces. Soon after this, the French continuing their
encroachments, orders were given by the English government, for the colonies to
arm and unite in one confederacy. Virginia took the lead, and raised a regiment
of four hundred men, at the head of which she placed her darling WASHINGTON*

WITH this handful of (...) fellows, col. WASHINGTON, not yet 23, boldly pushed
out into the Indian country, and there for a considerable time, Hannibal-like,
maintained the war against three times the number of French and Indians. At the
Red-Stones he came up with a strong party of the enemy, whom he engaged and
effectually defeated, after having killed and taken thirty-one men. From his
prisoners, he obtained undoubted intelligence, that the French forces on the
(...) of upwards of a thousand regulars and many hundreds of Indians. But,
notwithstanding this disheartening advice, he still presse^ on undauntedly
against the enemy, and at a place called the Little-Meadows, built a fort,
which he called Fort-Necessity. Here he waited, hourly and anxiously looking
for succors from New York and Pennsylvania; but he looked in vain -- nobody
came to his assistance. Not long after this, his small force, now reduced to
three hundred men, was attacked by an army of 1100 French and Indians. Never
did the true Virginian valor make a more glorious shine than on this trying
occasion.

To see three hundred young fellows -- commanded by a smooth-faced boy -- all
unaccustomed to the terrors of war -- far from home and from all hopes of help
-- shut up in a dreary wilderness, and surrounded by four times their number of
savage foes, and yet, without sign of fear, without thought of surrender,
preparing for mortal combat. Oh! it was a glorious sight! never since the days
of Leonidas and his three hundred deathless Spartans had the sun beheld its
equal. With hideous whoops and yells the enemy came on like a host of furious
tigers. The woods and rocks and tall tree tops were in one continued blaze and
crash of fire arms. Nor were our young warriors idle, but, animated by their
gallant chief, plied their rifles with such spirit, that their little fort
resembled a volcano in full blast roaring and discharging thick sheets of
liquid fire and of leaden deat^s among their foes. For three glorious hours,
Salamander-like, inveloped in smoke and flame, they sustained the attack of the
enemy's whole force, and laid two hundred of them dead on the spot! Discouraged
by such desperate resistance, the French general, the count de Villiers, sent
in a flag to WASHINGTON, extolling his gallantry to the skies, an offering him
the most honorable terms. It was stipulated that COL. WASHINGTON and his little
band of heroes, should march away with all the honors of war, and carry with
them their military stores and baggage.

IN the spring of 1755, WASHINGTON, while busied in the highest military
operations, was summoned to attend general Braddock, who, in the month of
February, arrived at Alexandria with 2,000 British troops. The assembly of
Virginia appointed 800 provincials to join him. The object of this army was to
march through the country by the way of Will's-Creek to fort du Quesne (now
Pittsburgh or Fort-Pitt). As no person was so well acquainted with the frontier
country as WASHINGTON, and none stood so high in military fame, it was thought
he would be infinitely serviceable to general Braddock. At the request of the
governor and council he cheerfully quitted his own command, to act as volunteer
aid-de-camp to that very imprudent and unfortunate general. The army, near
3,000 strong, marched from Alexandria to the mournful ditty of "over the hills
and far away," and proceeded unmolested within a few miles of Fort-Pitt. On the
morning of the day (9th of July) on which they expected to arrive, the
provincial scouts discovered a large party of French and Indians lying in
ambush. WASHINGTON, with his usual modesty, observed to general Braddock what
fort of enemy he had now to deal with. An enemy who would not, like the
Europeans, come forward to a fair ^^uffle in the field, but, concealed behind
rocks and trees, carry on a deadly warfare with their rifles. He concluded with
begging that general Braddock would grant him the honor to place himself at the
head of the Virginia riflemen, and fight them in their own way. And it was
generally thought that our young hero and his 800 hearts of hickory, would
easily have cleared them out too, for they were not superior to the force,
which, (with only three hundred) he had thrown into such a sweat a twelve month
before. But gen* Braddock, who had all along treated the American officers and
soldiers with infinite contempt, instead of following this truly salutary
advice, swelled and reddened with most unmanly rage: "High times, by God," he
exclaimed, strutting to and fro, with arms akimbo, "High times! when a young
Buckskin can teach a British general how to fight!" Washington withdrew, biting
his lip with grief and indignation, to think what numbers of brave fellows
would draw short breath that day, through the pride and obstinacy of one
epauletted fool. The troops were ordered to form and advance in columns through
the woods!!!! In a little time the ruin, which WASHINGTON had predicted,
ensued. This poor devoted army, pushed on by their mad-cap general, fell into
the fatal snare which was laid for them. All at once a thousand rifles began
the work of death. The ground was instantly covered with the dying and the
dead. The British troops, thus slaughtered by hundreds, and by an enemy whom
they could not see, were thrown irrevocably into panic and confusion, and in a
few minutes their haughty general, with 1200 of his brave, but unfortunate
countrymen, bit the ground. Amidst all this fearful consternation and carnage,
amidst all the uproar and horrors of a rout, rendered still more dreadful by
the groans of the dying, the screams of the wounded, the piercing shrieks of
the women, and the yells of the furious assaulting savages, WASHINGTON, calm
and self-collected, rallied his faithful riflemen, led them on to the charge,
killed numbers of the enemy who were rushing on with tomahawks, checked their
pursuit, and brought off the shattered remains of the British army.

THIS glorious action confirmed his admiring countrymen in the very high
opinion which they had conceived of their WASHINGTON. His valor and military
talents were extolled to the skies. The bravery of the Virginia troops on this
trying occasion, rejoiced the good old mother country, and was surely enough to
have taught her to despise that execrable firebrand, general Amherst, who, a
few years afterward, most impudently asserted, that the ^ight of a grenadier's
cap would put an American army to flight, and even boasted in parliament, that
he could march through all North America with 5000 men!!!!!!!

WITH respect to our WASHINGTON, I cannot but mention here two very
extraordinary speeches that were uttered about him at this time, and which, as
things have turned out, look a good deal like prophecies. A famous Indian
warrior who assisted in the defeat of Braddock, was often heard to swear that
WASHINGTON was not born to be killed by a bullet, "for," continued he, "I had
SEVENTEEN fair fires at him with my rifle, and, after all, I could not bring
him to the ground." And, indeed, whoever considers that a good rifle, levelled
by a proper marksman, hardly ever misses its aim, will readily enough conclude,
with this unlettered savage, that some invisible hand must have turned aside
his bullets.

THE Rev. Mr. Davies, in a sermon occasioned by Braddock's defeat, has these
remarkable words -- "I beg leave to point the attention of the public to that
heroic youth, colonel WASHINGTON, whom I cannot but hope Providence has
preserved for some great service to this country." Yes reverend Sir, for some
great service indeed. -- He was preserved of God to be the political savior of
his country. He who inspired the flaming fancies of a BARLOW and a DWIGHT; He
who imparted the ken of angels to FRANKLIN and to RITTEN-HOUSE, even he, the
same all-gracious power, raised up WASHINGTON, to be his minister of mercies to
America. Oh! that there were an heart in us to adore the giver, and to emulate
the bright virtues of his precious gift.

After the defeat and death of general Braddock, WASHINGTON continued to press
forward, the foremost man to fail upon every difficulty or danger that
threatened his beloved country. And the Lord was with him whithersoever he
went, and whatsoever he did the Lord made it to prosper. On every occasion he
displayed so much of wisdom, industry, and valor, as gained him his country's
heartiest approbation, a reward which, next to the smi^es of his own
conscience, he valued more than all things else.

IN 1759, he resigned his command, and entered into the married state* in the
27th year of his age, with the young and amiable widow of Mr. Custis, with whom
he received one of the handsomest estates in Virginia. From this period he
became as assiduous to serve the s^ate as a SENATOR, as he had hitherto been
active to defend it as a soldier; thus teaching us, by his own great example,
that a real patriot thinks nothing done for his country, while (...) remains
any thing to be done for it.

In the year 1773, when the damp of God was burning with peculiar brightness in
our land, and both Britain and her colonies enjoyed a measure of blessings
seldom indulged to the most ^avored nations -- When, at the very mention of
Old-England, our hearts leaped for joy, as at the name of a great and venerable
mother, and that mother felt an equal transport at thoughts of us, her
flourishing colonies -- When all the produce of these vast and fertile regions
was poured into her beloved lap, and she, in return, not allowing us the
trouble to make even a hob-nail, heaped our families with all the necessaries
and elegancies of her ingenious artists. -- When, though far separated by an
ocean's roar, we were yet so unite^ by love and mutual helpfulness, that the
souls of Rawleigh and Columbus, looking from heaven on the enchanting scene,
enjoyed the consummation of their wishes, and felt an accession to their bliss:
At this happy period, lord North brought in a bill to tax the colonies without
allowing us a voice in their councils!!! The colonies were thunderstruck, and
Britain herself, "sighing through all her island, gave signs of woe that all
was lost."

Millions of that magnanimous and freedom-loving people execrated the measure
as unconstitutional and wicked.

London, Liverpool, Glasgow, Bristol, etc. poured in petitions on petitions,
praying the minister, in compassion to their half-ruined trade and families, to
repeal the act. Petitions and remonstrances, without number, were sent also
from America to the king, to the parliament, and to the people of
Great Britain; but these, like the unfortunate petitions just mentioned, were
all consigned to the "committee of oblivion," as the opposition humorously
styled it. The ministry would not honor them even with a reading! They had
attempted in 1765, eight years ago, to impose on the colonies an
unconstitutional tax, under cover of the stamp act. This had blown up such a
flame of opposition throughout the continent, especially at Boston, that the
ministry prudently suffered the matter to die away. But the gall of
disappointment was still bitter on their minds, and they now thought to have
satisfaction by laying a tax of three pence in the pound on all teas consumed
in the colonies.* This set the old flame agoing again. The colonists at first
employed, as we have seen, moderate measures, but finding that these were
treated with contempt, and that the face of North, black as the cloud of
winter, was hard set against them for evil, they rose up as one man, from Dan
to Beersheba, resolved, like true sons of Britons, to live free, or not to live
at all. Soon, therefore, as the ships, laden with the ill-fated tea, arrived at
Boston, in the fall of 1773, immense quantities of it (L.18,000 sterling's
worth) were trundled into the sea; large parcels were destroyed in other
colonies, and still larger parcels were returned unsold.

On the arrival of this news in England, the countenance of the minister was
dark with fury, and he proceeded, without delay, to mix up for the colonies a
cup of fiery indignation, of which Boston, it seems, was to have ^ue largest
dose. As that most undutiful child had always led off the dance in outrage and
rebellion against the parent state, it was determined that she should pay the
piper for old and new -- that her purse should answer for all the ^ea that had
been destroyed -- that her luxuriant trade, which had made her so wanton,
should be taken away from her -- and that, ma^gre her high looks and proud
stomach, she should sit on the stool of repentance until his gracious majesty,
George III. should be pleased to pronounce her pardon.

On the receipt of this intelligence at Boston, the passions of the people flew
up, five hundred degrees above blood-heat! throughout the continent the fever
raged with equal fury. The colonies all extolled Boston for the firmness with
which she had stood up for her chartered rights -- liberal contributions were
made for her relief -- and this ministerial attack on her liberties, was
considered as an attack on the liberties of the whole, which were now thought
to be in such danger, as loudly to call for a general Congress from all the
colonies, to deliberate on their common interests. This most unkingly body sat
down, for the first time, in Philadelphia, Sept. 5th, 1774. They began with
publishing a bill of rights, wherein they repeated their loyalty and love to
the mother country, together with an earnest wish for a constitutional
dependence on her; but, at the same time, they begged leave to assure, that
though she, in her excess of parental fondness, might suffer herself to be
bound and insulted by North and Bute, and other Philistine lords, yet they, for
their parts, were resolved, like true sons of British Sampsons, to rise and
fight to the last hair of their heads. They asserted, and, begged leave to do
it pretty roundly too, as it was getting now high time to speak plain, that, by
the immutable laws of nature -- by the principles of the British constitution
-- and by their several charters, they had a right to liberty, the liberty of
British colonies; and, moreover, that their ever-honored fathers, at the time
of their emigration to this country, were entitled to all the rights of
freemen; and since, by such emigration, they had neither forfeited nor
surrendered these rights -- that they, their children, were determined, at the
risk of every thing short of their eternal salvation, to defend and to transmit
them entire to their posterity.

Millions of choice spirits in England, Scotland, and Ireland, cried out
"that is well said, and may God's arm strike with our American brother's;" this
was coming to the point, and produced the effect that might be expected. For,
instantly, all exportation of arms and ammunition to America was prohibited --
large reinforcements were sent to the king's troops at Boston -- and every step
was taken to compel the colonies to submission. This filled up the measure of
American hatred to the ministry, and called forth the most vigorous
preparations for war. Every ounce of gunpowder was husbanded like so much
gold-dust; powder-mills and musquet-manufactories were erected in most of the
colonies, while others, as not liking this slow way of doing things, laid
violent hands at once upon all the king's arms and ammunition that came in
their way. The hell fraughted cloud of civil war was now ready to burst, and
April the 19th, 1775, was the fatal day marked out by mysterious Heaven, for
tearing away the infant colonies from the old mother country. Early that
morning, General Gage, whose force in Boston was augmented to 10,00 men, sent a
detachment of 1,000* to destroy some military stores which the Americans had
collected in the town of Concord, near Lexington. On coming to the place, they
found the town militia assembled on the green near the road. " Throw down your
arms, and disperse, you rebels," was the cry of the British officer which was
immediately followed by a general discharge of the soldiers; whereby eight of
the Americans were killed and several wounded. The Provincials returned the
fire with good interest, and strewed the green with the dead and wounded. Such
fierce discharges of musquetry, produced the effect that might have been
expected in a land of freemen, who saw their brave countrymen engaged in the
strife of death. Never, before, had the bosoms of the swains experienced such a
tumult of heroic passions. They flew to their houses, snatched up their arms,
and in spite of their wild screaming wives and children, darted to the glorious
field where liberty, heaven-born goddess, was to be bought for blood. Pouring
in now from every quarter, were seen crowds of sturdy peasants with flushed
cheeks, and flaming eyes, eager for battle! Fast as they came up, their long
black muskets began to pour the red streams of fiery vengeance. The enemy fell
back appalled* Every step of their retreat was stained with trickling crimson;
every hedge or fence by which they passed took large toll of hostile carcases.
They would, in all probability, have been cut off to a man, had not General
Gage, luckily recollecting, that born of Britons, these Yankees might still
perhaps retain some of the old lion's fire, sent on 2,000 men to support, if
necessary, his troops. This reinforcement met the poor fellows, ^aint with f^^r
and fatigue, and brought them sa^^ly off to Boston. In this their first field,
the young American f^rmers gleaned of the British about sixty-three in stain,
and two hundred and eight in wounded and prisoners. The flame of civil discord
now broke out, a roaring blaze, and with equal ardor, both parties hastened to
c^ap on the horrid kettle of war.

On this day, June 12, 1775, General Gage issued his Proclamation of rebellion,
with threats of hea^iest vengeance against the (...); extending however in the
king's name, the golden (...) of mercy to all true penitents, Samuel Adams, and
John Hancock, excepted. The British 10,000 strong were still in Boston where,
ever since the affair of Concord, they had been surrounded by an army of 20,000
Provincials, How adorable the goodness of God for ordering that the (...)
attack on our liberties should fall on the populous and high (...) New
Englanders! The heroic spi^^^ with which they repelled it, should, to eternity,
endear them to their (...).
all so eager to try the city by storm, that it was with the greatest
difficulty their officers could restrain them.

On the night of June 16, with a view of driving the British from Boston, the
Provincial Generals sent a body of fifteen hundred men, to throw up some works
on Bunker's hill. Next morning General Gage pushed off a detachment three
thousand strong, with a suitable train of artillery, to dislodge them. The
attack was made with great fury on the part of the British, while the Americans
did not return a shot, until the enemy had come up within ten steps of the
works. A well directed and most horrid fire then took place. The British ^ell
back. Their gallant officers led them a second time to the charge; a second
fire equally close and deadly, drove them back again. But, led on a third time,
by dint of bayonet they at length carried the works; and the Americans
destitute of that weapon* were obliged, after an obstinate restance, to quit
their little dirt fort, the ever green grave of the immortal Warren, and many
more of weeping Liberty's martyred sons. On the other hand, the British drew
back to town with solemn step and slow, having nearly one half of their whole
detachment killed and wounded.

The bloody Rubicon was now passed, and Congress, having closed with the
British in an awful appeal to the sword, saw the necessity of appointing a
Commander in chief. In a moment the great name of Washington was buzzed from
Georgia to New Hampshire. Congress hastened to meet the wish of the nation; and
Washington was unanimously elected Commander in chief of the armies of his
country. On the third day of July* 1775, he arrived at the continental camp
near Boston, where he was received with great joy, after having been treated on
his way through the states, with all the attention due to that great and
virtuous man, to whom, under God, the whole continent looked for safety and
freedom. During this autumn and winter of 1775. Washington could do no more
with the British than to hold them close confined in Boston, where the scurvy
(...) in among them and proved very fatal. To remedy this evil, (...)
quantities of livestock and vegetables were shipped from Bri^^^^ -- 5,000 (...)
-- 14,000 sheep -- 12,000 hogs -- 22,000 pounds sterling worth of sour crout --
and nearly the same amount in ^ay, oats, and beans, for a single regiment of
cavalry!! A proof that nations, as well as individuals, had better sometimes to
pocket an injury, and save the expense.

In the spring of 1776, Washington gave orders to erect on the heights near
Boston, three large batteries, whose heavy fire both of balls and bombs soon
rendered the town so intolerably hot, that General Gage was glad to evacuate it
on the 17th of March, when Washington marched in with the honors of a triumph,
and was welcomed by the people and by the state assembly, as Heaven's agent of
their deliverance. In consequence of some disturbances, this year in Carolina
in favor of the ministry, Sir Peter Parker was dispatched with nine ships of
war, from fifty to twenty guns each, with a large land force commanded by
Clinton and Cornwallis, to make an attempt on Charleston the capital of South
Carolina. Before the ships could be brought to pay their respects to the town,
they must, it seems, pass a little fort on Sullivan's island. This, however,
being defended only by the raw militia, was hardly looked on as any obstacle.
Happily for America, Washington h^d committed the command of it to General
Moultrie. About ten o'clock, June 28th, Sir Peter Parker having brought his
ships of war close along side the fort, began a tremendous cannonade upon it,
not without expecting to see the militia fly, like frightened rats from an old
barn on fire. But, very contrary to his hopes, the Provincials stood their
ground as though they grew to the soil, and levelling their eighteen pounders
with good aim, they bored the ministerial ships through and through at every
fire. Their third broad^ide cut the springs of the Commodore's cables, so that
swinging around, stern on, toward the fort, she was raked fore and aft, most
dreadfully. The slaughter on board the ships was very great. The quarter deck
of the Bristol (the Commodore's ship) was at one time cleared of every soul,
except the Commodore himself, whose small clothes were rudely torn off by a
cannon ball. So that Sir Peter was the first Sans Culotte ever heard of in
America. Would to God he had been the last.

The heroes in the ^ort won immortal honor. One brave fellow, a Sergeant,
observing the flag staff shot away, jumped down from the fort on the beach, in
the ho^^st fury of the battle, snatched up the flag, and having returned it to
its place, streaming defiance, waved his hat with a -- Hurra, my boys, God save
Washington and America forever." Congress rewarded him with a sword. Another,
while roaring away with his 18 pounder, was terribly shattered by a Cannon
ball. When about to expire, he lifted up his dying eyes and said -- " My brave
Countrymen. I die, but don't let the cause of liberty die with me." Now louder
and louder, still peal on peal, the American thunder burst forth with earth
trembling crashes; and the British ships, after a long and gallant struggle,
hauled off with a good fortnights worth of work for Surgeons, Carpenters and
Splicers.

About this time the great question of independence, was proposed in Congress.
The honorable Samuel Chase, Esquire. the Demosthenes of Maryland, was the first
who had the honor to say on the floor of Congress, that, "he owed no
allegiance to the King of Great Britain." On the ever memorable 4th of July,
1776, the United States were declared a FREE AND INDEPENDENT NATION. God
Admighty grant us virtue enough, for ever to live so!!

A few days after this, Lord How came upon the coast with a huge forest of men
of war and transports, shading far and wide the frightened ocean, and bearing
nearly forty thousand men, British Hessians, and Waldeckers. Supposing that
this had intimidated the American commander, Lord How wrote a letter to him,
directed "to George Washington, Esquire." This Washington refused to receive,
looking on it as an insult to Congress, under whom he had the honor to bear
the commission of Commander in Chief, and should have been addressed as such.
General How then sent an officer to converse with him on the subject of
reconciliation. Having heard what he had to say, Washington replied, "by what
has yet appeared, sir, you have no power but to grant pardons; but we, who have
committed no fault, want no pardons, for we are fighting only for our rights,
as the descendants of Englishmen."

The unfortunate defeat, of Long Island, now took place, on August 28th, which
though the hottest day in the year, had like to have been the freezing point in
the American affairs. For, on this day, the British, with an infinite
superiority of force, after having defeated the Americans with great loss, were
investing the slender remains of their army, and had actually broke ground
within six hundred yards of the little redoubt^ that feebly covered their
front. Soon as it was dark Washington ordered the troops to convey their
baggage and artillery to the water fide, whence it was transported over a broad
ferry all night long, with amazing silence and order. Providentially a thick
fog continued next morning till ten o'clock; When that passed away, and the sun
broke out, the British were equally surprised and enraged to see the rear guard
with the last of the baggage, in their boats and out of all danger.

Lord How, supposing that such a run of misfortunes must have put Congress
into a good humor to think about peace, signified a willingness to have a
grand talk on the subject. Congress sent Doctor Franklin, Mr. Adams, and Mr.
Rutledge, each with his belt of wampum. But finding that his lordship was still
harping on the old string, pardons, pardons; not liking such music, they took
up their hats, and very erectly stalked off. Toward the close of this trying
campaign, it is a fact that Washington had not 3000 men, and even these were so
destitute of necessaries, that nothing but their love and veneration of him
kept them together. And with this handful he had to opppose a victorious army
of nearly fifty thousand veterans!! But Jehovah the God of Hosts was with him,
and o^t-times in the ear of the slumbering hero, his voice was heard, "fear
not, for I am with thee, ^e not dismayed for I am thy god." Hence under all the
disheartening circumstances of this campaign, Washington not only kept up his
own spirits, but cheered those of his drooping comrades. "Never despond, my
friends, said he, let matters come to the worst, we can but retire ^ver the
mountains, whence we shall never lack opportunities to har^ass, and finally to
expel the enemies of our country." Hearing his officers talking one day about
the gloominess of the American affairs he humourously clasped his neck with his
hands, and said with a smile, "I really cannot believe yet that my neck was
ever (...) for a halter."

For four months during the summer and (...) of 79, the Americans had been
obliged to retreat before the enemy, who had now completely overrun the
Jerseys, filling every town and hamlet with their victorious Red Coats.
Washington hovered around them waiting for an opportunity to strike. An
opportunity soon offered. Learning that the enemy at Trenton, (in number about
2000, chiefly Hessians) were lulled into that state of security which frequent
victories and a contempt of an enemy, too naturally inspire; he formed the
design to surprise them. Christmas night (76) was pitched on for the purpose.
Having divided his little force into three bodies, he gave the command of two
of these* to generals Ewing and Cadwaliader, with orders to cross the river
just below Trenton. Assisted by general Green, Washington himself led the
principal body over M'Konky's ferry, 9 miles above. It was his plan to reach
town about day break, but by reason of the immense quantities of ice in the
river, and a violent storm of hail and snow, he did not arrive till 8 o'Clock.
The troops under Cadwallader and Ewing, could not cross at all. The instant
before the attack, he animated his men by the following speech.

" My brave Countrymen, now is the the important moment to strike a blow,
which, however inconsiderable in appearance, may draw after it consequences the
most desirable and glorious. When therefore you come to the charge, give me,
which is all I ask on earth, to see you behave like men who are fighting for
Country, for liberty, and for life. For my own part, I solemnly vow to God,
that I will never survive a defeat, if that defeat be owing to any inattention
to your welfare." He would have proceeded, but was interrupted by the ^ager
cries of his men -- Lead us on; lead us on to the enemy." In an instant, like
lightning, they came up with the out guards, and pouring in their fire, drove
them back into to^n, seized their artillery, and were on the eve of discharging
on their main body, a storm of cannon and musket balls, when they prudently
threw down their arms and cried out for quarter. The brave col. Rhal, with 40
of his men were killed, and 1000 taken prisoners. The rest, at the beginning of
the rumpus, took down the road to Bordentown, and so cleared themselves. If
Ewing and Cadwallader could but have crossed the river, and seized the Trenton
bridge according to Washington's orders, the whole of the British forces at
Trenton, Bordentown and Burlington, would have been as completely taken as ever
was a gang of partridges in a fowler's net. However, this bold stroke threw
genesis How into such a tremor, that he instantly called off all his cantonments
from the Delaware to Brunswick and Amboy, within the welcome sight and smell of
their men of war.

Though this victory was gained on the 26th of December, and Washington, in order
to animate his country men, had marched his prisoners to Philadelphia, yet we
find him again, on the 1st of January, across the angry Delaware, and raising
aloft his Country's flag, bold-(...) over the heights of Trenton. Lord
Cornwallis advanced to ^^tack him. Finding that the enemy, greatly superior in
numbers, were endeavoring to surround him, and seeing no possibility, on
account of the ice, to re-cross the Delaware; Washington was obliged again to
recur to stratagem, of which no general perhaps ever had a larger stock. He
kept up a heavy cannonade on the enemy till night, then lighting a vast number
of fires, and leaving guards at the bridges, he pushed off about midnight for
Princeton, and at sunrise, came down upon another heavy body of the British,
who had just struck their tents, and were coming on in high spirits to attack
him at Trenton. To it, in a moment, both parties ^ell like heroes. Flash and
clash went the muskets and bayonets. Here the servants of George and there the
sons of liberty, rushed on to mutual wounds and death.

" God save the king, the British heroes cried,
" And God for Washington! Columbia's sons replied."
The great name of Washington imparted its usual animation to his troops. The
enemy gave way in all quarters, and were pursued 4 miles. The victors returned
with 400 prisoners; the bayonet had stopped 120 on the field. But they fell not
alone. The Gallant Mercer and 63 of his brave countrymen sleep with them. But
the stri^e of the heroes was but for a moment; and they have forgotten their
wo^nds. Together now they feast in paradise, and when meet their eyes of love,
their joys are not dashed by recollection of the past.

The British officers gave our Washington full credit for such fine strokes of
generalship, and began to look thoughtful whenever his name was mentioned.

The enemy now (January 15th.) drew in all their forces to winter quarters at
Brunswick, where Washington continued to thin their number by cutting off their
foraging parties; so that every load of hay or dish of sprouts they got, was at
the price of blood.

Thus gloriously, in ten days, was turned the tide of victory in favor of
America, by him whom heaven, in mercy, not to America alone, but to Britain and
to the world, had raised up to found here a wide empire of liberty and virtue.
The character of Washington was exalted to the highest pitch even throughout
Europe, where he was generally styled the American Fabius, from the famous
Roman general of that name who opposed Hannibal with success. A distinction to
which he was justly entitled, from the invincible firmness with which he
rejected every bait and finesse of the British generals; as also, from that
admirable judgment with which he suited the defense of his country to the
genius and abilities of the people, and to the natural advantages of the
country itself; thereby not allowing the enemy to profit by their great
superiority of numbers, discipline, and artillery, and constantly cutting them
off by skirmishes and surprise.

The ministerial plan for this year (1777) was to reduce the Americans, by
cutting off all communication between the northern and southern states!! To
effect this, general How, with 20,000 men, was to go round from New York to
the head of Elk, and thence march on, due north, through Philadelphia, while
general Burgoyne, with 10,000 men, setting out from Canada, was to pass along
down the lakes, and thence due south to meet his brother How; the strait line,
formed by the junction of these two gentlemen, was to possess such virtue,
that, it was supposed, no American could ever be found hardy enough to set foot
over it!!

Accordingly, July 23, general How left Sandy Hook, ^ailed up the Cheseapeake,
and landing at the, mouth of Elk River marched on with but little interruption,
except at Brandy wine, to Philadelphia. Into this elegant city, on the 26th of
September 77, he entered in triumph; fondly supposing, that, in America as in
Europe, the capture of the city, was the same thing as the reduction of the
country. But instead of finding himself master of this great continent, whose
Rattle Snakes alone, in the hand of heaven, could scourge his presumption; it
was with no small difficulty he could keep possession even of the little
village of Germantown. For on the morning of the 4th of October, Washington
made an attack on him with such judgment and fury, that his troops gave way in
every quarter. "The tumult, disorder and despair in the British Army, says
Washington, were unparelled. But in the very moment of the most decisive and
glorious victory, when some of the Provincial regiments had more prisoners than
men, the Americans began to retreat!! Washington's grief and mortification,
were inexpressible.

But while he was annoying the enemy by land, he did not lose sight of their
fleet, which was now forcing its way up the Delaware, to keep open to the army
a channel of supplies. They arrived without molestation, within 8 miles of
Philadelphia, at a marsh called Mud-Island. On this poor harmless spot, the
fittest however that nature in this peaceful land of Friends could furnish,
Washington had ordered a fort to be thrown up, the command of which with 230
men, he assigned to lieutenant col. Sam. Smith. On the eastern or Jersey side
of the river, at a place called Red Bank, he ordered a strong redoubt; the
command of which with 205 men, was given to Col. Green. These, with some
chevaux de frize sunk in the river, and a few galleys, formed all the barrier
that Washington could present against the British navy. The strength of this
barrier, was soon put to a fiery trial. Great preparations were made to attack
the Americans, at the same instant, both by land and water. Count Donop; with a
host of Hessians, was sent over to be in readiness to attack Red Bank, while
the tide of flood, groaning under their enormous weight, brought up the men of
war. The morning was still, and the heavens overeast with sad clouds, as of
nature sympathising with her children, and ready to drop showers of celestial
pity on their strifes. No sooner had the ships floated up within three cables
length of the ^ort, than they began a most tremendous cannonade: while cannon
ba^s and fire tailed bombs, like Comets, fell upon it thick as hail. The
gallant Smith and his myrmidons stood the shock to a miracle, and like men
fighting under the eye of their Washington, drove the two and thirty pounders
through them with such spirit and success, that, in a little time the Augusta, a
heavy 64 gun ship, took fire and blew up, the horrid balloon of the greatest
part of the crew. Another ship, called the Merlin or Black Bird, soon got on
the wing and followed the Augusta.

At the same moment, col. Donop, with his Hessians, made a gallant attack on
the fort at Red Bank. After a few and well directed fires, Green and his men
artfully retired from the outworks. The enemy now supposing the day their own,
rushed on in vast numbers along a large opening in the fort, and within twenty
steps of a masked battery of 18 pounders loaded with grape shot and spike
nails. All at once, Hell itself seemed to open before their affrighted view.
But their pains and their terrors were but for a moment. Together down they
sunk by hundreds, into the sweet slumbers of death, scarcely sensible of the
fatal blow that struck them.

Heaps on heaps the slaughtered Hessians lie.
Brave Green beholds them with a tearful eye.
Far now from home and from their native shore,
They sleep in death and hear of wars no more."
Poor Donop was mortally wounded and taken prisoner. The attentions of the
American officers, and particularly the kind condolance of the Godlike
Washington, quite overcame him On hearing of his misfortune, Washington sent an
officer to condole with him. The officer was conducted to his apartment and
delivered the message. The wounded Count appeared much affected -- a tear
swelled in his eye -- and he said to the officer, present to General Washington
the thanks of an unfortunate brother Soldier -- t^ll him I expect to rise no
more -- but, that if I should, the first exertion of my strength shall be, to
return him my thanks in person.
; and his last moments were s^eeped in tears of regret, for having left his
native land, to fight a distant people who had never injured him.

After six weeks of infinite fatigue, with great loss of men and money, the
British forced a passage large enough for their provision ships, to
Philadelphia, where general How and his officers held their balls this winter;
while 16 miles distant, the great Washington, well pleased with his campaign,
retired and hutted it at Valley Forge.

While such ill success attended this part of the ministerial plan, viz. to
choke the Colonies by a military noose, so lightly drawn from Chesepeake to
Champlain, as to stop all circulation between the northern and southern States;
a worse fate frowned on their attempt in the north. General Burgoyne with
10,000 veterans, besides a host of Canadians and Indians, left Canada in June,
and came pouring down from the lakes with an impet^osity that swept every thing
before it. The hatchets of the Indians were drunk with American blood. No age,
no sex could soften them. The widow's wail, the virgin's shriek, and infant's
trembling cry, was music in their ears. In cold blood they struck their cruel
tomohawks into the defenseless head of a Miss M'Rae, a beautiful girl who was
that very day to have been married. Such acts, of inhumanity called forth the
fiercest indignation of the Americans, and inspired that desperate resolution
of which the human heart is capable, but which no human force can conquer. The
New Englanders, who were the nearest to these infernal scenes, turned out in
mass. Washington sent on Gates and Arnold with strong reinforcements; and to
these he joined the immortal Morgan with his dreadful phalanx, a 1000 riflemen,
whose triggers were never touched in vain, but could throw a ball a hundred
yards, at a squirrels head and never miss.

The first check given to Burgoyne's career, was at Bennington. Hearing that
the Americans had laid up large provisions in that town, he detached a colonel
Baum with 600 Germans to surprise it; and at the same time, posted colonel
Breyman in the neighborhood, with an equal number, to support him if
necessary. Finding the place too well guarded either for surprise or storm,
Baum fortified himself at a little distance, and sent back for Breyman. The
American commander, the brave general Stark, thinking these enemies fully
enough, at least, not wishing for any more, sallied out and with great fury
attacked Baum's intrenchments. At the first onset, the Canadians and British
marksmen took to their heels, and left the poor Germans in the lurch. After a
gallant resistance, Baum was mortally wounded, and his brave countrymen killed
or taken to a man. In the mean time, Breymen, who had not heard a syllable of
all this, arrived at the place of action, where, instead of the cheering huzzas
of joyful friends, he was saluted, on all hands, with the deadly whizzing of
rifle-bullets. After receiving a few close and scorching fires, the Germans
were ^ain to try their shanks. The enemy lost in these two engagements not less
than 800 men, in killed, wounded, and prisoners.

About the same time, all their forts on the lakes were surprised -- Colonel
St. Ledger was defeated at fort Stanwix -- The Indians began to desert -- Arnold
and Morgan were coming up like mountain-storms -- and the militia from all
quarters, were pouring in. Burgoyne began to be alarmed, and wrote to New York
for help; but, finding that Clinton could give him none, and that the salvation
of his army depended on themselves, he gallantly determined, on the 7th of
October, (77) to stake his all on the cast of a general battle.

His army, in high spirits, was formed within a mile of the American camp.
Burgoyne himself, with the flower of the British troops composed the center;
Brigadier Gneneral Frazer commanded the left; the Germans headed by Major
Generals Phillips and Reidsdel, and Colonel Breyman, formed the right; with a
fine train of artillery, flying colors, and a full roll of martial music, from
wing to wing the towering heroes moved. On the other hand, fired with the love
of liberty and their country, the Americans poured out by thousands, eager for
the glorious contest. The action began by a most furious attack on the center
of the British army, and extending along the left wing. The Grenadiers behaved
with their usual gallanty, but were obliged to give way. Perceiving that they
were sinking under the weight of the American fire, Gates ordered a strong body
to march (...) and their ^^ank, while Morgan, with a heavy reinforcement,
hastened to the left to decide the action there. These charges was made with
such impetuosity, that the enemy was thrown into the utmost confusion. To save
them from total destruction, the brave General Frazer flew to their assistance.
In this attempt he lost his life and great numbers of his men were slain. The
situation of this part of the Royal army becoming now exceedingly critical, and
the danger increasing every moment, a retreat was ordered. But scarcely had
they entered their camp, when the Americans stormed it with all the fury of
Lions: with trailed arms rushing to the charge through a severe fire of grape
shot and musquetry. The British fought with equal desperation, for their all
was at stake, and the Americans, like a whelming flood, were bursting over
their entrenchments, and hand to hand with arguments of bloody steel, were
pleading the cause of ages yet unborn. For some time, the mortal strife was
maintained on both sides, with a bravery that was never exceeded. But in that
moment of danger and of glory, the impetuous Arnold who led them on, was
dangerously wounded and forced to retire, and several regiments of British
Infantry pouring in to the assistance of their gallant comrades, the Americans,
after many hard struggles, were finally repulsed. In another quarter, where the
strength of the Germans fought, the Americans led on by Morgan, carried the
entrenchments sword in hand. Colonel Breymen, with the greatest part of his
countrymen, was killed, and their baggage, tents and artillery, all fell into
the hands of the Conquerors. This was a bloody day to both armies; but so
peculiarly disheartening to the British, that they were obliged to retreat that
night to Saratoga, where, in a few days (on the 13th of October 1777.) they
surrendered to Gates and the Americans, by whom they were treated with a
generosity that perfectly astonished them. For when the British were marched
out to lay down their arms, there was not an American to be seen! They had all
nobly retired, for a moment, as if unwilling to give the pain, even to their
enemies, of being spectators of so humiliating a scene! Worthy countrymen of
Washington! this deed of yours shall out live the stars; and the blessed Sun
himself, smiling, shall proclaim, that in the wide travel of his beams, he
never looked upon its like before.

Thus gloriously for America, ended the campaign of 77. 78 began as
auspiciously. In May, Silas Deane arrived from France with the welcome news of
a treaty with that powerful People; and a letter from Louis XVI* to Congress,
whom he styled -- Very Dear Great Friends and Allies. On the 6th of June
commissioners arrived from Britain with Lord North's conciliatory plan, wherein
was offered every thing that America once contended for, or co^^ted. But things
were now gone too far to admit of the idea of reconciliation on any basis short
of Independence. Negotiation was, of course, at an end on the part of Britain,
who took instantly to the sword again.

On the 18th of June, the British army, now under the command of Clinton,
evacuated Philadelphia for New York. The figure they made on the road had
something the air of the sublime; for their baggage, loaded horses, and
carriages, formed a line not less than twelve miles in length. General
Washington, whose eye, like that of the sacred Dragon, was always open and
fixed upon the enemies of America, immediately crossed the Delaware after them
-- pushed on detached corpse to obstruct their advance -- gall their flanks --
and fall on their rear, while he himself moved on with the body of the army. By
the 27th, Clinton had got on as far as Monmouth, and Washington's troops were
close on his flank and rear. Next morning he ordered general Lee with 5000 men,
to begin the attack; himself moving on briskly to support him. But to his
astonishment, as he advanced, he met Lee retreating, and the enemy impetuously
pursuing. Here Washington was seen in all his splendour; for the moment of
danger and confusion was always the orb in which he shown the brightest. At
^ight of him his troops recovered their wonted spirits and wheeled around
furiously to the charge. The enemy finding themselves now warmly opposed in
front, made an attempt to turn his left flank, but were gallantly attacked and
driven back. They then made a rapid push to the right, but the brave Green with
a choice body of troops and artillery, repulsed them with considerable
slaughter. At the same instant Wayne advanced with his Game Chickens, Every
body has heard of Paoli.
and poured in so severe and well directed a fire, that the enemy were glad to
get back to their defiles. Morgan's rifles were full hot that day. Washington
and his hero's lay upon their arms all night, resolved to fall on the enemy
the moment they should attempt their retreat next morning. But during the night
they moved off in silence, and got such a start that Washington thought it
dangerous in such hot weather, to make a push after them. Washington lost
fifty-eight killed -- 140 wounded. The British had 249 killed, and the wounded
in proportion. Numbers, on both sides, died of the extreme heat, and cold water,

In September 1780, an attempt was made to take off our Washington, and by
means which I can hardly believe the old British Lion was ever well pleased
with. The brave General Arnold, having been appointed to the government of
Philadelphia, was alas! over-persuaded by the devil to make a shaving business
of it. But, unskilled in the use of the swindling razor, he unfortunately cut
many of his customers, so near the quick, that they never gave over bawling
until they got him into the Star chamber. Congress, unwilling to expose the
man who had fought so bravely in the cause of liberty, thought they would make
what the musicians call, a piano slur of it, and be done with it; for it was a
piece of vile discord to generous American ears. For the same reason, the
god-like Washington hurried it over, and after a gentle reprimand of Arnold,
gave him the command of West-point with a large body of American troops. The
history of Arnold's embarrassments and his quarrel with his countrymen, soon
got down to New York to the British commander, who, well knowing the ticklish
situation of a proud man caught on the horns of poverty, sends him up a Major
Andre with money in his pocket. The Major, by means yet unknown to the public,
got near enough to Arnold to probe him, and, alas! found him, both in principle
and purse, hollow as an exhausted receiver, and very willing to be filled up
with English guineas. English guineas are offered him; and Arnold agrees, Oh
shocking to humanity! Arnold agrees to sacrifice Washington to the British! To
be certified of this delightful truth, Andre, during Washington's absence from
West-point, comes ashore from a sloop of war, with a surtout over his
regimentals, spends a day and night with Arnold, sees, with his own eyes, the
dear train laid, the matches lighted, and every thing in readiness, a few
nights hence, to send the old Virginia farmer and his republic apa^ki^g. Every
thing being settled to satisfaction, Andre wishes to set off to carry the glad
news to General Clinton, But, behold, by a fine stroke of Providential
interference, he cannot get on board the ship!! Arnold gives him a horse and a
pass to go to New York by land. Under the name of Anderson he passes, in
safety, all the guards. Now, like an uncaged bird and light as the air he
breathes, he sweeps along the ^oad. His fame brightens before him -- stars and
garters, coaches and castles, dance before his delighted fancy -- even his long
loved reluctant Delia (Miss Seward) is all his own -- she joins in the nation's
gratitude -- softly she rolls her eye of love, and, brightening in all her
beauty, sinks on his enraptured breast! In the midst of these too happy
thoughts, he is met by three young militia-men; though, not on duty they
challenge him. He answers by the name of Anderson, shows his pass and bounds
away. Here the guardian genius of Columbia, burst into tears -- she saw the
fall of her hero, and her country's liberties crushed for ever. Dry thine eyes
blessed faint! thy Washington is not fall^^ yet -- the thick bosses of Jehovah's
buckler are before the chief, and the shafts of his enemies shall yet fall to
the earth, accursed. For scarce has Andre passed the young militia men, before
one of them tells his comrades, that, he does not like his lo^ks," and insists
that he shall be called back and questioned again. His answers prove him a spy.
He would have fled, but they level their muskets. Trembling and pale, he
offers them an elega^^^ gold watch to let him go; no! he presses on them a
purse bloated with guineas; no! he promises each of them a handsome pension for
life -- but all in vain. The power that guarded Washington was wroth with
Andre. On searching him they find in his boot, and in Arnold's own hand
writing, a plan of the whole conspiracy!! But why should I tell how Major Andre
died? The place where his gallows stood is overgrown, with weeds -- but smiling
angels often visit the spot, for it was bathed with the tears of his foes.

His candor, on his examination, in some sort expiated his crime, it melted
the angel soul of Washington, and the tears of the hero were mingled with the
ink that signed the death warrant of the hapless youth. The wretched Arnold
fled. British historians have wondered that he left his wife in the dangerous
power of Washington. But Arnold knew in whom he trusted; and the god-like man
behaved exactly as Arnold had foreseen; for he immediately sent him his clothes
and baggage, and wrote a polite letter of condolence to his lady, offering her
a conveyance to her husband, or, to her friends in Pennsylvania. Washington now
waged the war with various success. On the one hand, his hero of Saratoga
(Gates), was defeated with considerable loss at Cambden; On the other, the
British lost, on the King's mountain, the brave Colonel Ferguson with all his
army, 1,400 Men. After the defeat of Gates, Washington sent on his favorite
Green to head the Southern Army against the victorious Cornwallis and
Tarleton. With Green he joined the famous Morgan, whose riflemen had done such
signal service during the War.

In order to draw Cornwallis's attention from a blow meditated against the
British post at Ninety-six, Green detached Morgan with 300 regulars, 500
Militia and 100 Horse, to Paulet's river, near the neighborhood of Cornwallis
and Tartelon. Immediately the pride of Tarleton rose. He begged of his friend
Lord Rawdon to obtain for him the permission of the Commander in chief, to go
and attack Morgan. "By heaven, my Lord," said he, "I would not desire a finer
feather in my cap, than Colonel Morgan. Such a prisoner, would make my
fortune." "Ah Ben, replied Rawdon, very cooly, you had better let the Old
Waggoner alone." As no refusal could satisfy, permission at length was granted
him; and he instantly set out with a 1000 choice Infantry, 300 Horse and two
pieces of cannon. His force was to Morgans, at least as 5 to 4. At parting, he
said to Lord Rawdon with a smile; My Lord if you will be so obliging as to wait
dinner, the day after tomorrow, till 4'o clock, Colonel Morgan shall be one of
your Lordships' guests." "Very well, Ben," said the other, "we shall wait."

Morgan bravely stood his ground, and, at a place called the Cowpens, drew up
his men with most admirable judgment. -- He paraded his Militia in a large
field, but near a piece of thick woods: this was made to appear as his whole
force; but close behind them and in the edge of the woods, he concealed his
Regulars. Scarce was this arrangement made, before the thundering rattle of
Tarleton's drums was heard, and the Enemy, Horse and Foot, poured in on the
other side of the field in all their glittering steel. The Militia suffered
them to advance within a hundred yards, and, then gave them a well directed
fire, and, according to orders, broke, to gain the woods, and form behind the
Regulars. The British susposing Morgan's whole force now put to the rout,
advanced with such impetuosity that Tarleton's horse had like to have cut down
some of the fugitives before they reached the woods. Suspecting no danger nigh,
and rushing on as to certain victory, the enemy were now within ten steps of
Morgan's riflemen, with every man his finger on the fatal trigger, and his
unerring sight drawn upon his brothers heart. Sons of Columbia! let the curtain
drop: for who, without weeping eyes, can behold the horrid tragedy that ensued,
or the pale cloud of shrieking ghosts that suddenly ascended from the bloody
field! Oh! that they may have winged their way to that blessed world, where
strife and groans, and death, are unknown! The survivors, Tarleton and a few
horse excepted, were taken.

Washingtons heroes, continued the war, against the British, till July 81; when
Cornwallis resolved to push into Virginia and to fortify himself at York-town.
But the eye of Washington was upon him, and, with an address hardly ever
equalled, concerted a plan that ended in his total destruction -- He artfully
wrote letters to Green, informing, that "in order to relieve Virginia, he was
determined immediately to attack New York. These letters were so disposed of as
to fall into the right hands. Clinton took the alarm. But while Clinton was in
daily expectation of a visit from him, Washington and his army, now across the
Delaware, were in full stretch to the South, darkening the day with their
clouds of rolling dust. Cornwallis saw now that the day of his fall was at
hand. He had done all that man could do, but all in vain. On the last of
September, Washington sat down before York with about 100 pieces of heavy
artillery. On the 7th, of October, this dreadful train began to thunder; and
the British works sunk before them. Lord Cornwallis, unwilling to expose his
gallant army to the destruction of a general assault, agreed on the 17th, to
surrender. This was justly considered as the close of War; which having been
begun with supplication, Washington piously ordered to be finished with
thanksgiving. In the Seige of Cornwallis, the behavior of the Americans The
Amiable Colonel Scammel, Adjutant General of the American Army, and uncommonly
beloved by them, was badly wounded, and taken prisoner by some British
Dragoons, who trotted him, on, before them, throe miles, into town, where, he
presently died!! Great was the grief and rage for Scammel. In a few nights,
Washington gave orders to storm one of the enemy's redoubts, which was carried
almost in an instant. The British called for Quarters. A voice of death was
heard, "Remember poor Scammel." -- "Remember, Gentlemen, you are Americans,"
was rejoined by the Commander, and instantly the points of the American
bayonets were thrown up toward heaven.
was, as usual, generous and noble. The conduct of the French also, was such as
to entitle them to equal immortailty.

For when the British marched out, to lay down their arms, the French troops,
were seen to shed tears -- they condoled with the British, and tendered them
their purses! -- Glorious proof, that God never intended M^^ to be, as some
wickedly term it, Natural Enemies.

At the conclusion of the war this truly illustrious man, with a soul far
superior to the low ambition of governing, surrendered up to Congress all the
authority with which he had been invested. Never was there a more glorious
display of the power which virtue possesses over the human heart, than on that
memorable occasion. Congress was then sitting at Annapolis. Washington had
informed them of his intention to resign on the following day. The house was
crowded with the most respectoble characters in the universe. Washington arose,
and with a dignified modesty peculiar to himself, presented into the hands of
the President of Congress, the commission which he had received from them seven
years before. They now saw before them the man whom they had long considered as
sent of God to save them and their children from slavery -- the man who for
this greatest of all purposes had cheerfully relinquished every pleasure of
life, and bravely exposed himself to all its evils -- the man who for seven
long years of difficulty and danger, had manifested the most unflinching zeal
for his country, and had been made the honored instrument of securing to them
liberty, property and every thing most dear and valuable -- the man, who, in
consequence of all this possessed so entirely the hearts of his army and of the
nation, that he could easily have made himself their master -- They now saw
this man, scorning to abuse his power to the dishonor of the mother country;
but, on the contrary, treating her with the most profound respect -- dutifully
bowing before her delegated presence, the Congress -- returning the commission
she had entrusted him with -- piously laying down his unbounded power at her
feet -- and cheerfully falling back into the humble condition of the rest of
her children. The sight of this great man acting in so generous, so godlike a
manner, produced an effect beyond the power of words to express. Virtue
appeared to stand before them arrayed in more than mortal charms. Their
feelings of admiration and delight were too delicious -- too big for utterance.
A flood of tears gushed from every eye, which though a silent was perhaps the
richest offering of veneration and esteem ever paid to a human being.

On the 4th of February 1789, when the Federal Constitution was adopted, he was
by the unanimous voice of his country elected President of the United States,
and before the expiration of four years, for which he had received his
appointment, he was with equal unanimity re-elected to the same honorable
station. During the first part of his administration he gave the most entire
satisfaction; but afterward when Mr. Pit was pleased to turn loose his
cruisers upon our defenseless commerce, and when the French Directory and their
agents, abusing the friendly sentiments which we entertained toward them on
account of their former services, endeavored to draw us into their war -- when
our citizens, impiously forgetting their own country, were divided and
distracted by foreign politics, then it was that WASHINGTON failed to please
some. But indeed it was not for an angel of God to please such opposite
parties, one of whom was furiously clamorous for a war with Britain, the other
as keen set on a game of logger heads with France. In the midst of these
violent commotions, WASHINGTON turned not to the right hand nor to the left to
humor any party. Placed by his country at the sacred helm of her government,
with no pole star but her good, no compass but duty, like a brave and
heaven-assisted pilot, he steered our great national bark safely through the
Scylla and Charybdis, the dangerous rocks and whirlpools of French and English
politics.

Little minds are dazzled with pomp and show, to such, WASHINGTON must have
appeared little less than a God, when at York amidst the thunder and lightning
of the war, the British Lion crouched before him, and Cornwallis and Tarleton
with seven thousand veteran troops, grounded their arms and acknowledged his
superiority. But however great, however glorious he might have appeared as a
triumphant conqueror, he must appear far greater, far more glorious as the
noiseless statesman, whose wisdom and firmness preserved his country from the
ruin and horrors of war, and secured to it all the blessings of peace and
flourishing commerce. And however this wise, this beneficent conduct of his may
have been reprobated by some, yet the day is at hand, when he, whom all the
clamours of a too passionate party, could not persuade to let slip the hell
hounds of war to feast on the cries and blood of mankind, will be revered and
beloved as one of the Guardian Angels of the human race: Yes, when those
unfeeling Rulers, who, to monopolize the sale of sugars and of spices, could
without remorse, deluge the earth and dye the ocean with human gore, shall be
remembered only to be accursed, then shall the name of WASHINGTON sound in the
delighted ears of posterity, as the name of some gentle angel of God sent on
errands of love to his country: when bloody Kings and Conquerors, with all
their eclat, shall have passed away like the black storms of night which
desolated nations in their course, then shall our WASHINGTON, like the sun,
blessed instrument of light, and joy to our world, roll on in his eternal r^^e,
gilding distant lands, and ages yet unborn with the sweet beams of his
beneficent life.

When our children and our childrens children, hearing the great name of
WASHINGTON re-echoed from every lip, shall ask their fathers "what was it that
raised WASHINGTON to this godlike height of glory?" Let them be told, that, "it
was his GREAT VIRTUES, those precious plants of life, the native shoots of a
soul, like his, early watered with the dews of heaven-born religion." Yes, let
them be told; and O! may they never forget! that the same of WASHINGTON which
has gone forth throughout the earth, and ascended the highest heavens, arose
from his early sense of religion, that only source of human virtue and of human
greatness. For how shall frail man, prone to inglorious case and pleasure, ever
ascend the arduous steeps of virtue and of glory, unless animated by the mighty
hopes of religion? Or what shall arrest him in his swift descent to infamy and
vice if ^nawed by that dread power which proclaims to the guilty that their
secret crimes are seen and shall not go unpunished? Hence the wise, in all
ages, have pronounced, that, there never was a truly great man without
religion. There have indeed been great generals, great statesmen, etc. without
religion; but let it be remembered that more courage or cunning, however
paramount, never yet made a great man.

" Admit, that this can conquer, that can cheat,
" It Is phrase absurd to call a villain great.
" Who wickedly is wise, or madly brave,
" Is but the more a fool, the more a knave."
Were it not so, the prince of devils would out-top the topmost hero of them
all, for he had wit to out-wit Solomon, and courage enough to throw down his
black gauntlet to the Almighty. No, no, to be truly great, a man must have not
only great talents but great virtues, and these must have nerves of steel too,
to bear him strongly up till death, for if he should ever turn aside to vice,
farewell for ever his reputation as a hero. Hence when Epaminondas was asked,
which was the greatest man himself, or Pelop^^^s, (another illustrious
character of the (...)) he replied, "wait till we are dead," thus implying,
that (...) all of heroism, depends on a perseverance till death, in virtue and
in great actions. But what motive on earth, can give such perseverance to our
virtue, as true religion? For want of this most animating, this only tone
giving principle, how many who once dazzled the world with the glare of their
abilities, are now eclipsed and set to rise no more? There was Arnold who, in
courage and military talents glittered in the same firmament with WASHINGTON,
and, for a while, his face shone like the star of the morning, but, alas! for
lack of WASHINGTON's religious principles, he soon ^ell, like Lucifer, from a
heaven of glory into an abyss of never ending infamy. But why should I summon
the Arnolds, the Cromwells, the Bacons, the Caesar's and Alexanders of the
earth, to give sad evidence that no valor, no genius alone can make men great?
Do we not daily meet with melancholy instances of youth, lovely as innocence,
sparkling as wit, and promising to the full of their fond parents wishes, who,
yet, merely for lack of religion, soon make shipwreck of all this precious
cargo; sacrificing their gold to gamblers, their health to harlots, and their
glory to grog; making conscience their curse, this life a purgatory, and the
next a hell!! In fact a man though of the greatest talents, without religion,
is but like a gorgeous ship without ballast: highly painted and with flowing
canvas, she launches out upon the deep, and during a smooth sea and gentle
breezes, she moves along stately as the pride of ocean; but soon as the stormy
winds descend, and the blackning billows begin to roll, suddenly she is overset
and disappears for ever. But who is this coming thus gloriously along, with
masts towering to heaven, and his sails white looming like the mountain of
s^ows, the strength of ocean roars beneath his prow, while his course through
the waves is as the course of the mighty Leviathan? who is it but the servant
of God, the friend of man, and guardian angel of his country! who is it but the
pride of Columbia, WASHINGTON the great and good, whose talents like the sails
of a mighty ship, spread far and wide catching the gales of heaven, while his
capacious soul, stored with the rich ballast of religion, remains firm and
unshaken as the ponderous rock? The warm zephyrs of prosperity breathe
meltingly upon him, the chill storms of adversity descend in all their fury;
the big billows of affliction dash violently against him, but nothing can move
him; his eye is fixed on God, his thoughts on the same that remains after
death: The present joys of an approving conscience, and the glory that sadeth
not away, these comfort and support him.

Never perhaps, had human being a more vivid sense than WASHINGTON, of that
great truth which lies at the bottom of all our religion and of all our joys; I
mean, the belief of a particular providence. His strong, vigorous mind clearly
discerned that mighty God, whom nature through all her wondrous works proclaims
aloud: that mighty God who fills the heaven of heavens with his glory, yet
every where present with his works, paints the humble ^illy of the vale, and
feeds with parent care the crying tenants of the sparrow's nest; that mighty
God who is thus regardful of his meanest creatures, must, surely, be more
regardful of man than of millions of sparrows. This through life, was
WASHINGTON's firm belief. And this through life animated his hopes, sweetened
his resignation, taught him humility, and inflamed his gratitude. To this ever
present parent and preserver of men. WASHINGTON ascribed all those rich mercies
which crowned his life -- His favored birth at so singularly important a time
and place -- his extraordinary rise from obscu^ity to a throne! a throne in the
hearts of five millions of freemen -- his miraculous escape from the deadly
rifle's aim, and from all the casualties of war -- his preservation from the
dark designs of Arnold and of Andre -- his capture of veteran armies, and
defeat of a mighty nation -- his subversion, in part, of a great monarchy, and
establishment of a pure and happy republic -- These wonderful events for which
admiring millions extolled him, his enlightened mind deemed it equal insanity
and sacrilege to take to himself. Not unto me, not unto me, but unto thyself O
God be all the glory, was the style of WASHINGTON. When called by his country
in 1775, to lead her freedom-loving sons against the arms of Britain, what
charming modesty, what noble self-distrust, what pious confidence in heaven,
appeared in all his answers! How widely different from the behavior of
Suwarrow on a similar occasion! When that butcher of the Poles was appointed by
the Emperor of Russia, to command his forces against the French, he replied, "I
thank your Highness, and will beat the French!!" Vain mortal! Shall the Father
of mercies de^^rt the souls that he has created, let drop his everlasting reins
of government, and suffer a Demon to break the nations before him like a
potter's vessel! No! WASHINGTON thought not so. Firmly persuaded that he who
formed "this universal frame thus wondrous ^air," formed it on some great plan
worthy of infinite wisdom and goodness, he wisely concluded, that God would
never give to another his glory, the glory of governing it: nor allow to
angels, men, or devils to act but in subserviency to his adorable design.
Filled with this sublimely delightful idea, WASHINGTON found no place for pride
-- saw himself but as a mortal man whose breath is in his nostrils -- whose
place is but a point -- his time a moment -- and himself an atom in the hand of
God to accomplish his mighty will. Hence when called to the chief command, by
his countrymen who expected every thing from his great abilities, how utterly
did he renounce all self-sufficiency? how earnestly did he conjure his
countrymen "to cease from man, nor trust in the arm of flesh, but in the living
God, whose alone the victory is, with whom it is all one to save by many or by
few." -- Who, in the flame of battle, can strike a sudden panic through the
hearts of the brave, or give the lion's courage to the timid, as may best serve
his all wise purposes.

And when after, having conducted his countrymen through the great
revolutionary war with such singular success, he again received an unanimous
call to the PRESIDENT's CHAIR, accompanied with the heartiest thanks of the
Union for his great services past, and an assured anticipation of equally great
to come, read his answers "When I contemplate the interposition of Providence,
as it was visibly manifested in guiding us through the revolution, in preparing
us for the reception of a general government, and in conciliating the good will
of the people of America toward one another after its adoption; I feel myself
oppressed and almost overwhelmed, with a sen^e of the divine munificence. I
feel that nothing is due to my personal agency in all those complicated and
wonderful events, except, what can simply be attributed to the exertions of an
honest zeal for the good of my country."

And when he presented himself, for the first time, before that august body,
the Congress of the United States, April 30, 1789 -- when he saw before him in
full conclave the pride of Columbia in her chosen sons, her Adamses, her
Jeffersons, her Jays, her Franklins, her Lees, etc. etc. -- Immortal heroes!
whose wisdom and valor had stood around her a wall of fire, during her long and
arduous struggle for liberty and independence -- when he saw those illustrious
faces, which his knowledge of their GREAT VIRTUES rendered still more
illustrious; and whose eager eyes all fixed and shining on HIM, darted the
sweetest beams of admiration and of filial affection, then it was, that our
WASHINGTON felt sensations unutterable; sensations that were left to more
expressive silence -- that sacred pause of exquisite bliss which belongs alone
to virtue to impart! and one moment of which far outweighs a whole eternity of
prosperous vice. And his address to congress on that important occasion
infinitely deserved the solemn silence with which it was heard; infinitely
deserves to be remembered by every council, parliament, or congress, that may
be held to the end of the world!

The delegated Fathers of his country were before him to consult on measures,
of all others, the nearest to his heart, on measures the best calculated to
strengthen the chain of love between the states -- to preserve friendship and
harmony with foreign powers -- to secure the blessings of civil and religious
liberty, of peace and prosperity to the union, and to build up our young
republic, a great and happy people, among the nations of the earth. Never
patriot entered on such important business with fairer hopes, whether we
consider the unanimity and confidence of the citizens, or his own and the
abilities and virtues of his fellow-counsellors; but all this would not do,
nothing, short of the divine friendship, could satisfy WASHINGTON. Feeling the
magnitude, difficulty, and danger of managing such an assemblage of communities
and interests; dreading the machinations of bad men, and well knowing the
insufficiency of all second causes, even the best; he piously reminds Congress
of the wisdom of imploring the benediction of the great first cause, without
which he knew that his beloved country could never prosper.

It would, says he, be peculiarly improper, to omit, in this first official
act, my servent supplications to that almighty being who rules over the
universe, who presides in the co^^cils of nations, and whose providential aids
can supply every human defect, that his benediction may consecrate to the
liberties and happiness of the people of the United States, a government
instituted by themselves for these essential purposes, and may enable every
instrument employed in its administration, to execute with success, the
functions allotted to his charge. In tendering this homage to the great author
of every public and private good. I assure myself that it expresses your
sentiments not less than my own; nor those of my fellow-citizens at large, less
than either. No people can be bound to acknowledge and adore the invisible hand
which conducts the affairs of men, more than the people of the United States.
Every step, by which they have advanced to the character of an independent
nation, seems to have been distinguished by some token of providential agency.
-- These reflections arising out of the present crisis, have forced themselves
too strongly on my mind to be suppressed. You will join with me, I trust, in
thinking, that there are none under the influence of which the proceedings of a
new and free government can more auspiciously commence.

And after having come near the close of this the most sensible and virtuous
speech ever made to a sensible and virtuous representation of a free people, he
adds -- I shall take my present leave; but, not, without resorting once more to
the benign parent of the human race, in humble supplication, that, since he has
been pleased to favor the American people with opportunities for deliberating
with perfect tranquillity; and dispositions for deciding with unparallelled
unanimity on a form of government for the security of their union, and the
advancement of their happiness; so his divine blessings may be equally
conspicuous in the enlarged views, the temperate consultations, and the wise
measures, on which the success of this government must depend.

But if the conduct of our WASHINGTON was so lovely in the eyes of angels and
good men, because so respectful to the great parent, in public it was not less
so in private life. The learned and fa^^tious MR. LEE MASSEY, long rector of
the parish in which WASHINGTON lived, has often told me, that he never knew so
constant a churchman as WASHINGTON. "And his behavior in the house of his God
was so exceedingly decent, added the same Rev. gentleman, that it produced the
happiest effect on my whole congregation, and greatly assisted and comforted me
in my moralizing labors; and he always made it a point to bring with him to
church whatever friends happened to be at his house!! The amiable Judge
Harrison, secretary to Washington, used often to say, that, whenever the
General could be spared from camp on the Sabbath, he never sailed riding out to
some neighboring church, to make one of those who were publicly worshipping
the great Creator.

And while he resided in Philadelphia, as President of the United States, his
cheerful and constant attendance on divine service, was such as to convince all
who were destitute of religion and true ^aste, that he deemed no pleasures
equal to those of devotion, and no business a sufficient excuse for neglecting
his supreme benefactor. Greatest of sentimentalists! Patron of propriety! Noble
devotee of duty! No wonder that he, whom thou so signally honoredst through
life, should through life, so signally have honored thee!

The pillars of heaven are not more immovable than is this great truth; which
in WASHINGTON's own language, runs beautifully thus -- there exists in the
economy and course of nature an indissoluble union between virtue and
happiness; between duty and advantage -- between religion and glory. For what
is religion but a firm belief of the great things of eternity, and a
reverential, affectionate intercourse between the soul and its almighty
Creator? Now what motives could human wit devise, comparable with these of
religion, to kindle our love, to enrapture our hopes, to alarm our fears, to
inflame our ambition, and, in short, to touch every spring and passion of our
souls, in favor of virtue and happiness?

Did the sense of shame, restrain Alcibiades from base actions in the presence
of Socrates? Behold, says religion, a greater than Socrates is here. Does the
love of created beauty and worth, re^^^e and improve the soul? Religion leads
to the eternal beauty! ^he love of whom exalts human nature to divine.

Did the ambition of a civic crown animate Scipio to heroic deeds? Religion
holds up a crown, at sight of which the laurels of a Caesar fade to weeds. Does
the hope of gain call forth noblest industry and worth? Religion points to
treasures in heaven, compared with which, whole beds of diamonds, and rocks of
massy gold are trash. Did Titus and Aurelius study the happiness of their
subjects, for the sake of this world's fame? Religion displays that world of
glory, where good kings, who have made their subjects happy, shall shine like
the stars for ever and ever.

Are subjects withheld from crimes ruinous to society, through fear of death?
Religion adds infinite horrors to that dread, it warns them of a death both of
soul and body, in hell, in torments exquisite and eternal.

In short, what motives under heaven can restrain men from vice and misery, or
urge them on in full stretch after individual and national happiness,
comparable with those of Religion? Hence, those great Legislators of nations,
Moses, Lycurgus, and Numa, desired nothing for their dear countrymen, in
comparison of Religious Principles. "I ask not gold for the Spartans, said
Lycurgus, virtue is better than gold." The event showed his wisdom. The
Spartans were invincible all the days of their virtue, even 500 years! "I ask
not wealth for Israel, cried Moses, but, O! that they were wise, that they did
(...) fear God and keep his commandments! The Lord himself shall be their sun
and shield." The event proved Moses a true prophet. For while they were
virtuous they were independent and happy. In short, look throughout the world,
and you will see this eternal truth written on the fates and fortunes of all
nations, that according as they were virtuous or vicious, they were strong or
weak, united or divided, prosperous or unfortunate.

Hence, WASHINGTON, in his consultations for our good, said more stress on
religious principles, than on all other means whatever. Of all the dispositions
and habits which lead to the prosperity of a nation, religion, says he, is the
indispensable support. Volumes could not trace all its connections with private
and public happiness. That is, to say nothing of all those duties, generally
called duties of imperfect obligation, such as meekness, hospitality, charity,
etc. Nor of those ten thousand little, nameless tendernesses and endearments of
looks, speech and manners, which, like the graces in a ^ine piece of music,
make up the sweetest harmonies of social life; and which have no more to do
with human laws, than angels have with fetters and handcuffs: To pass over all
these: Let it be simply asked, continues WASHINGTON, where is the security for
property, for reputation, for life itself, if there be no sense of God of
religion on the minds of those who give their oaths in courts of justice.

Human laws! -- Human nonsense! -- How often, even where the cries and screams
of the wretched call aloud for lightning-speeded vengeance, have we not seen
the sword of human law loiter in its coward scabbard, afraid of angry royalty?
Did not that vile Queen Jezebel, having a mind to compliment her husband with a
vineyard belonging to one of her poor subjects, subborn a couple of villains to
take a false oath against innocent Naboth, and then cause him to be dragged out
with his little motherless, crying babes, and most barbarously stoned to death?

Great God! what bloody tragedies have been acted on the poor ones of the
earth, by kings and great men who were above the laws, and had no sense of
religion to keep them in awe! -- And if men be not above the laws, yet what
horrid crimes! what ruinous robberies! what wide-wasting flames! what cruel
murders may they not commit in secret -- if they be not withheld by the sacred
arm of religion! In vain therefore says WASHINGTON, would that man claim the
tribute of patriotism, who should do any thing to discountenance religion and
morality, those great pillars of human happiness, those firmest props of the
duties of men and of citizens. The mere politician equally with the pious man,
ought to respect and to cherish them.

But some have said, and with a serious face too, that a sense of honor is
sufficient to preserve men from base actions! O blasphemy to sense! Do not we
daily hear of men of honor, by dice and cards, draining their fellow citizens
to the last guinea, reducing them to a dunghill, or driving them to a pistol?
Do not we daily hear of men of honor corrupting their neighours wives and
daughters, and then murdering their husbands and brothers in duels? Bind such
selfish, such inhuman beings, by a sense of honor!! Why not bind roaring Lions
with a cobweb? "No." exclaims WASHINGTON, Whatever a sense of honor may do on
men of refined education, and on minds of a peculiar structure, reason and
experience both forbid us to expect that national morality can prevail, in
exclusion of religious principles.

Indeed he seems never to have lost ^ight of the importance of religion to
national safety. When he was told that the British troops at Lexington, on the
ever memorable 19th April, 1775, had fired on the Americans and killed several
of them, he replied, I grieve for the death of my Countrymen, but rejoice that
the British are still so determined to put God on our side: alluding to that
noble sentiment which he has since so happily expressed, viz. The smiles of
heaven can never be expected on a nation that disregards the eternal rules of
order and right which heaven itself has ordained. And truly WASHINGTON had
abundant reason, from his own happy experience, to recommend religion so
heartily to others. For, as religion never had a more dutiful son than
WASHINGTON, so WASHINGTON never had a more generous mother than religion.
Setting aside all those secret comforts and joys with which she refreshed him
in his frequent visits to the great King; setting aside all those incalculable
favors which he received from her at the hands of her celestial daughters the
virtues, that fine health which rosy-cheek'd temperance gave him -- that
clearness of head which genteel sobriety furnished him -- that firm tone which
blushing chastity dispensed him -- that horn of abundance which firm ^erved
industry bestowed on him -- that tranquillity which prudence in business,
preserved to him -- that cheerfulness which smiling innocence presented to him
-- that bold undaunted heart which good conscience gave him -- I say, setting
aside these, and the ten thousand other choicest presents which religion sent
him by the hands of her daughters the virtues; she threw over him her own
venerable mantle, which, like the AEgis of Minerva, makes little men great and
great men little less than gods. It was this mantle of religion which
immortalized our WASHINGTON. By inspiring every body with the profoundest
veneration for him as the best of men, it naturally smoothed his way to the
supreme command. For when war, that monster of hell, came on roaring against us
with all his deaths-heads and garments rolled in blood, we unanimously elected
WASHINGTON our commander in chief, from a natural persuasion that so good a man
must be the peculiar favorite of heaven, and the fastest friend of his country.
How far this precious instinct of nature in favor of goodness, was correct, or
how far WASHINGTON's conduct was honorable to religion, and glorious to himself
and country, bright ages to come, and happy nations yet unborn, will, I trust,
declare.

The life of WASHINGTON adds one more to the already innumerable proofs of the
incalculable importance of good character to all men, but especially to great
men. "Very gladly, said George Villars, would I give ten thousand pounds for a
good character, because I could easily make thirty thousand pounds by it." But
WASHINGTON's good character was worth to himself and to his country, more
thirty thousand pounds than all the Golden Sands of Ganbia, and precious ore of
Potosi could furnish! It obtained for him the supreme command of the American
armies! a command which his great abilities conducted with such skill and
success, that he fully established the liberties of his country; and erected
for himself a monument whose base covers the United States and its summit
reaches the sky: a monument that shall shine in the Cabinets of the Almighty,
when the moon has shrouded for ever her silver face, and the great sun himself
has ceased to gladden the earth with his golden beams.

But before I quit this article, permit me to add, (for which I hope his
brethren in arms will thank me) that WASHINGTON's piety rendered him one of the
brightest ornaments of his profession as a soldier. It inspired him with that
HEROIC kind of courage, so honorable to reason and to man, and so necessary to
a General; that calm deliberate valor, which, even in the maddest rage of
battle, enabled him to look coolly on, and improve every advantage which the
errors of the enemy offered. Braddock's bloody field bears glorious testimony
to this. For there in the midst of horrors unparalleled, while profane
dram-drinking veterans were flying in every direction, like gunshot deer, this
virtuous youth, unconcerned as Mars, was riding along the line of his Virginia
Riflemen, incessantly calling out well fired, my brave fellows remember the
fate of our little army depends now on your rifles,

An officer said one day at head quarters, that in his opinion a field of
battle called for valor not virtue. "There is no call, sir," replied
WASHINGTON, prior to that of virtue, none of comparable magnitude and
importance. By fighting we serve our country; by virtue we serve him who made
us, we serve mankind, we serve ourselves and even we serve our country the
better in the article of valor. For how a man can fight in a bad cause and
under a guilty conscience, I do not know. Under such circumstances I think I
should be the veriest coward alive; but give me the happiness to live and to
fight, so as to have God on my side, and I hope I shall never know fear.

This is near akin to a noble sentiment of a great captain in former ages "I
fear my God, O Abner, and know no other fear."

The great Gustavus Adolphus used constantly to say, that "a soldier always
fights the better for being a good man."

WASHINGTON proved to a demonstration that virtue is the soul of courage. No
beau ever went with more composure to a ball than he did to a battle.
Hannibal-like, he was the first on the field, and the last off. Providence, in
love to America, made his body bullet-proof, and his great virtues rendered his
mind fearless of fear

His conduct in camp was correspondent with his principles. -- He was never
absent from public prayers. And as to his private devotions, we have every
evidence save that of the eye, that they were duly discharged. He whose
feelings through life, were so exquisitely alive to duty and propriety, that he
could not lie down under the weight of a hundred pence due to his neighbor;
surely could never have slept under the enormous burden of ten thousand talents
due to his God.

WASHINGTON's PATRIOTISM.
The next duty to piety is PATRIOTISM, or the LOVE of our COUNTRY.

In this first of all Republican virtues, the whole life of WASHINGTON may
justly challenge a comparison with that of the greatest Heroes, whether we
consider the majesty of its stream or the purity of its source. His was not the
Patriotism of a Caesar, or an Alexander, Human Devils! who could rob and murder
millions of mankind to enrich their own States. No, his was the patriotism of
an enlightened and virtuous mind, which, looking on the whole human family as
his brethren, (...), for all, the tenderness of a brother; rendered unto all,
the same great duties of humanity and justice. But knowing that the proper
sphere of activity to the individual lay in his own country, he nobly exerted
on that beloved spot, all the influence of his PRAYERS, his EXAMPLE, and his
ADVICE.

As to his prayers -- I shall carry with me to my grave, says he, addressing
himself to us, my un^^asing vows, that heaven may continue to you the choicest
tokens of its beneficence -- that your union and brotherly affection may be
perpetual -- that the free constitution which is the work of your own hands,
may be sacredly maintained -- that its administration in every department may
be stamped with wisdom and virtue -- that in short the happiness of the people
of these states, under the blessings of heaven, may be made complete, by so
careful a preservation, and so prudent an use of Liberty, as will acquire to
them the glory of recommending it to the applause, the affection and adoption
of every nation which is stranger to it. O divine prayer! would to God it could
be uttered every Sabbath, in all places of prayer throughout the Union, and
with the same heaven-assaulting fervor with which it flowed from his full
soul!.!

As to his advice, hear how earnestly he entreats us -- to improve the
extraordinary opportunities of happiness which heaven has put into our hands.
How particularly does he conjure us to reflect on the infinite importance of
national union to our collective and individual welfare -- to cherish a cordial
and immovable attachment to it -- to accustom ourselves to think and speak of
it as of the palladium of our political safety and prosperity; watching for its
preservation with jealous anxiety; discountenancing whatever may suggest even a
suspicion that it can in any event ever be abandoned; and indignantly frowning
upon the first dawning of every attempt to alienate any portion of our country
from the rest, or to enfeeble the sacred ties which now link together the
various parts. For this you have every inducement of sympathy and interest.
Citizens, by birth or choice, of a common country, that country has a right to
concentrate your affections. The name of American which belongs to you as a
nation must always exalt the just pride of patriotism, more than any title
taken from the state in which you may have been born. With but slight
difference you have the same religion, manners, habits, and political
principles. You have in a common cause, ^ought and triumphed together; the
independence and liberty you possess, are the work of joint councils, and joint
efforts, of common dangers, sufferings and successes.

O! let us consider that our country is the common mother of us all -- the
cradle of our existence -- the nursery of our youth -- the guardian of our
manhood -- the sacred circle that embraces our wives, our parents, our
children, our liberties, our laws and every thing on earth dear and valuable to
us. She is also the precious bank in which we all have, in common, our shares,
and must therefore bear our part in whatever good or ill befalls her. If her
liberty be destroyed none of us can escape the chains. If her credit sink, each
man's fortune sinks with it. If foreigners press our seamen, beggar our
merchants and ruin our trade, every man suffers.

If national vice abound, if luxury, sloth, duelling, and sedition prevail,
increasing the debt and hastening the downfall of the country; every individual
must bear his part of the heart-ache and wretchedness that ensue. On the
contrary, if public virtues flourish, if unanimity in council, valor in the
field, industry and economy every where prevail; the blessing extends to all:
Every man is crowned with the glory, feasted with the plenty, and partakes in
the joy that gladdens the dear common mother!

O for WASHINGTON's flaming patriotism! That divine cement of nations! Without
which a people, though numerous as the sands of the desert, are but as the sands
of the desert, loose and scattered before every blast. While a nation, though
few in number, but welded together, by patriotism, and edged with public
virtue, become, like an ax of steel, sufficient to cut its resistless way
through whole forests of ^oes. For proof, see the little republics, of Greece!
Mere mole-hills on the map of nations; but nurseries of immortal patriots,
educated in the school of virtue, and led on by Leonidas and Liberty. See, I
say, these little republics, these virtuous few, this noble band of brothers,
invaded by the great King of Persia at the head of an army of at least fifteen
hundred thousand men! Expectation stands in horror, looking to see the Greeks
suddenly swept away by the b^som of destruction. But, accustomed from earliest
infancy to love their country -- invigorated by rig^d temperance -- enured to
manly to^l -- and c^^^ely united in the same great interests, this handful of
brave republicans met Xerxes and his ^^st of slaves, and gave them the most
signal overthrow ever recorded in history.

But no nation under the sun, ever exhibited a more brilliant display of the
power of patriotism than the ancient Romans. When Carthage, proud Mistress of
the Sea, made war, with all her wealth against the Roman poverty, she found the
result very different from her expectations. The reason is plain. Gold and
silver may easily be exhausted, but public virtue and fortitude never can. Even
after loosing two hundred and fifty thousand of their best troops, the Romans
would (...) hearken to any terms. No! Let us die, to a man, rather than
outlive the ruin of our country, was the universal cry. Every citizen threw
aside his own business and pressed to take up arms in defense of his country;
and not only refused to receive pay, but eagerly offered for the public good,
all the gold and silver in his possession. The behavior of the women, to their
immortal honor, was equally great and disinterested. The Romans-prevailed.
Indeed it is hardly possible for human force to prevail against such
magnanimous patriots who feel, that, without virtue, life is pain and woe, and
that without liberty, even virtue mourns and looks around for happiness in vain.

Such was the patriotism which raised the republics of ancient Greece and Rome
to be the Mistresses of the world. And such, through life, was the patriotism of
WASHINGTON. While yet a youth, the tender down hardly formed on his ruddy
cheek, he hears that the French and Indians have lifted the tomahawk and are
butchering the frontier inhabitants. He ^ees the grim ruffians bursting into
the unguarded Cabin. -- The father and the husband, shot down, lies weltering
in his own heart's blood -- while the wretched mother and her helpless little
ones, with heart-piercing shrieks, and eyes wild-starting from their sockets,
fly, but fly in vain, from their bloody pursuers! -- He starts up burning for
vengeance. The Allegh^nies are not seen before him; rivers shrink to rills, and
immense ^orests to scanty groves. Full-nerved with patriot rage, he rushes upon
the murderers of his countrymen, as the bounding Lion upon the wretch who has
invaded his brindled cubs. Bloody were the balls of his rifles in the battle of
the roaring Kan^away, when the painted children of the foe fled to their
distant lands.

And in 1774, when Lord North had resolved, Uzzah-like, to lay his unhallowed
hand upon the sacred ark of our liberties, then it was that the patriotism of
WASHINGTON broke forth in a blaze of glory to himself, and of honor to human
nature.

He saw, with aching heart, the black cloud that was gathering over his
country, the fearful odds marshalled in dread array against us; thirteen
millions, against three! Veteran armies, against raw militia! Powerful navies,
bridging the Atlantic, against sloops and schooners! Britain, in fine, wealthy,
warlike Britain coming on, in stepmother wrath, resolved that her children
should down on marrow bones and take her yoke. Possessing a princely fortune
WASHINGTON might easily have slipped away from a storm which, indeed, he had
very little of this world's reason to persuade him to encounter. For he knew
very well what sort of promotion the Scotch Lairds met with in 1745, and had
abundant cause to expect, that, in case of equal success, he should be equally
promoted. And besides, he had no children for whose dear sakes nature might
rouse him up to meet such risks. No daughters, meanly studious of ornaments to
please the enslavers of their country; no sons to wear the galling chain, and
tread lightly in presence of her haughty Lordlings. Hence one of his European
friends advised him to quit a scene of danger to which he had such slender
ties, and fly with him to the safe and pleasant shores of Europe. What, replied
WASHINGTON, shall I forsake my mother, because she is in danger? The other
observed that COL. WASHINGTON had not perhaps duly appreciated the pleasures,
he was renouncing, the dangers he was incurring. God forbid, rejoined
WASHINGTON, that I should ever appreciate pleasure, opposite to duty, or shrink
from dangers when my country calls. No! I had rather suffer with her, than
reign with her oppressors. His conduct was agreeable to his principles. In the
ever memorable 1775, he embraced his weeping consort, and went forth the
Leonidas of his country, resolved to fix her liberties or find a glorious
grave. For seven long years he kept the fields of Iron war, with no dainties,
but common soldiers fare; A gentleman assured me that dining one day at
headquarters in company with a number of officers, he expected, as was very
natural, to have had a fine swig at some good drink, such as Porter, Punch,
Wine, etc. but how did his palate fall, on hearing the general call out, Come
gentlemen, here is plenty of Whiskey and water, or, of water and Whiskey; or
here is Whiskey by itself, or water by itself; don't be bashful but call freely.
no music, but clashing arms and thundering guns, no pleasures, but his toils
and watching for us. At any period of this long conflict, he might, no doubt,
have exchanged our liberties for myriads of shining gold, or highest seats of
purpled honor. But WASHINGTON was not born to blast the hopes of millions, or
bid the Genius of his country hang her head and weep.

Greece and Rome have boasted, and justly too, of their great patriots, who
after rendering immortal services to their country, would accept no pecuniary
rewards. Of the same disinterested and noble quality was the patriotism of
WASHINGTON. For after having steered the trembling bark of his country through
all the storms and tempests of a perilous war; after having by the help of the
Almighty, conducted her in safety into the port of honorable peace and glorious
independance, he would receive no Gold. No: Gold is the counterpoise of
services done, but say Americans! what Gold could counterpoise services like
his, when, after the dread explosion at York town, he saw the black storm of
war passing away, and the sweet beams of liberty gilding again our happy plains.

The patriotism of the Roman Emperor, Alexander, has been celebrated through
all ages, because he was never known to give any place through favor or
friendship, but to employ those only whom both himself and the Senate looked on
as the best qualified to serve the country. In our WASHINGTON we meet this
great and honest Emperor over again. For in choosing men to serve his country,
WASHINGTON knew no recommendation but merit; had no favorite but wor^h. No
relations however near, no friends however dear, stood any chance for places
under him provided he knew men better qualified to fill them. His great soul
was so truly republican, so perfectly abhorrent of every thing like
selfishness, that during the whole of his administration he was never known to
advance even as individual of his own name and family.

The British with good reason admire and extol Admiral Blake as one of the
bravest and best of Patriots, because, though he had no love for Oliver Cromwell,
yet he ^ought like a hero for him, and with his dying breath exhorted his men
"to love their country as a common mother, and, no matter what hands the
government might chance to fall into, to fight for her like good children."

The same truly filial spirit was in WASHINGTON. Equally anxious was he that we
should all so dearly love our country and (...) at the idea of party spirit,
that leaven of hell, whose fatal fermentation dissolves the sacred cement of
union and introduces all the horrors of civil war.

The Roman historians have extolled their Cincinnatus to the heavens, because
that after having, in a day of great public danger, taken command of his
country's forces, and entirely defeated the enemy, he hastened, laden with
honors, to the Senate, piously resigning the powers with which they had
entrusted him, and then cheerfully returned to cultivate his little farm, (of
four acres) from which he had been called to lead the armies of his country. O
wondrous man! O prodigy and pride of purest republican virtue! May each
exalted American imitate thy glorious example. WASHINGTON imitated! WASHINGTON
equalled it! For after having beg^n, continued, and ended for his country, the
most glorious revolution that this or any other age ever beheld, after having
through his unparalled worth obtained a confidence and power supreme and
absolute, At one period of the great revolutionary war Congress offered, and
actually settled the supreme power on our WASHINGTON, but, thinking it a
dangerous precedent, the hero returned it.
he hastened, at the call of duty, to resign that power into the revered hands
of Congress, and returned to the dignified station of a virtuous private
citizen; yes, he returned with heaven in his soul and glory eternal on his
name, to enjoy the welcome shade, and delicious fruits, of that blessed tree of
liberty, which, with divine help, his own right hand had planted.

WASHINGTON's INDUSTRY.
But of all the virtues that adorned the life of this great man, there is none
more worthy of our imitation than his admirable industry. It is to this virtue
in her WASHINGTON, that America stands indebted for services past calculation;
and it is from this virtue, that WASHINGTON himself, has snatched a wreathe of
glory that shall never fade away. O that the good genius of America may
prevail! That the example of this her favorite son may but be universally
adopted! Soon shall our land be freed from all those sloth-begotten Demons
which now haunt and torment us! For, whence do all our miseries proceed, but
from our lack of industry? In a land like this, which heaven has blessed above
all lands: A land abounding with the fish and fleshpots of Egypt, and ^lowing
with the choicest milk and honey of Canaan; a land, where the poorest Lazarus
may get his fifty pence a day for commonest labor; and buy daintiest bread of
Corn flour for less than a penny a pound! Why is any man hungry, or thirsty, or
naked, or in prison? Why, but for his own most unpardonable sloth! But alas!
What would it avail, though the blessed shade of WASHINGTON, were to descend from
his native skies, and, with an Angel's voice recommend industry as the handmaid
of health, wealth, innocence, and happiness to man! A notion from the land of
lies, has taken too deep root among some that "labor is a low-lived thing, fit
for none but Negro-(...) dress and pleasure are the only accomplishments for a
gentleman!" But does it become a gentleman to saunter about living on the
charity of his Relations -- to suffer himself to be dunned by his creditors --
and like a hunted wolf to fly from the face of Sheriffs and Constables? Is it
like a gentleman to take a generous woman from her parents, and reduce her to
beggary -- to see even her bed sold from under her, and herself and weeping
infants turned out of doors? -- Is it like a gentleman to reduce one's children
to rags, and to drive them, like the birds of heaven, to hedges and highways to
pick berries, filling their pale bloated bodies with diseases? Or is it like a
gentleman to bring up one's sons in sloth, pleasure, and dress, as young
Noblemen, and then leave them without estates, profession, or trade, to turn
gamblers, sharpers or horse-thieves? "From such gentlemen, O save my country
Heaven!" was WASHINGTON's perpetual prayer, the emphatical prayer of his life
and great example! In the ear of wisdom, that was heard incessantly calling
aloud "He is the real gentleman, who cheerfully contributes his every exertion
to accomplish heaven's favorite designs, the beauty, order and happiness of
human life -- whose industry appears in a plentiful house, and smiling wife, in
the decent apparel of his children, and in their good education and virtuous
manners -- who is not afraid to see any man on earth, but meets his creditor
with a smiling countenance, and with the welcome music of gold and silver in
his hand -- Who exerts an honest industry for wealth that he may become as a
watercourse in a thirsty land, a source of refreshment to a thousand poor."

Yes, my dear countrymen, this is to be the real gentleman, whose life is
filled up with honorable toils, crowned with plenty, enjoyed with health,
dignified by usefulness and sweetened by the blessings of the poor! How
charming the thought That each sweet hour flies well improved away,
That generous deeds distinguish every day.


This was the life, this the example set by WASHINGTON. His whole inheritance
was but a small tract of poor broken ^^nd in Stafford County, opposite to
Fredericksburg, (where he once lived) and a few Negroes. This appearing utterly
insufficient to those purposes of honor and usefulness, with the charms of
which his mind seems to have been early smitten, he resolved to make up the
deficiency by dint of great industry and economy. For these virtues how
excellent! how rare in youth! WASHINGTON was admirably distinguished when but a
boy. At a time when many young men have no higher ambition than a fine coat and
a trolic, " often have I seen him, says the Reverend Mr. Lee Massey, riding
about the country with his surveying instruments at his saddle," enjoying the
double satisfaction, of obliging his fellow citizens by surveying their lands,
and of making money, not meanly to hoard, but generously to lend to any worthy
object that asked it. This early industry was one of the first steps to
WASHINGTON's preferment. It attracted on him the notice and admiration of all
his very numerous acquaintance, and, which was still much more in his favor, it
gave such strength to his constitution, such vigor to his mind, such an ardor
and spirit for adventure, that he was ready, like a young Lion, to leap on any
glorious enterprise, no matter how difficult or dangerous. Witness the
expedition from Williamsburgh, through the Indian country to the Ohio, which he
undertook for Governor Dinwiddie, in 1773, and when he was but 21. Indeed his
uncommon attachment to industry and useful life, made such an impression on the
public mind in his favor, that by the time he was one and twenty he was
appointed Major and adjutant General of the Virginia forces. There was at this
time a young fellow in Williamsburgh, by the name of Jack B -- who possessed a
considerable vivacity, great good nature and several accomplishments of the
boon companion sort; he could tell a good story, sing agreeably, scrape a
little on the fiddle, and cut as many capers to the ^^ne of old Roger as any
Buck a-going. -- And being, besides a young fellow of fortune, and son of an
intimate acquaintance, Jack was a great favorite of the governor, and very much
at his house. But all this could not save poor Jack from the twinges of envy.
For, on hearing every body talk in the praise of Major WASHINGTON, he could not
help saying one day at the governor's table "I wonder what makes the people so
wrapped up in Major Washington; I think, begging your excellency's pardon, I
had as good a right to expect a majority." "A^, Jack, replied the governor,
when we want a little diversion, we send for you, but when the country wants a
man for business, we send for Major Washington."
For these services he recieved a handsome salary from the crown. By the death
of an elder brother he acquired the Mount-Vernon estate, and a much larger, by
the affections of the young and Amiable Mrs. Martha Cu^tis, who, in the year
1759 and 27th of his age, with her hand and heart gave him possession of one of
the finest estates in Vriginia. Here was a proper rise for you! a rise which to
little minds would have appeared a sufficient apology for sloth, high living,
and the gout. But on WASHINGTON, whose industry was founded on principle, it
produced no other effect than gratitude to heaven, and, if possible, and
increase of exertion to gratify more amply his favorite wish, the wish to be
useful.

Never was the great Alfred more anxious to improve his time than our
WASHINGTON; and it appears that, like Alfred, he divided his time into the four
grand departments of sleep, devotion, recreation, and business. On the hours of
business, whether in his own or in his country's service, he would allow
nothing to infringe. While in camp no company however illustrious, no pleasures
however elegant, no conversation however agreeable, could prevail on him to
neglect his business -- The moment that his hour of duty was come, he would
fill his glass and with a smile call out to his friends around the social
board, "well gentlemen, here is bon repos," Bon repos, is a French cant for
good night. WASHINGTON drank it as a signal to break up; for the moment the
company had swallowed the Generals bon repos, it was hats and off. General
WAYNE, who happily for America, understood fighting better than French, had
some how or other taken up a notion, that this same bon repos, to whom
WASHINGTON always made such conscience of giving his last bumper, must have
been some great warrior of the times of old. Having by some extraordinary l^^k
gotten hold of two or three dozen of good old wine, he invited a parcel of
hearty fellow-officers to dine with him and help him to break them to the
health of America. Soon as the cloth was removed and the bottles on the table,
the hero of Stony Point cried out "come my brave fellows, fill your glasses,
here is old bon repos forever." The officers were thunderstruck, but having
turned off their glasses, rose up one and all, to go. "Hey-day! what is all
this, gentlemen what is all this?" why did not you drink bon repos or good
night? "what! is that the meaning of it? "Yes" "Well then damn bon repos, and
take your seats again, for by the life of WASHINGTON, you sha^t, stir a peg,
till we have started every drop of our drink,"
and immediately withdraw to business.

While he was employed in choosing a place on the Potomak for the Federal City,
his industry was not less remarkable. Knowing how little is generally done
before breakfast, he made it a rule to rise so early as to have breakfast over,
and be on horseback by the time the sun was up. Let the rising generation
remember that he was then sixty years of age!

On his farm, his husbandry of time was equally exemplary. He contemplated a
great object; an object worthy of WASHINGTON. He aimed at teaching his
countrymen the art of enriching their lands, and, consequently, of rendering
the condition of man and beast more plentiful and happy. He had seen thousands
of acres, which, by constant cultivations, had lost the power of covering their
nakedness even with a suit of humble sedge; he had seen thousands of wretched
cattle, which, driven out houseless and hayless into the cold wintry rains,
presented such trembling spectacles of starvation and misery as were more than
enough to start the tear into pity's eye. To remedy these cruel evils, (which
certainly they are, for he who lent us these animals, never, surely, meant that
we should make their lives a curse to them, much less to our children, hardened
by such daily sights of misery,) WASHINGTON generously set himself to make
artificial meadows, to cultivate fields of clover, and to raise the most
nutritious vegetables, such as Cabbage, Turnips, Scarcity and Potatoes; of
which last article he planted in one year 700 bushels! To render these vast
supplies of food the more beneficial to his cattle, he built houses of shelter
for them all. " He showed me a barn, says Brissot, upwards of a hundred feet
square, and of brick, designed as a storehouse for his Corn Potatoes, Turnips,
etc, around which he had constructed ^^ables of an amazing length, for his
Cattle," every one of which had a stall well littered with leaves or straw; and
a rack and manger well furnished with hay and provender.

The pleasures and profits arising from such an arrangement, are incalculable.
How delicious must it have been to a man of WASHINGTON's feelings, to reflect
that, even in the worst of weather, every creature, on his extensive farms, was
warm and comfortably provided! To have seen his numerous flocks and herds,
gamboling around him through excess of joy and fullness of fat! To have beheld
his steps washed with butter, and his dairy floated with rivers of milk! To
have seen his once naked fields and frog-croaking pocosins, now by clearance or
manure converted into Meadows, standing thick with heavy Timothy and Clover!
While his farm-yards were piled with such quantities of litter and manure as
afforded a constantly increasing fertility to his lands!

Here was an employment worthy of WASHINGTON; an employment which we might
indeed have expected from him, who, through life, had studied the b^st
interests of his countrymen; who, first, as a soldier, had defended them from
slavery and crowned them with liberty; then as a statesman, had preserved them
from war and secured to them all the blessings of peace, and now, as the last
but not least service of his li^e, was teaching them the great arts of
improving their farms, multiplying their cattle, enriching their lands, and
thus pouring a flood of plenty and of comfort through the joyful habitations of
man and beast.

Full of this greatly-benevolent idea, no wonder that he was so frugal of his
time, and that, though the most hospitable of all the hospitable Virginians, he
would not suffer the society of his dearest friends to take him entirely from
his business. Long accustomed to find his happiness in doing his duty, he had
attained to that Royal-Arch degree of virtue, as to be restless and uneasy
while duty was neglected. Hence of all men that ever lived, WASHINGTON was the
most rigidly observant of those hours of business which were necessary to the
successful management of his vast concerns. "Gentlemen," he would often say to
his friends who visited him, "I must beg leave of absence a few hours in the
forenoon: here is plenty of amusements, books, music, etc. and consider
yourselves at home, and be happy." He came in about 12 o'clock, and then, as if
animated by the consciousness of having done his duty, and that all was going
on right, he would give himself up to his friends and to decent mirth the rest
of the evening. But his mornings were always his own. Long before the sun had
peeped into the chambers of the sluggard, WASHINGTON was on horseback and out
among his overseers and servants, and neither himself, nor any about him, were
allowed to eat the bread of idleness. The happy effects of such industry were
obvious. Well manured and tilled, his lands yielded a grateful return, and it
was at once pleasing and astonishing to behold the immense quantities of ^ine
hay, of fat meats and choice grain that were raised on his farms. His servants
fared sumptuously, his cattle rarely had the hollow-horn, and the surplus of
his produce, sold to the merchants, furnished bread to the needy* and a revenue
to himself more than sufficient to defray his vast expenditures, and to spread
a table of true Virginia hospitality for those crowds of friends and foreigners
whom affection or curiosity led to visit him.

O! Divine Industry? Queen Mother of all our virtues and of all our blessings!
What is there of GREAT or of GOOD in this wide world that springs not from thy
royal bounty? And O! thou infernal sloth! Fruitful fountain of all our crimes
and curses! What is there of mean or of miserable in the lot of man that flows
not from thy hellish malice?

What was it that betrayed David, otherwise the best of kings, into the worst
of crimes? IDLENESS. Sauntering about idly on the terrace of his palace, he saw
the naked beauties of the distant, bathing (...). Lust, adultery and murder
were the consequences.

What was it that brought on a ten years war between the Greeks and Trojans?
IDLENESS. Young Paris, the Coxcomb of Troy, having nothing to do strolls over
to the Court of Menelaus, (a Greek Prince) whose beauteous wife, Hellen, the
black-eyed Queen of love, he corrupts and runs off with to Troy. A bloody was
ensues; Paris is slain; his Father, brothers, and myriads of wretched subjects
are slaughtered; and Troy, the finest City of all Asia, is red^^ed to ashes!

What was it that hurried poor Mr. A -- d to that horrid act of suicide which
froze the blood of all who heard it? Idleness. His young wife was all that we
could conceive of sweetness, tenderness and truth in an Angel's form; and his
three beauteous babes were the three graces, in smiling infancy. But! On
wretched man! Having nothing to do, he strolled to a tavern and to a
card-table, where he lost his all! Five thousand pounds, lately ^ettled on him
by a fond father! He awakes to horrors unutterable! What will become of his
ruined wife! his beggared babes! Believing the torments of the damned far more
tolerable, he drives the scorching bullets through his brain, and flies a
shrieking ghost to join the mournful throng!

What is the cause of all that horrid uproar which often throws our towns into
such fear and trembling, on the evenings of our great hollidays? Idleness.
Merciful heavens! what wild tumultuous throng is that, on yonder restless,
^eaving field? What clouds of dust! What stunning din of ten thousand
discordant voices, whooping and hallooing, cursing and swearing! Why surely the
Devil's millennium is begun, and all hell has turned out to celebrate the
joyous occasion! No, it is no more than the tag-rag-and-bob-tail of a town,
just escaped from the sobering hand of industry, and got out there together
with sharpshin in pocket, drinking and roaring, racing and cock-fighting,
betting, boxing, and playing the D -- (...) in a thousand shocking shapes.

O sad sight! See you tall genteel young man, in powder and ruffles, standing
before his judges, trembling like an Aspen, and pale and blank as the picture
of guilt; while in the crowded courthouse, every countenance, filled with pity
or contempt, is fixed upon him. Alas! what could have brought him to this?
Idleness. His father, happening to possess 500 acres of poor Land, and a few
Negroes, thought it would be an eternal disgrace to his family to bring up this
son (though he had many) to be a mechanic. No, he must, like the rest of his
brothers, live the fine gentleman, grown to man's estate, and having no
profession, trade or habit of industry to support this pleasant life, he took
to Horse-stealing! If we had leisure to wait, we should presently see this
unhappy youth, on receiving sentence of death, bursting out into sobs and cries
sufficient almost to make us wish we had never been born. But let us make haste
and leave these accursed scenes of shame, misery and death, into which idleness
never ^ails to bring poor deluded youth. Yes, let us hurry away from these
haunts of horror, and joyfully return to our beloved WASHINGTON and to his
health -- wealth -- and glory-giving Goddess, industry.

What is it that braces the nerves, purifies the blood, and hands down the
flame of life, bright and sparkling, to old age! What but rosy-cheeked
Industry. See WASHINGTON so invigorated by constant exercise, that, though
close on the heel of three score and ten when he fell asleep, he was still
fresh as at forty, straight as a young Grenadier, and girding on his patriot
sword, ready, once more at his country's call, to lead his eager warriors to
the field. What is it that preserves the morals of young men, and secures to
them all the blessings of unblemished character and unbroken health? What but
snow-^obed industry. See WASHINGTON, under the guardianship of industry, walked
the slippery paths of youth safe and incorrupt, though born in a country whose
fertility and climate furnished both the means and the invitation to vice.
Early smitten with the love of glory; early engaged in the noble pursuit of
knowledge, of independence and of usefulness, he had no eyes to see bad
examples nor ensnaring objects, no ears to hear horrid oaths nor obscene
language, no leisure for impure passion nor criminal amors; hence he enjoyed,
O! blessed gift of industry! that innocence, that purity of soul, which is
rightly called its 'sunshine;' and which impressed a dignity on his character,
and gave him a beauty and loveliness in the eyes of men, that contributed more
to his rise in the world than young people are aware. And what is it that
raises a young man from poverty to wealth, from obscurity to never dying fame?
What but Industry? See Washington, born of humble parents and in humble
circumstances -- born in a narrow nook and obscure corner of the British
plantations! yet, lo! what great things wonder-working Industry can bring out
of this unpromising Nazareth? While but a youth, Washington manifested such a
noble contempt of sloth, such a manly spirit to be always learning or doing
something useful or clever, that he was the praise of all who knew him. And,
though several years yet on the forenoon side of twenty, so high were the hopes
entertained of him, he was appointed a county surveyor! Arduous task! But
WASHINGTON's industry was a full match for it. Such was the alertness with
which he carried on his surveys; such the neatness and accuracy of his plats
and drafts, that he met with universal applause. Full-^ed and flushed with so
much fare of praise, a fare of all others the most toothsome and wholesome to
generous minds, our young Eagle began now to flap his wings of honest ambition
and to pant for nobler darings. A fair occasion was soon offered; a dangerous
expedition through the Indian wilds, as before mentioned, to the French
Mamelukes, on the Ohio. Nobody else having a stomach to such an adventure,
WASHINGTON's offer was gladly accepted, and he executed that hazardous and
important trust with such diligence and propriety, that he received the thanks
of the governor and council. Honors came down on him now in showers: He was
appointed Major and Adjutant General of the Virginia forces -- then a colonel
-- after that a member in the house of Burgesses -- next generalissimo of the
armies of the United States; and finally chief magistrate of the Union.

All these great and arduous appointments served but the more to display the
wonderful effects of his industry. For such was his economy of time, and so
admirable his method and regularity in doing business that he always kept ahead
of it. No letters of consequence were unanswered -- no reasonable expectations
were disappointed -- no necessary information was ever neglected. Neither the
congress nor the governors of the several states, nor the officers of his army,
nor the British generals nor even the Overseers and Stewards on his farms, were
uninformed of what he expected from them. Nobody concerned with him, was idle
or fretted for want of knowing what to do.

O admirable man! O Great Preceptor to his Country! no wonder every body
honored him who honored every body; for the poorest beggar that wrote to him
on business, was sure to receive a speedy and decisive answer. No wonder every
body loved him, who, by his unwearied attention to the public good, manifested
the tend^rest love for every body. No wonder that his country (...) to honor
him, who showed such a high sense of their honors, that he would not allow even
a leaf of them to wither, but so watered them all with the refreshing streams
of his industry, that the continu^^ (...) with ever-increasing glory on his
head.

Since the day that God created man on the earth, none ever displayed the power
of industry more signally than did GEORGE WASHIGNTON* Had he, as Prince of
Wales, or, as Daup^in of France, rendered such great services, or attained such
immortal honors, it would not have seemed so mavelous in our eyes. -- But,
that a poor young man, with no King, Lords, nor Commons to back him; with no
Princes, nor Whores of Princes, to curry favor for him -- with no gold but his
virtue, no silver but his industry, should with this old-fashioned, King
David's coin, have stolen away the hearts of all the American Israel, and from
a sheep cot, have ascended the throne of his country's affections, and gotton
himself a name among the mighty ones of the earth! This is mavelous indeed!
It is surely the noblest panegyric ever yet paid to that great virtue,
industry, which has "length of days in her right hand, and in her left hand
riches and honors."

Reader! Go thy way, think of WASHINGTON and HOPE. Though humble thy birth, low
thy fortune, and few thy friends, still think of WASHINGTON and -- HOPE. Like
him honor thy God and delight in glorious toil, then like him "thou shall
stand before kings; thou shall not stand before common m^n."

The motives to industry are as numerous as HEALTH, INNOCENCE, LONGEVITY
INDEPENDENCE, and in short, all the Honors and (...) that man can enjoy between
the cradle and the grave. But among these there is none so animating to a
generous mind as the godlike pleasure it affords of doing GOOD.

WASHINGTON'S BENEVOLENCE.
If ever man rejoiced in the divine administration, and cordially endeavored
to imitate it, by diffusing blessings around him, it was WASHINGTON. Taught by
religion, that "God is love," and that he must, by the laws of his own nature,
delight most in those of his rational creatures who most resemble him in love,
and in doing good to their brethren. -- Taught by experience, that, betwixt
souls, love is the only principle of union and of bliss, which, by uniting our
hearts gives us the fullest and sweetest participation of each other's joys,
and at the same time enables us to bear one another's infirmities and injuries,
with a brotherly generosity. -- Taught by observation that love is the only
cosmetic, or beautifier: that however youth, beauty, and wit may dazzle for a
moment, it is goodness alone that can captivate our hearts forever: convinced,
I say, of these three precious perquisites of love, WASHINGTON seems early to
have been smitten with her heavenly charms, and early to have studied that
goodness which made him so singularly the delight of all mankind. It was this
amiable quality which completed the character of our WASHINGTON, and by
spreading over his great virtues and talents the sweetly-beaming veil of
goodness, rendered him at once the most endearing and venerable of human beings.

The Marquis De Chastel^ux* who visited him in camp, tells us that he was
astonished and delighted beyond measure, to see this great American living
among his officers and men, as a father among his children, who at once revered
and loved him with a filial tenderness.

Brissot, another famous French traveller, assures us, that, throughout the
continent, every body spoke of WASHINGTON as of a father.

This dearest and best of all appellations, "The father of his country," was
the precious fruit of that noble spirit of benevolence, which he so carefully
cultivated through every age and stage of his life. A singular instance of
which we meet with in 1754, and the 22d year of his age.

He was stationed at Alexandria with his regiment, the only one in the colony,
an^ of which he was Colonel. There happened at this time to be an election in
Alexandria for members of the Assembly, and the contest (...) high between
colonel George Fairfax and Mr. William (...)* WASHINGTON was the warm friend of
Fairf^x, (...) a Mr. William Pain headed the friends of Elzey. A (...)
happening to take place in the Courthouse yard, WASHINGTON, a thing very
uncommon with (...) got warm, and, which was still more uncommon, said
something that offended Pain, whereupon the little gentleman, who, though but
a cub in size, was the old Lion in heart, raised his sturdy hickory, and, at a
single blow, brought our hero to the ground. Several of WASHINGTON'S officers
being present, whipped out their cold Irons in an instant, and it was looked
that there would have been murder off-hand. To make bad worse; his regiment
hearing how he had been served, bolted out from their barracks, with every man
his weapon in his hand, threatening dreadful vengeance on those who had dared
to knock down their Colonel after that sort. Happily for Mr. Pain and his
party, WASHINGTON recovered time enough to go out and meet his enraged
soldiers, and after thanking them for this expression of their concern for him,
assured them that he was not hurt in the least, and begged them, as they loved
him or their duty, to return peaceably to their barracks. As for himself, he
went to his room, generously chastising his imprudence which had thus struck
out a spark, that had like to have thrown the whole town into a flame. Finding,
on mature reflection, that he had been the aggressor, he resolved to make Mr.
Pain honorable reparation by asking his pardon on the morrow! No sooner had he
made this noble resolution, than, recovering that delicious gaiety, which ever
accompanies good purposes in a virtuous mind, he went to a ball in town that
night and behaved as pleasantly as though nothing had happened: Glorious proof
that great souls, like great ships, are not affected by those little puffs
which would overset feeble minds with passion, or sink them with spleen!

The next day he went to a tavern, and wrote a polite note to Mr. Pain, whom
he requested to meet him. Mr. Pain took it for a challenge, and repaired to
the tavern, not without expecting to see a pair of pistols produced. But what
was his surprise on entering the chamber to see a decanter of wine and glasses
on the table! WASHINGTON arose, and, in a very friendly manner met him, and
gave him his hand. Mr. Pain, said he, to (...) sometimes is nature; to rectify
error, is always, glory. I find I was wrong in the affair of yesterday, you
have had I think some satisfaction; and if you think that sufficient, here is my
hand, let us be friends.

Admirable youth! Noble speech! No wonder since it charms us so that it had
such an effect on Mr. Pain, who from that moment became the most enthusiastic
admirer and friend of WASHINGTON, and ready at any time, for his sake, to
charge up to a battery of two and forty poun^ers.

What a lesson for our young countrymen! Had WASHINGTON been one of the race of
little men how sadly different would have been his conduct on this occasion!
Instead of going that night to the ball, and acting the lively agreeable
friend, as if nothing had happened, he would, like an angry viper that had been
trod on, have retired to his chamber. There he would have found no such
entertainments as WASHINGTON had at the ball; no sprightly music -- no
delicious wines -- no sweetly-smiling friends: on the contrary, all the
tortures of a soul brooding over its indignities, until reflection had whipped
it up into pangs of rage unutterable, while all the demons of hell with
blood-stained torches pointing at his bleeding honor, cried out revenge!
revenge! revenge! There in his chamber he would have passed the gloomy night,
in preparing his pistols, moulding his balls, or with furious looks, and
hard-gritted teeth, driving his bullets through the body of his enemy chalked
out on the wall. The next morning would have seen him on the field, and, in
language, lately heard in this state, calling out to his hated antagonist, you
have injured me, sir, beyond reconciliation, and by G -- d I will put you to
death, if I can. While his antagonist in a style equally musical and christian,
rejoins, kill and be damned! Pop go the pistols, down tumbles one of the
combatants; while the murderer with knocking knees and looks of Cain flies from
the avenger of blood. The murdered man is carried to his house a ghastly,
bloody corpse. Merciful God! what a scene ensues! some are stupefied with
horror, others sink as lifeless to the floor. His tender sisters,
wild-screaming with despair, throw themselves on their dead brother and kiss
his ice-cold lip^; while his aged parents, crushed under unutterable woe, go
down brokenhearted to the grave.

Thus bloody and miserable might have been the end of WASHINGTON or of Mr.
Pain, had WASHINGTON been one of those poor deluded young men, who are
determined to be great, and to be talked of in news papers, in spite of God or
devil. But, WASHINGTON was not born to exemplify those horrid tragedies, which
cowards create in society by pusillanimously giving way to their bad passions.
No! he was born to teach his countrymen, what sweet peace and harmony might for
ever smile in the habitations of men, if all had but the courage, like himself,
to obey the sacred voice of JUSTICE and of HUMANITY. By firmly obeying these,
he preserved his hands unstained by the blood of a fellow man; and his soul
unharrowed by the cruel tooth of never-dying remorse. By firmly obeying these,
he won those smiles of God which convey to the souls of the virtuous, that joy
which the stranger meddleth not with. By firmly obeying these, he preserved a
life, which crowned with deeds of Justice and benevolence, has brought more
glory to God, more good to man, and more honor to himself, than any life ever
lived since the race of man began.

Sons of Columbia! would you know what is true courage? see it defined, see it
exemplified in this act of your great, young countryman. Never man possessed a
more undaunted courage than WASHINGTON: but in him, this noble quality was the
lifeguard of his reason, not the assassin; a ready servant to obey her high
commands, not a bully to insult them; a champion to defend his neighbor's
rights, not a tyrant to trample them under foot. Transported by a sudden
passion, to which all are liable, he offended Mr. Pain who resented it much
too roughly, by knocking him down on the spot. WASHINGTON had it in his power
to have taken ample revenge; and cowards, who have no command over their
passions, would have done it; but duty forbade him, and he had the courage to
obey* Reason whispered the folly of harboring black passions in his soul,
poisoning his peace; he instantly banished them and went to a ball, to drink
sweet streams of friendship from the eyes of happy friends. Again, reason
whispered him that having been the aggressor, he ought to ask Mr. Payne's
pardon, and make friends with him. In this also he had the courage to obey her
sacred voice.

In what history ancient or modern, sacred or profane, can you find in so young
a man, only 22, such an instance of that TRUE HEROIC VAL^R which combats
malignant passions, conquers unreasonable self, rejects the hell of hatred, and
invites the heaven of love into our own bosoms, and into those of our brethren
with whom we may have had a falling out; Joseph forgiving his brethren in the
land of Egypt; David sparing that inveterate seeker of his life, Saul; Sir
Walter Rawleigh pardoning the young man who spat in his face; afford, it is
true, charming specimens of the sublime and beautiful in action, and certainly
such men are the worthies of the world and brightest ornaments of human nature.
But yet none of them have gone beyond WASHINGTON in the affair of Pain.

A few years after this, Pain had a cause tried in Fairfax Court, and
WASHINGTON happened on that day to be in the house. The lawyer on the other
side, finding he was going fast to leeward, thought he would luff up with a
whole broadside at Payne's character; and after raking him fore and aft with
abuse, he artfully bore away under the lee of the jury's prejudices which he
endeavored to inflame against him. "Yes, please your worships, continued be, as
a proof that this Mr. Pain is a most turbulent fellow, and capable of all I
tell you, be pleased to remember, Gentlemen of the Jury, that this is the very
man, who some time ago served our beloved Col. WASHINGTON so barbarously. Yes,
this is the wretch who dared in this very Court-House-yard, to lift up his
impious hand against that greatest and best of men, and knocked him down as
though he had been but a bullock of the Stalls."

This roared out in a thundering tone, and with a tremendous stamp on the
floor, made Pain look very wild, for he saw the countenances of the court
beginning to blacken on him. But WASHINGTON arose immediately and addressed the
Bench --

As to Mr. Payne's character, may it please your worships, said he, we all have
the satisfaction to know that it is perfectly unexceptionable; and with respect
to the little difference which formerly happened between that gentleman and
myself, it was instantly made up, and we have lived on the best terms ever
since: and besides, I could wish all my acquaintance to know, that I entirely
acquit Mr. Pain of blame in that affair, and take it all on myself as the
aggressor.

Mr. Pain used often to relate another anecdote of WASHINGTON, which reflects
equal honor on the goodness of his heart.

"Immediately after the war, said he, when the conquering hero was returned in
peace to his home, with the laurels of victory green and flourishing on his
head; I felt a great desire to see him, and so set out for Mount Vernon. As I
drew near the house, I began to experience a rising fear lest he should call to
mind the blow I had given him in former days. However, animating myself, I
pushed on. WASHINGTON met me at the door with a smiling welcome, and presently
led me into an adjoining room where Mrs. WASHINGTON sat. Here, my dear, said
he, presenting me to his lady, here is the little man you have so often heard
me talk of, and who, on a difference between us one day, had the resolution to
knock me down, big as I am. I know you will honor him as he deserves, for I
assure you he has the heart of a true Virginian. -- He said this* continued Mr.
Pain, with an air which convinced me that his long familiarity with war, had
not robbed him of a single spark of the goodness and nobleness of his heart.
And Mrs. WASHINGTON looked at him. I thought, with a something in her eyes
which showed that he appeared to her greater and lovelier than ever.

" A good (...)* ^aith the divine teacher, brings forth good fruit." No
wonder then that we meet with so many and such delicious fruits of CHARITY in
WASHINGTON, whose soul was so rich in benevolence.

In consequence of his wealth and large landed possessions, he had visits
innumerable from the poor. Knowing the great value of time and of good tempers
to them, he could not bear that they should lose these by long waiting, and
shuffling, and blowing their fingers at his door. He had a room set apart for
the reception of such poor persons as had business with him, and the porter had
orders to conduct them into it, and to let him know it immediately; and so
affectionately attentive was he to them, that, if he was in company with the
greatest characters on the continent when his servant informed him that a poor
man wished to speak to him, he would instantly beg them to excuse him for a
moment, and go and wait on him.

WASHINGTON'S conduct showed that he disliked another practice too common among
some great men, who, not having the power to say yes, nor the heart to say no,
to a poor man, are fain to put him off with a "come again, come again," and
thus trot him backwards and forwards, wasting his time, wearing out his
patience and his shoes, and after all give him the mortification of a
disappointment.

WASHINGTON could not away with such CRUEL KINDNESS. If he could not oblige a
poor applicant he would heartily tell him so at once; but then the goodness of
his heart painted his regret so sensibly on his countenance, that even his
refusals made him friends.

A poor Irishman wanting a little farm, and hearing that WASHINGTON had such an
one to rent, waited on him. WASHINGTON told him that he was sincerely sorry
that he could not assist him for he had just disposed of it. The poor man took
his leave, but not without returning him a thousand thanks! Ah! do you thank me
so heartily for a refusal? "Yes* upon my shoul, now please your Excellency's
honor, and I do thank you a thousand times. For many a great man would have
kept me waiting like a black Negro; but your Excellency's honor has told me
strait off hand that you are sorry, and God bless you for it, that you cannot
help me* and so your honor has done my business for me in no time and less.

The Potomac abounds with the finest Herrings in the world, which, when salted,
furnish not only to the wealthy a charming relish for their tea and coffee, but
also to the poor a delicious substitute for (...). But fond as they are of this
small boned Bacon, as they (...) call it, many of them have not the means to
procure it. WASHINGTON'S heart felt for these poor people and provided a
remedy. He ordered a seine and a batteau to be kept on one of his best fishing
shores on purpose for the poor. If the batteau was lost or the seine spoilt,
which was often the case, he would have them replaced with new ones
immediately. And if the poor who came for fish, were at any time too
weak-handed to haul the seine themselves, they needed but to apply to the
overseer, who had orders from WASHINGTON, to send hands to help them. Thus, all
the poor of his large neighborhood had it in their power to come down in the
season, and catch an abundance of the finest fish for themselves and their
families. In what silver floods were ever yet caught the herrings, which could
have given to WASHINGTON what he tasted, on seeing the poor, driving away from
his shores with carts laden with delicious fish, and carrying home, whooping
and singing, to their smiling wives and children, the rich prize, a whole
year's joy and plenty!

In all his charities, he discovered great judgment and care in selecting
proper objects. Character was the main chance. Mount Vernon had no charms for
lazy, drunken, worthless beggars. Such knew very well that they must carry
their pigs (their vices) to another market. He never failed to remind them of
the great crime of robbing the public of their services, and also the exceeding
cruelty and injustice of snapping up from the really indigent, what little
charity bread there was stirring. But if the character was good; if the poor
petitioner was a sober, honest and industrious person whom Providence had by
sickness or losses, reduced to want, he found a brother in WASHINGTON. It is
incredible what quantities of wool, corn, bacon, flour, clothes, etc. etc. were
annually distributed to the poor from that almost exhaustless heap, which the
blessings of heaven had heaped on this its so industrious and faithful steward.

"I had orders, said Mr. Peake, a sensible, honest manager of one of
WASHINGTON'S plantations, to fill a corn house every year for the sole use of
the poor in my neighborhood, to whom it was a most seasonable and precious
relief; saving numbers of poor women and children from miserable famine, and
blessing them with a cheerful plenteousness of bread."

Mr. Lund Washington, long a manager of his mount Vernon estate, had similar
orders. In one year when corn was so dear (a dollar per bushel) that numbers of
the poor were on the point of starving, Mr. L. Washington, by order of the
General, not only gave away all that could be spared from the granaries, but
bought at that dear rate several hundred bushels* for them!

But it were an endless task to enumerate all the thousand, thousand sweet and
seasonable charities of this good angel of the poor. The wondering stranger
beheld them in the shining eyes and devouring looks of ALL, wherever he went.

When the young men saw him they flocked to the door, and the aged arose and
stood up.

The great men refrained from talking in his presence, and the hearts of the
LITTLE ONES leaped for joy.

Because he fed the poor that cried unto him, and his garment covered the naked.

He was a father of the fatherless, and stood up mightily for him that had none
to help him.

The blessing of him that was ready to perish came upon him, and he caused the
heart of the widow to sing for joy.

Blessed be thy soul, O WASHINGTON, child of generous love! Thou wast as the
black storm of winter to the foes of thy country; but to the children of the
poor, like the soft cloud of summer that droppeth down marrow and fatness! Thou
have ceased among men, and the tears of millions have flowed; but thou art with
HIM who is MIGHTY to REWARD. For the bread which thou gave to thy poor
brethren, thou art now fed with purest manna, and honey from the rocks of
heaven, even Angels food. And for the cloth with which thou did cover their
nakedness, thy covering now is from the looms of Paradise, even robes of
floating gold. Bright sun beam of glory, thou have ceased among men, but thy
shining is with him who is mighty to reward!

But though so kind to the bodies, WASHINGTON was still more kind and costly in
his charities to the minds of the poor. Sensible that a republican government,
that is, a government of the people, can never long subsist where the minds of
the people are not enlightened; he earnestly recommended it to the citizens of
the United States, to promote, as an object of primary importance, institutions
for the general diffusion of knowledge. In this, as indeed in all other cases*
where any thing great or good was to be done, WASHINGTON led the way.

He established a Charity-School in Alexandria, and endowed it with a donation
of four thousand dollars! The interest was regularly paid and expended on the
education of fifteen boys. In 1785, the Assembly of his native state, Virginia,
desirous -- "to embrace, as they said, every suitable occasion of testifying
their sense of the unexampled merits of GEORGE WASHINGTON, ESQUIRE. toward his
country, presented him with fifty shares in the Potomak, and one hundred shares
in the James River Navigation Company; making in the whole, not less than the
enormous sum of fifteen thousand pounds sterling!

Of this public act, they requested the Governor to transmit WASHINGTON a copy.
In answer to which he addressed a very elegant letter to the Governor, "in
which I take the liberty" says he, of returning to the General Assembly,
through your hands, the profound and grateful acknowledgments, inspired by so
signal a mark of their beneficent intentions toward me.

He goes on to beg that they would be so good as to excuse his determined
resolution not to accept a farthing of it for his own use. "But," continued he,
if it should please the General Assembly to permit me to turn the destination
of the fund vested in me, from my private emolument, to objects of a public
nature, it shall be my study in selecting, to prove the sincerity of my
gratitude for the honor conferred on me, by preferring such as may appear most
subservient to the enlightened and patriotic views of the Legislature.

They were very cheerfully submitted to his disposal; and, according to
promise, he appropriated them to works of the greatest public utility; viz. His
shares in the James River Canal, to a College in Rock-bridge County, near the
waters of James River, and his Potomak Shares to a National University to be
erected in the Federal district, on the Great Potomak.

How immortal were his wishes for the good of his country! As if incapable of
being satisfied with all that he had done for her while living, he endeavored
be founding these noble institutions for the diffusion of knowledge and virtue,
to make himself her benefactor when he could live no more. Charming evidence,
that, like Cato, he tasted no happiness equal to that of making others happy.

Since the idea is perfectly correct, that the great Governor of the world must
look, with peculiar benignty and benediction, on those of his children, who
have most distinguished themselves by their dutifulness; may we not indulge the
pleasing hope that these Colleges, founded by such a hand, shall prove the
nurseries of brightest genius and virtue, and that from their sacred halls,
will walk forth in endless succession, the mighty WASHINGTONS, and ADAMSES, the
FRANKLINS and LEES, the JEFFERSONS and MADISONS, etc. etc. of future times! O
that Columbia may live before God! and that the bright days of her peace and
prosperity may never have an end!!

WASHINGTON'S JUSTICE.
But of all the virtues that shed such dignity and grace on the character of
WASHINGTON, there was none so venerable and majestic as his Justice, or
Honesty. This from his youth, he seems to have revered, as the precious pillar
that supports the fair fabric of all social order and happiness.

The Marquis de Chastell^ux observes, that WASHINGTON'S reputation for
incorruptible justice, stood so high, even while a young man, that all the
neighboring gentlemen, if they could but get him as an executor to their
wills, closed their eyes in peace; from a sweetly satisfying sense, that
justice would be done to the families they left behind them, to his care.

Being asked which he thought the greatest man, Aristides the just, or, Caesar
the generous; Oh! Aristides, a thousand times! replied he, with eyes sparkling
with admiration and love of that great man, Had every body been as just as
Aristides, there would have been no Caesar. The one was more than a man, the
other worse than a beast of prey. With such exalted sentiments of justice, no
wonder that the firm-toned WASHINGTON stood through life so immoveably by her
sacred standard: So immoveably, we trust, will our Captains of men of war stand
by the Four and twenty Pounders of their country, with duty and her sixteen
stripes waving over their heads.

The great Turenne is deservedly celebrated by his countrymen the French, for
his delicate sense of justice. The magistrates of a large district, dreading
the march of his numerous army through their fields, vineyards, etc. waited on
him and offered a bag of one hundred thousand crowns, if he would take another
route. He refused their money. Seeing them greatly distressed he hastened to
relieve them. "Gentlemen, said he, I did not intend to march through your
country; justice therefore will not allow me to pocket your money for not doing
what I really did not intend to do." Glorious Turenne! Equally Glorious
WASHINGTON! For when offered by his native state the enormous sum of seventy
thousand Dollars! he refused it all, because he had formerly made something
like a promise that he would never take pay for any services done to his mother
country. "To this promise, says he, I have invariably adhered -- and from his
promise if I had the inclination, I do not consider myself at liberty to depart
That famous British minister, sir Robert Walpole, used to say, in open day,
that there was no man so honest but he might be bought, if you would b^t bid
boldly up to his price! how would he have dropped his Beet-steak if he had
heard this anecdote of WASHINGTON!
."

It was partly on account of his veneration for justice, that he always held
slanderers and slander in such utter abhorrence. -- "Vile practice" said he,
Vile offspring of injustice, cowardice and spleen. For the same reason, he was,
through life, the declared enemy of gambling. There are persons, now living,
who have often heard him say that he looked on the practice of sitting down to
play, with the wish to get a man's money from him, as having something in it so
mean, selfish, and dishonest, that it was to him inconceivable how a gentleman
could ever reconcile it to his feelings! To give an equivalent for what we
receive, said he, is the ground of all dealing amongst honest men; but to take
a sum of money from a man, (and what is still worse from his wife and children)
and give him nothing in return but heartaches, bitter reflections, family
quarrels and wretchedness, is utterly incompatible with common honesty, not to
say humanity. Impressed with these sentiments, WASHINGTON shunned a gaming
table, as he would have shunned a pillory; and knit his awful brow as sternly
at a Gambler, as at a Cutpurse. And yet for complaisance sake, or to amuse his
friends on a winter's evening, he had no objection to a hand at whist: but he
always played for pleasure, not for pence; to divert his friends, not to strip
them. -- So that all the choice dinners and suppers which his friends got at
his table, (and no man ^n America, perhaps ^one in the world gave so many) were
all clear gain to them. WASHINGTON would have died a thousand deaths, rather
than have allowed the slightest ground for such vile dirt to be thrown on him,
as Quin the Player daubed on a Nobleman with whom he had supped. Bolting out
after supper along the splendid passage, lined with servants, each looking for
a see, Quin cried out, "Give me the way, gentlemen, and spare me tonight, for
'pon honor, I Am as naked as a bird: your master gave me a good supper, and he
has taken my purse to pay the reckoning."

It was this delicate sense of honor that set WASHINGTON so point blank against
making purchases, when he had not a dead certainly of paying at the time due.
He said, that, he would rather take a turn on the rack, than be sitting
momently expecting to see the face of a creditor, when he had no money to give
him. A gentleman assured me, that he once heard him say, that, He thought a man
who owed money to a great many people, was in almost as bad a condition as the
man in the gospel who was possessed with a legion of devils. Meaning, I
suppose, that when one slipped out, a hundred whipped in, to torment him.
Sometimes they had him in the fire, sometimes in the water, and if he ran
through dry places, seeking rest, he found none. They gave him no rest, says
the parable, until they had run him plump into the to^^^s! Merciful God! how
cruelly does man invert thy kind intentions. Thou ^^dest him to sing along the
flowery paths of honor, free and happy as the birds of heaven, but pride and
folly, true hawks of hell, soon spoil all his melodious notes!

That great philosopher, Socrates, slipped one day into a large store
something, I suppose, like what the New Englanders call a a Variety Store;
after looking, for sometime, over the vast variety of curiosities which pride
and folly had struck out, such as gold laced jackets, diamond necklaces, full
bottomed perriwigs and I know not what, he lifted up his eyes and exclaimed. O!
Jupiter! what a world of trumpery is here that I have no use for!! Socrates was
a heathen, But what numbers of us Christians must have every gim crack article
that Socrates despised, aye and a great many more, or we cannot be happy. We
must have gold watches, and Turkey Carpets, and gilt chariots, and so on, and
so on: and, ( worse than the Indian who gives a fat bullock for a two penny
string of beads) we are ready, for this trumpery to give not only our fat^
^locks, but even our wives and children to abuse and curses, and to coop
ourselves up in prison bounds to lead the lives of criminals, fearing every
body, pitied by none, damned by many, and despised by all.

It was a frequent saying with WASHINGTON, that, "to dive deep into a
merchant's Ledger, was a sure sign of a failing fortune, or a callous
conscience." For this reason his life was a Practical comment on that wholesome
old proverb, Cut your Coat according to your cloth." Hence, like the famous
Pilot boats of his native state, he always sailed nearer the wind, than did his
income, be that as scanty as it would. I have been told by his old friend and
pastor, the Rev. Mr. Lee Massey, who, (if wit and worth could have given
bishoprics, would have had a mitre long ago,) that while WASHINGTON received no
more than the salary of a County surveyor, he always had a dollar at the
service of a friend: and never suffered a creditor to tip him the wink and take
him ^side to shove an account into his fist. And when by the generosity of his
brother, he inherited the Mount Vernon estate, and by the far greater
generosity of the young Mrs. Martha Custis, he was made one of the wealthiest
men in America, he continued the same, independent and good. He walked with
justice, and justice is one of the mighty pillars that support the throne of
him who is the same yesterday, to day and for ever.

WASHINGTON used often to say, that, to be just, a man must sometimes cease to
be generous. Generous minds have been known, especially when young, to gratify
their benevolence even at the expense of their honesty. The reason is, acts of
Generosity give great pleasure to ourselves; they attract on us the admiration
and love of others; and every sermon we hear, every novel we read, dwells on
the praises of charity. But let no honest youth despair, because he is not able
to be generous. Let him reflect that we are under greater obligations to the
one than to the other. Society may subsist without Generosity, but not without
Justice!

It was on this account that WASHINGTON could never bear a character so
hypocritical as his who makes rich presents keeps open house, and makes his
Guests drunk with old Mad^^a; and yet can shake hands familiarly with a
creditor of ten years standing. But

From the same divine principle (the love of justice) Washington, though the
most benevolent of men, was the most rigid of economists. "We should all, says
he, calculate on great and continual expense. We are liable to sickness -- we
may be involved in law suits -- new taxes may be laid -- the price of
provisions may rise -- Servants may sicken -- and houses may burn Our debtors,
though honest, may be in Straits -- Our Tenants may be unfortunate -- our
friends may come to want, and our neighbors may ask our help. There is a
luxury in doing good, for which a wise man would cheerfully dispense with a
little superfluous eating and show. And besides, by living frugally, we shall
seldom know the heart ache of borrowing, or the insolence of Creditors.

From the same profound veneration for justice, Washington was always eminent
for the punctality of his promises and payments. Never man more clearly
discerned its close connection with dignified character, or its imporrtance to
those with whom we deal, especially if they be poor. It Is pity, said he, that
the rich do not more generally reflect on the disadvantages which the poor
labor under in getting their money. Though much wrong^d, they are afraid to go
to law with one mightier than themselves. Law is slow, and though not always
sure, is always costly. A poor tradesman may have his credit and his bread at
stake, and yet (...) afraid to offend his wealthy customer. And thus between
the dread of losing that customer, on the one hand; and the ra^^ ^^der ill
treatment from him, on the other, he may be much more miserable than any good
man can wish to see his Brother.

His admiration of that golden precept, "Owe no man any thing," early led
Washington to combat false sham^, that weakness which under the specious mask
of Good Nature, and Delicacy, keeps many a young man from asking for his own ^
Paying others with great punctuality, he expected that they should be equally
punctual; And looked on him as but ill entitled to the character of a good man,
who puts you to the pain of asking for your money, and less, of an (...) man,
who suffers you to want it, when he could easily procure (...) for you. Unless
the Debtor was a poor man, Washington never l^^t a debt for want of demanding
it, and that pretty early and earnestly too.

It was a remark of Washington, that, he who would enjoy, undisturbed, the
pleasures of honesty, must learn, sometimes at least, to say No, even to his
dearest friends. Few are the pleasures equal to those of meeting the requests
of a beloved wife, or, child. But if they ask for diets, or, for amusements,
above your income, it is duty, it is kindness, even to them, to refuse. If it
cost a struggle; let it be remembered, that it is the struggle of virtue; and
they themselves, sooner or later will revere and commend you for it. But if you
indulge, you contract the pangs of guilt, and your weak in dulgence will be
requited with reproach. Perhaps an evil, still worse, ensues; the virtue of the
family is shaken. When the husband and the father yields to guilt, it is
difficult for the Wife and children to retain their integrity. Plans of fraud
are, too often, unanimously adopted, whereby they live in sloth on money with
which debt should be paid.

Of all men, Washington was the most correct and regular in his business and
dealings: -- The richest fruits of industry," said he, may easily be lost by
confusion. To finish one piece of business before you begin another -- to put
every thing in its proper place, -- to give and take short memorandums of your
bargains, what you are to perform, and what to expect -- to keep receipts and
vouchers of every thing you pay -- to enter carefully your expenses and incomes
-- and to post He was taken ill on Friday. An intimate friend asked him, if he
wished to have any thing done on the arrangement of his temporal affairs; he
shook his head and replied, "no, I thank you, for my books are all posted to
Tuesday!" That industry and method must be truly astonishing, which, in the
management of possessions so vast and complicated as his, kept every thing, so
harmoniously adjusted, that when he was called at a short notice, to leave the
world, he had not a wish to add or alter a tittle.
all these so correctly, that by a single glance you may tell the true state of
your affairs; and never suffer the vexation of being called on by a creditor,
without being in readiness to dismiss him with a light heart. These are, what
some have been pleased to call, small matters, but they are such small matters
as will yield you a great deal of safety and comfort, save you much time and
trouble in the course of life, snatch you from many a dispute and lawsuit, and
preserve perhaps your purse from a second payment of the same money, and your
character, from ill-natured suspicion. It is a sad thing to see a young man,
suddenly called on for a valuable paper, at his wits end to know where he has
laid it, turning the house upside down, and, after all, unable to find it,
obliged to sit down in a high fever of rage and disappointment.

And yet this may be a great scholar, and can tell you in latin, greek, or
French, the name of every four-footed beast, and creeping thing, that boarded
with Noah in the ark! Thus preposterously, in the education of his son, does a
father sacrifice more to sound than to sense, to pride than to prudence; and
had rather hear him challenge his company with a smart Parlez vons Francois,
than teach him like Washington, to do his business with regularity and
exactness, with writings and receipts; though the neglect of these gives rise
to more than half the quarrels, law, suits, and duels, that distract the world!
Washington passed through life without any of these curses; for in all his
dealings, every thing was so clearly understood, so fairly expressed, that
there was no room for heart-burnings. His exactness in business extended to
all, not excepting even those whom he most dearly loved. He said, It was one of
the best means to preserve love. Some think exactness unnecessary between
relations and friends. But alas! love is apt to wax cold, and then selfishness
returns. When an account is old, and much tangled, both sides are too prone to
suspicion. Suspicion is a painful feeling, and quarrels among relations are the
disgrace and bane of life.

The inconsiderate may say, that such attention manifests a littleness of mind,
unworthy of Washington. But in reply, Washington himself assures, that, every
thing great, good, or happy in the lot of man, is connected with his industry
and attention to business. Through neglect of these, his estate melts away, and
debts are contracted. Debt haunts the mind -- Creditors dun and barrass -- a
wife mourns for comforts which she enjoyed under her father's roof -- his
children cry for (...), -- and his daughters turn away their tearful eyes from
prospects on which they must no longer look -- These things are distressing,
they four the temper; and mar his happiness. The morning of his days, which
rose so bright, is overcast -- weaned is his attachment to life, and the fight
of the horrid pistol is welcome.

Such are the sorrows of the debtor, while he continues honest. But alas! such
trials are found too heavy for most men. By degrees they undermine the moral
principle, and reconcile a man to practices which he once abhorred. His first
failure of payment, or breach of promise is painful to him; when he considers
at how low a rate his word must hereafter pass, he sinks in his own eyes; but
by degrees his difficulties bring him to study deceiving as an art, and at last
he lies to his creditors without a blush!! With the loss of truth the silken
cord of friendship is dissolved. He seizes the moment of unsuspecting affection
to ens^are the generous friends of his youth; borrowing money which he will
never pay, and binding them for debts which they must hereafter answer.

Thus he sells the dear bliss of loving and of being beloved!! His calls still
are pressing; and now, an ingenuity, which, in a better cause might have
immortalized his name, is exerted to evade the law, to deceive the world -- to
pervert the relation of father and son, transferring goods from the one to the
other to defraud his creditors. Fictitious bills, false securities! dark
conveyances! mysteries of iniquity! O my soul, come not thou into his secrets,
unto his assembly mine honor be not thou united! Bankruptcy now at hand, he
makes a last grasp with his expiring credit, takes what he can, once more, from
friends and neighbors, from the ignorant and unsuspecting -- purchases goods,
at any rate, from all who will trust him, and sells, them for ready money, at
half their value! Inhuman wretch! One would suppose that when the bustle is
over, painful reflections must arise, on friends, whom he has brought to ruin;
on neighbors, whose generosity he has abused; on the savings of the poor
labourer, which he has seized, disappointing his hopes of honest comfort; on
the staff of the aged, which he has snatched away, dashing him, infirm and
helpless on the cold ground of charity; on the dignity of human nature, which
he has disgraced; and on the credit and character of his Country which he has
contributed to blast; But his heart is a stranger to the relentings of
humanity.

This cruel sacrifice, of other's comforts, is often made that the successful
Speculator may accumulate wealth to figure in the Great World, and to excite
admiration like what we felt for Washington. Mistaken Man! Washington won our
hearts, not by his wealth, but his worth. It Was his great virtues and services,
that poured around him such an atmsophere of the lovely and venerable* that no
human eye could look on him without feeling unutterable things." The most
illustrious characters from Europe, have declared that they could never
approach him without awe* While, on the nerves of his Countrymen, the sight of
their Washington impressed those sentiments, which a bad man, with the riches
of ten thousand worlds could never command. When the roar of Washington's
wheels was heard in our Streets, men, women, and children, flocked to the doors
and windows, like Doves to the beams of the morning. All eyes were fixed upon
him; and the eager look, the heaving bosom, and the tear-bathed cheek, evinced
the power of virtue, Dear delicious feelings of veneration and love! Sweet,
heaven flavoured offerings of the soul to goodness! When, alas! shall we ever
taste your luxuries again!

Oh! That the great example of Washington may teach us --

I. The infinite importance of virtue, to true glory. Some, seek a fame like
Washington, and would set the world a-stare on them, by the glitter of their
wealth though gained by means which, virtue would blush at.

Let such Gentlemen read the following letter, written, during the last war,
from an English gentleman, to an English duke.

Yes, you are a duke! and we see your Ducal Coronet on your Strumpet's coach!
Your builder and baker, your butcher and Tailor gnaw their nails, unpaid; while
the Jocky and Brother Gambler, receive ready cash with ostentatious profusion.
Sharpers and Prostitutes with all the qualities of thievery, riot in those
riches which ought to be paid to honest men, who, with their families are
starving in consequence of feeding and clothing you. When such a Wretch as
you, can be the Companion of a Prince, and Privy Counselor to the King of
Great Britain and Defender of the Faith: who can be surprised, or who can
lament that the subjects rebel, and that the Empire is dismembered! Under a
Ruler like you, who would not glory in the illustrious character and conduct of
a -- WASHINGTON???

O! What a compliment to virtue. Here is a Nobleman -- a favorite of his
Prince, and in the highest seat of honor; laden with wealth and glitlering with
titles; and yet, all this avails him nothing. He is vicious! A Companion of
sharpers and prostitutes, and will not pay his debts! Hence, in spite of his
gold, he is held up, an object of scorn and execration to the world. And when
his Chariot rolls into the Streets, instead of being followed, as was that of
Washington, by the affectionate looks and benedictions of all beholders, it
serves, worse than the Crier's bell, to call angry Merchants and disappointed
Tradesmen to their doors, to point at and curse the passing Scoundrel, who b^ys
of every body and pays nobody.

While on the other hand, there is Washington! a Stranger to the bean monde,
simply and American Farmer, and wearing no Stars, nor titles, save those of
brightest virtues, and yet in these he appears so lovely, so venerable, that
honest Britons cannot look on him without pleasure, they forget that he is
fighting against them -- they heap him with commendations, and soon as the war
is over, they ship off to him innumerable presents. British Farmers send him
their cheeses; British Authors, the incense of their praises; British Bishops,
elegant bibles, and British Lords, e. g. The Earl of Buchan and his friends, a
precious box lined with gold, and made of the oak that sheltered the great Sir
William Wallace after the battle of Falkirk. This was sent to Washington as to,
"the greatest and best man in the world."

Dear Countrymen! If honest Britons so loved Washington, how ought honest
Americans to love one another; Tho from difference of education they may happen
to differ a litttle in their Political opinions!!

II. Let us admire and imitate WASHINGTON'S sacred regard for Order; and for
due submission to lawfully-ruling power.

All human society requires government. Even the smallest families must be
unprosperous and miserable without it. What then is to be expected in large
societies of thousands and millions of selfish and ambitious mortals, unawed by
divine or human laws! What, Oh! Americans! but the most horrid-tragedies,
springing from pride, fraud, lust, hate, revenge, etc. and wrought up at length
to such bloody battles, and inhuman massacres, with such death-screams, and
dying groans, as to give horror-struck humanity, a perfect picture of the
habitations of the damned? But no sooner has just and effective government
raised aloft her awful form; than all these ^ell-begotten monsters disappear.
The sons of violence are bound in chains, or cut off by the sword of justice;
the cries of the weak and oppressed, distress our ears no more; sweet peace
smiles over all; and secure now, of enjoying her own delicious fruits, Industry
springs up, with eye sparkling with honest ambition; millions fall to work; the
rich storehouses of nature are broken up; earth, water, air, and fire, lend
their mighty aids; and arts, sciences, manufactures, and commerce, pour a
flowing tide of blessings round the world.

These are thy peaceful precious fruits, O blessed Government! Thus it is that
thou enablest man, created in his Maker's image, and touched with Heaven's own
fire, to imitate his God; and, like him, to call beauty out of deformity, and
order out of Chaos!

Washington's life exhibits immortal monuments of his sense of the blessings of
government, and the great duty of cheerful submission to it. Frequent were the
opportunities which he had to wear the brightest gold and purple that
sceptre-seeking ambition could covet: But he despised them all. Charmed with
that heaven which results from good government, and a prompt obedience to it,
he readily returned the glittering sword of the victorious Generalissimo, --
stepped down from the exalted chair of supreme magistracy -- mixed as a
commoner among the citizens -- obeyed those whom he had been accustomed to
command -- honored the president -- revered the laws -- paid his taxes, and, in
every respect, behaved as became the man, who was fully possessed of this great
idea, that, in exact proportion to our union, will be our strength, our peace
and prosperity at home, and our respectability and success abroad.

Let us my fellow-citizens, as we revere the memory of GEORGE WASHINGTON -- As
we honor the mighty God of order, whom WASHINGTON honored -- As we would live
the life and die the death of that righteous man O let us imitate this greatest
because best example in his most exemplary life.

If ever there was a people under the canopy of Heaven, who had reason to be
cheerfully obedient to their government, we are that people. The form of our
government, is of all others, the most conducive to our best interests; and
therefore the most perfect, Widely different from the liberty and safety of our
republican form, most of the nations of the world, groan under the caprice and
cruelty of the kingly governments. That a people may be happy under the
administration of a wise and good king, we all agree, because, thank God, there
have been charming instances of it; but then alas! wise and good kings are very
rare, almost as rare as Washingtons. The pride and ambition common to man,
nursed in the hot-bed of a court, and high fed on luxury and flattery, too
generally run up into the vilest monsters, at once the disgrace and curse of
human kind.

"When I look around me (says the Rev. Dr. Chandler, one of the ornaments both
of English learning and piety) on the present kings of Europe, I am apt to ask
myself, what is there in most of them that should make their subjects wish
their lives, or regret their deaths? Actuated by ambition or revenge, or sunk
in indolence and pleasure, they waste the riches of their people by the most
abominable extravagance and dissipation; or rush their subjects into war, to
the certain murder and ruin of thousands of them. And as to our own kings, some
of them involved us in all the calamities of civil wars; others impoverished
and oppressed us by illegal exactions; and the generality of them, either by
their own choice, or led by wicked ministers, sacrificed the national interest
to their own accursed ambition, revenge, and debauchery."

And when the ancient Jews, in evil hour, applied to God for a king, he told
them they did not know what they were asking for. "This," said he, by his
prophet Samuel, "will be the character, (meaning the general character) of the
king that shall reign over you: he will take your sons and appoint them for
himself for his chariots, and to be his horsemen, and some shall run before his
chariots. And he will appoint them captains over thousands, and captains over
fifties; and will set them to ear his ground, and to reap his harvest, and to
make his instruments of war, and instruments of his chariots. And he will take
your daughters to make his pastry, and to be cooks and bakers, And he will take
your fields, and your vine-yards, and your olive-yards; even the best of them
and give them to his servants and his officers. And he will take your men
servants and your maid servants; and your goodliest young men, and your asses
and put them all to his work: and ye shall be his servants. And ye shall cry
out in that day because of your king which ye shall have chosen unto you; and
the Lord will not hear you in that day."

What thanks do we not owe to God that we and our dear children are not under
such curses; the too frequent fruits of a kingly government! Curses, from
which, as we have just read, it is so exceedingly difficult to be delivered.
For when once a King (though not worse in grain than other men) gets seated in
a throne, his spirits are put into such a delicious tumult by the pomp^ and
pleasures of royalty, that he cannot think of ever letting them go out of his
hands. To secure these for ever in his family, he raises all the money that he
possibly can by taxes, and creates innumerable offices, places of honor and
profit, which he artfully gives to his own friends and creatures. Thus he
fleeces the people to pay for their own fetters. For every officer under
government, from the Prime Minister to the tax gatherer, receiving his place
from the king, "eating his Majesty's bread," is ready for throat-cutting if he
hears but a dog bark against him. So that the poor slaves may groan, and cry,
and starve, they and their children from generation to generation.

But blessed be God, the friend of America, who has given us a government under
which we are not liable to such sufferings. -- At the end of the war in 84,
having thrown off the British monarchy, we wanted a government for ourselves.
And never, sure, was a nation favored with a fairer chance to get a good one.
We were innocent and perfectly free: We had WASHINGTON, FRANKLIN, ADAMS, JEF.
ERSON, HENRY, MADISON, and a great many others the most enlightened and
virtuous patriots in the world. We were wise enough to ask their assistance,
and they gave us a pure Republican government; that is, a government which
preserves the supreme power sacred in our own hands, where God intended it
should be -- a government which contains wholesome laws aiming equally at the
happiness of every honest man (of the poorest peasant as well as John Adams)
with a regular course of law and justice for the redress of grievances -- A
government which make wise provision for amending itself whenever necessary,
which appoints an uninterrupted succession of officers, in the way of a free
election -- a government which commits not the administration of such
inestimable blessings to any one man, (which were madness indeed) but to a
number of men? and not to these as forming one body, (which were as mad as
entrusting it to one man) but three bodies, President, Senate and House of
Representatives, and these so nicely balanced as to check each other in their
smallest attempts on our liberties -- and a government which orders these her
servants, President, Senate, and Representatives, to make quick returns to us
of the power with which we entrusted them; the President, at the end of every
four years; and the Representatives, of every two years; and therefore does not
allow them time to hatch their infernal eggs of ambition even if they were such
demons as to be impregnated with them; but strongly binds them to their best
behavior, that they may be beloved as Washington, and be elected again; and
obliges them to make the best laws, as they themselves are so soon to obey.

Other wretched nations, even in passing from the slavery of one tyrant to
another, have been obliged to wade through seas of their own countrymen's
blood; but we obtained ours without any struggles among ourselves; without the
loss of a single drop of American blood.

Who can reflect on that gracious guardian power of America, which brought us
safely through out alarming war against Great Britain, which not only enabled
us to repel Lord North's attempts on our liberties, but, far beyond our first
and most sanguine expectations, to establish ourselves FREE and INDEPENDENT
SATES; and then, without the least struggle or bloodshed among ourselves,
kindly spread over our favored heads, the heavenly canopy of an excellent
government, pouring down on us all the blessings of just and equitable society;
securing to every honest man and his family, all the sweet and precious
safeties of his liberty, his life, his health, his character, his property, his
religion, and in fine of every blessing connected with his highest happiness in
this world, and with his preparation for eternal happiness in the next -- who,
I say, can think of this profusion of riches mercies conferred on our country,
above all other countries in the world, without feeling his soul oppressed and
almost overwhelmed with a sense of the Divine munificence, as Washington
expresses it? or without joining him in, "unceasing prayers to God, that he may
continue to us the choicest tokens of his beneficence -- That our union and
brotherly love may be perpetual. But, if the blessed effects resulting from
order and good government cannot prevail on us to join in this divine prayer
let us at least take a vi^ of the horrors which may result from writing and
talking so as to create parties and factions among us.

Cast your eyes over ancient Rome, while virtuous and united, the mighty
Mistress of the world! but no sooner had the evil spirit of party and faction
crept in among them, than the old Roman steel became as a rope of sand falling
into pieces of itself. One of these devoted parties snatched up Sylla, swearing
by Pluto and the Styx that he was the honestest fellow in all Rome; the others
damned themselves by Jupiter, and all the Gods, Celestial Terrestrial, and
Infernal, that Sylla was a villain and not fit to hold a candle to Marius. Of
course Marius was pitted. Fluent orators mounted the tub. Parchments (for they
had no paper in those days) were stained as black as ink with (...) and Fr^,
and all the Latin words that stood for scape-gallows, and damned scoundrel, and
so on. Such fuel as this soon blew up the flame to a pitch beyond restraint.
Merius first opened the horrid scene and glutted, his followers with the blood
and wealth of the friends of Sylla; Sylla repaid the Marian faction in the same
coin, and with interest. In these unnatural contests thousands of Roman
citizens were butchered; their wives and children barbarously turned out of
doors, and their estates confiscated and sold to cram the purses and to fatten
the vices of their diabolical destroyers. Bloody battles were often fought in
the very streets: and wretched Rome more than once experienced from her own
citizens all the horrors of a city taken by storm.

And in the histories of the civil wars of Great Britain, and, here lately of
France, we may behold the same horrid features of faction. Here are the two
parties, Whigs and Tories, or Aristocrats and Democrats. A little time ago,
while they had a government, though a very imperfect one, they loved each other
as children of the same country and constitution, and would in a moment have
fought for one another with all the heroism of magnanimous brothers: But now,
split into parties and driving at different interests, they regard each other
as enemies. Jealousy and hatred, true miscroscopes of hell, are before their
eyes and conceal from each all the good qualities and intentions of the other;
and at the same time, so distort, magnify and blacken all their designs and
actions, that they appear to each other as little better than Devils. Their
Newspapers too, as if warm and smoking from the presses of the damned, lend
all their fire and brimstone to feed the infernal flame. "The Aristocrats!
(cries the passion-choaked Printer on the other side). The Aristocrats! A set
of unfeeling Kingly Villains! Monsters of Pride, who would as lieve drive their
guilt Chariots over a poor Man, as over a dog: and would devour widows houses
for a stake at an E. O. Table! Vile miscreants, who only want a Kingly
Government that they may fleece and lord it over the poor!"

On the other hand, the Aristocrat Gazettes give chapter and verse for it, that
"The Democrats are a lazy vicious race, whose poverty and lice make them envy
and hate the rich; and who will never be at rest, until, having trampled down
Religion, *Laws, and Government, they are at full liberty, like wild Arabs, to
rob and plunder their wealthier neighbors."

Grounded now on something like love of public good, the bad passions of the
two parties rage with redoubled fury. They seldom meet in company without
fierce contentions and bloody frays. Duels and murders are frequent. The
devoted wretches, as they pass each other in the streets, can read death in one
another^ dark faces and glaring eyes. The horrid tragedy ripens fast, and the
dreadful storm is on the very eve of bursting. Numerous Ravens, with ill
brooding croaks and terrifying screams, are seen flapping their wings flow and
sad, over the fated city. All night long fearful noises are head in the air, as
of groans from dying persons; while frightful meteors, in shape of fiery balls,
shoot through the gloom leaving long hideous tracks behind them like streams of
blood. In the morning, the awful roar of guns is heard in the midst of the
city. Trembling seizes on the aged, while the feeble sex sicken with terrors
unfelt before. The men snatch up arms, and rush, in tumultuous crowds, to the
place whence the noise proceeds. Immense is the concourse. The orators on both
sides get up to address the eager throngs, and with bitterest abuse inflame
their passions against each other to madness. The fierce uproaring crowds can
withhold no longer. With horrid imprecations, with faces black with rage, and
eye balls flashing fire, they fly at each other like tigers. They plunge their
knives, swords and daggers into each others hearts. Pale and staggering, with
mutual curses in death, they sink to the ground. The streets are floated with
blood. The dead bodies lie heaps on heaps, while women and children, with
wringing hands, and heart-piercing cries, demand their husbands, their fathers,
and their brothers.

These O accursed Faction and Party! These are your bloody fruits! Thus it is.
that by filling our souls with the passions of the damned, you turn man into a
devil to man, you turn the fairest cities into slaughter-houses, you turn earth
itself, the goodly creation of God, into the hell from whence you came!

These unutterable curses of Faction and Party, rose often on the mind of
WASHINGTON, and shook his parent soul with trembling for America. Hence it was,
that, during the uncertainty whether these states would adopt a Federal
Government, WASHINGTON was never seen to smile; a dark gloom hung constantly on
his face, and his eyes often looked as if he had been weeping; and hence it was
that he poured out his soul, "in unceasing vow^ to God, that our union and
brotherly love might be everlasting."

O my countrymen! If we would partake with our WASHINGTON, of those eternal
delights which are prepared for the children of peace; let us, with him, make a
covenant with our souls to fly from party spirit, as from the bane and
damnation of all Republics; and the only demon that can prevent favored
America from rising to the greatest and happiest among the nations. Let us all
(whether Peasant or President, whether ^or Adams or Jefferson) as dear children
of God, and brothers of WASHINGTON, shun, as we would hellfire, every word and
act that may needlessly provoke each other to wrath and strife, These are not
the weapons of conversion, but, of obduracy; they have been potent to cut the
throats of millions of our race; but have never yet reclaimed one soul from
error and prejudice.

In the foregoing pages we have seen a sketch of the life of Washington; of
him, who was the pride of America, and boast of humankind; who united in
himself such a Constellation of virtues as sweetly assure us of Immortality, --
of our relation to ANGELS -- and of our capacities for glories and felicities,
that shall know no bounds.

It is hardly exaggeration to say that WASHINGTON was pious as Numa; just as
Aristides; temperate as Epictetus; patriotic as Regulus; in giving public
trusts, impartial as Severus; in victory, modest as Scipio; prudent as Fabius;
rapid as Marcellus; undaunted as Hannibal; as Cincinnatus disinterested; to
liberty firm as Cato; and respectful of the laws as Socrates. Or, to speak in
plainer terms; he was religious without superstition; just without rigor;
charitable without profusion; hospitable without making others pay for it;
generous but with his own money; rich without covetousness; frugal without
meanness; humane without weakness; brave without rashness; successful without
vanity; victorious without pride; a lover of his country, but no hater of
French or English; a staunch friend of government but respectful of those who
pointed out its defects with decency; true to his word without evasion of
perfidy; firm in adversity; moderate in prosperity; glorious and honored in
life; peaceful and happy in death.

Thus singularly virtuous was the man, whom Heaven was pleased to select as his
honored instrument to establish this great WESTERN REPUBLIC. And if every thing
be duly considered, I trust it will appear WASHINGTON was raised up of God as a
forerunner to some mighty event. In 1774, when a dark gloom hung over the
spirits of our Fathers; a gloom o^casioned by the alarm of a mighty nation
coming forward with her armies and sleets, (shading the Ocean) to strike at our
dearest liberties; then it was, that, the spirit of God came mightily on
WASHINGTON, and raised him up as an Ensign of Hope to our trembling countrymen.
And when we consider how wonderfully this man was enabled to inspire
confidence; insomuch that thirteen little Colonies, which, a few years before,
had been thrown into a panic by a handful of French Indians, now headed by
WASHINGTON, were resolved, to oppose one of the most formidable powers in
Europe. -- When we consider, how wonderfully he inspired Union; insomuch that
all the souls of thirteen Colonies, so widely distant in their situation,
Religion, Customs and Interests, clave to him even as one man, beyond all
conjecture of reason, and all suspicion of Lord North-when we consider how
miraculously, this man was preserved to us, during our long and critical
struggle, notwithstanding the attempts (one or two of which have come to light)
that were made to take him from us -- when we consider, how wonderfully he kept
up the spirit, and the Union, of these states, during the long contest of eight
years, notwithstanding the many horrors and distresses of war, the great want
of luxuries for the rich, and of necessaries and pay for the Soldiers -- And,
after the establishment of Heaven-born freedom in our land; how wonderfully,
his parental influence ^ed the people of these states to adopt one grand system
of pure Republicans policy, happily uniting civil liberty with effective
government -- when, I say, all this is considered, who but must feel a sweet
flutter of hope that great events are connected with us, and that God has sent
on his servant WASHINGTON, as a Day Star to some mighty Revolution, big with
blessings to mankind, which will ere long dawn on the land where WASHINGTON,
was born? Perhaps, God may be about to establish here a mighty empire, for the
reception of a happiness unknown on earth, since the days of blissful Eden. An
Empire, where Religion shall continue, through immemorial time, to unfold aloft
her sacred banner celestial white, untorn by state violation, and unstained by
the impious touch of wordling priests. An empire, that shall afford a welcome
retreat to all the uncorrupted sons of freedom, when Liberty is forcibly driven
from every other realm -- An Empire, that shall open a vast Theater for the
display of the grand transactions of providential wisdom -- Transactions marked
with more than human manners and characters, that shall not relate to this or
to any other nation alone -- That shall bear, in-stamped upon them, the broad
seal of God himself; either evidently pointing to, or accomplishing the grand
designs of his providence, Fulfilling ancient prophecies -- Leading our
posterity, happy in future days, to see the glorious kingdom of Messiah, rising
by degrees out of the Revolutions and destruction of the kingdoms of this
world. When nation shall no more lift up the sword against nation, nor torrents
of human blood flow down from shameful variance betwixt man and man. -- When
the creature traveling in pain, shall no more lift the piteous eye, with groans
unutterable, to God -- But, when the uninjuring, the unsuffering kingdom of
Christ being come, men shall no longer hurt nor destroy in the earth, but the
Leopard and the Kid shall lie down together; and the young Lion and the Calf;
and a little Child shall lead them -- When glad songs of peace shall warble
through every land, and the fruits of love shall overspread the earth as waters
cover the sea.

Who without tears of joy can think of such a glorious day of happiness about
to dawn, (...) long perhaps, on the land of WASHINGTON? Or without feeling
himself under new and sacred obligations to do every thing that may invite it?
And it is in our power to invite it -- Yes, if our country were filled with
such men as Washington, that glorious day would this moment shine upon us. For
whence are the sweet beams of peace and happiness but from the sun of Virtue?
And if the sun of virtue did but gild our plains, how soon would our desert
rejoice and blossom like the rose? How soon would Earth resemble Heaven?
Temperance would pour her ruddy blessings around our land. Industry would fill
our barns with plenty, and cause our presses to burst out with new wine.
Righteous dealing would make us to be respected and beloved of one another,
while mutual affection would render our society sweet and harmonious as that of
dearest friends and brothers, Foreign nations, hearing that the vine of
Paradise was planted in our land, would hasten to feed on its delicious
clusters. God even our own God would give us his blessings, the little hills
would clap their hands with joy, and consenting clouds shower down their marrow
and fatness upon us. Since then it is "righteousness that exalts a nation;
since the eternal decree is passed, that the glory of nations shall forever
rise and fall with their virtues, let us then if we do indeed love our country,
and would have her and her children to be free and happy, for all generations;
let us now, while it is called today, vow a vow to God, that we will endeavor
through life to become what Washington was, in his virtues. O! let us consider
that crown of glory which he now wears, the bright reward of his virtues; and
that the same crown is prepared, the same virtues expected of us -- Let us
consider that these form the great errand on which we were sent into this world
-- That Heaven and earth are waiting on us for this purpose -- That the eyes of
God and angels are fixed on us with eager expectation -- And that the venerable
shades, of Washington, and our fathers, are anxiously looking on us for these
virtues, to make happy this great Republic which their toil, and sweat, and
blood so dearly bought. Since then, we are moral soldiers, fighting for an
immortal prize, for ourselves and for our children; "Let us be of good courage,
and play the men for our people and for the cities of our God, and let the Lord
do for our country that which seems him good."

THE DEATH OF WASHINGTON.
If the prayers of millions could have prevailed, WASHINGTON ^^^ld have been
immortal on the earth. And if fullness of (...), riches and honors, could have
rendered that immortality happy, WASHINGTON had been blessed indeed. But this
world is not the place of true happiness. Though, innumerable are the sweet
comforts, which a prudence and virtue like WASHINGTON'S, may enjoy in this
world, yet they fall short, infinite degrees, of that pure unimbittered
felicity, which God, the Almighty Parent, has prepared in heaven for the
children of his love.

" There is the land of pure delight,
Where blissful angels reign;
The glorious day still knows no night,
And pleasures banish pain.
There ever blooming Spring abides,
And never with ring flowers;
Death like a narrow sea divides,
That happy land from ours.
Sweet fields beyond the swelling flood,
Stand dressed in living green;
So to the Jews old Canaan stood,
While Jordan rolled between."
To prepare for this immensity of bliss, this eternity of joy, is the mighty
errand on which God sent us into this world. Our preparation consists in
acquiring those great virtues, Justice, Humility, and Love, which, and which
alone can make us welcome companions of Angels, and worthy members of their
Illustrious society. WASHINGTON had wisely spent his life in acquiring these
immortal virtues. " He had fought the good fight -- against his own
unreasonable affections -- he had glorified God; by exemplifying the charms of
virtue, to men -- he had finished the great work which God had given him to do;
for himself and for his country. He had borne the heat and burden of the day --
his great day of duty; And the evening (of old age) being come, the servant of
God must now go to receive his wages. Happy, happy WASHINGTON! If Crowns and
Kingdoms could purchase such sweet peace like thine, such smiling joy, such
hopes big with immortality; with what begging earnestness, would Crowns and
Kingdoms have been offered by the mighty conquerors of the earth, in their
dying moments of terror and despair!

On the 14th day of December, 1799. (when he wanted but 9 weeks, and 2 days of
bing 63 years old) he rode out on his plantation. The day was very raw and
snowy. The same night he was attacked with a violent pain and inflammation of
the throat. The lancet of one of his Domestics was employed, but with no
advantage. By times in the morning, Dr. Craik, his companion in peace and war,
the friend and physician of his youth and age, was sent for. Alarmed at the
least appearance of danger threatening a life so dear to him, Dr. Craik advised
to call in, immediately, the consulting assistance of his friends, the
ingenious and learned Dr. Dick of Alexandria, and Brown of Port-Tobacco. They
came on the wings of speed. They felt the awfulness of their situation. They
knew that never again should they be called to fight the king of terrors in
defense of such a prize. -- They saw the MOURNFUL GENIUS of AMERICA, with the
red eyes of her grief bathed in tears, fixed on her son; sometimes cast on them
anxiously asking their assistance. The greatest of all human beings was now
lying low; a life of all others the most revered, the most beloved was at
stake. Craik, Dick and Brown, the ablest GUARDS of life, were stationed around
him bending over the prostrate hero. If human skill and solicitude could have
availed; if the sword of genius and the buckler of experience could have
repelled the blows of death, WASHINGTON had still lived. Defeated a thousand
times by their superior skill, when lives less valuable were contended for,
Death began to fear left this great prize so long coveted should be snatched
from him. -- But he soon felt his arm invigorated by a strength not his own. --
The great hour was come and WASHINGTON must die. Yes his Mansion is prepared
above. The crown of his rejoicing is bright. The harps of the blessed are
strung. "Let the angel of Death conduct the Soul of WASHINGTON to the feasts of
Heaven."

It appears, that, from the commencement of the attack, he was favored with a
presentiment, that, he was now laid down to rise no more. He took however the
medicines that were offered him, but it was principally to oblige the
long-loved partner of his heart and bed.

It has been said that a man's death is a true copy of his life. This is
generally the case with those who die in their senses. It was WASHINGTON'S case
exactly. In his last illness he behaved with the undaunted firmness of a
soldier, and the calm resignation of a christian.

The inflammation in his throat was attended with great pain, which he bore
with the fortitude that became him. He was once or twice heard to say that had
it pleased God he should have been glad to die a little easier; but that he
doubted not that it was for his good.

Every hour now spread a fader gloom over the scene. Despair sat on the faces
of the physicians; for they saw that their art had failed. The strength of the
mighty was departing from him; and Death, with his sad harbingers, chills, and
paleness, was coming on apace.

Mount Vernon, which had long shone above all families, the Queen of elegant
joys, was now about to suffer a sad Eclipse! an Eclipse which would soon be
mournfully visible, not only through the United States but throughout the world.

An awful silence prevails throughout the spacious Dwelling. -- The big grief
has sealed every lip and darkened every countenance. His servants are now about
to lose their long loved master and protector; and his friends to bid a last
adieu to the endearing society of the greatest and best of human kind. Their
faces are swollen with weeping, and torrents of bitter tears roll down their
cheeks. But though bitter, yet shallow are their streams of sorrow, when
compared with that flood of unutterable woe, which overwhelms the soul of his
life's dear companion. Blessed with a soul, capable of loving an angle spirit
inhabiting the noblest form, she had given her heart and hand to her WASHINGTON
in early life. Forty happy years had they lived together like two lovers joined
in wedlock. Every year, sweet as it rolled along, marked their ever growing
loves -- Loves, which, fed by mutual tenderness and virtue, were continually
ascending with a brighter flame, nearer and nearer to their native skies --
Loves, which by a forty years inter-growth, were become so incorporated, as to
render each a part of the others self. O! how heart breaking! -- How soul
rending the separation! But the hour of separation is come! She can keep her
WASHINGTON no longer! He, whose company was the perpetual feast of her soul,
must now be taken from her! That voice which was sweeter to her ear than the
music of songs, shall charm her ear no more. She shall speak to him but he will
not answer. The echo of her voice will frighten her own soul. That face which
was welcomer to her eyes than the streaks of the morning, shall rejoice her
eyes no more. She shall awake in the morning; but shall not see him -- She
shall seek him early; but shall not find him. The place where her beloved lay,
will be empty. The heaviness of her heart returns; her tears of grief roll down.

Great, honored Lady! what but the arm of the mighty God of Washington, could
have supported thee in that dismal hour of darkness and distress! And he did
support thee. The consolations of religion were thine; and her consolations are
mighty. Often had thy WASHINGTON reminded thee, when the tear swelled in thine
eye, and the sigh of thy bosom arose at the thought of parting; often had he
reminded thee of those blissful shores, where the souls of the virtuous,
escaped from the sorrows of mortality, shall soon meet again, infinitely
improved; and there in the presence of HIM WHO MADE THEM, shall pluck and eat
together, in communion sweet, the rich (...) of eternal life.

Sons and Daughters of Columbia! gather yourselves together, around the bed of
your fallen hero; around the bed of him to whom (under God) you and your
children are indebted for the richest blessings of life. When Joseph, the great
prime minister of Egypt, heard that his Shepherd-Father was sick, he hastened
up to see him, and fell on his neck, and kissed him and wept. Joseph had never
received such services from Jacob, as you have received from WASHINGTON. But we
call you not to weep for WASHINGTON. We ask you not to view those eyes, now
sunk and hollow, which formerly darted their lightening-flashes against your
enemies; nor to feel that heart, now faintly-labouring, which formerly throbbed
with more than mortal joys, when he saw the young heroes of Columbia, rushing
on in rattling steel to charge the foe; nor to mark that arm now feeble, which
so often waved the fiery-circled sword of war, pointing where the roar of
battle should begin. No, we call you not to weep but to revere.

The Great Star, lighted up of God, to lead America to freedom, is now setting,
but he sets in glory. He looks back on past life, as on a goodly field, which
his own industry, under the divine blessing, has strewed thick with richest
fruits and flowers. He looks forward with joy to those brighter scenes, which
God has prepared for the spirits of the just. None ever acted better up to his
great character, in life; and none ever sustained its last closing scenes with
more dignity and grace. The summer evening sky was not more serene and placid
than his countenance; while his reason was elevated and clear as the pure arch
of heaven.

With what composure did he endure the violence of his pains! With what
expressive composure did he utter -- thy will be done! Even when the ^old
sweats hung on his brow, his eye spoke complacency, and a noble philosophic
joy, sat smiling on his face.

Feeling that the hour of his departure out of this world was at hand; he
desired that every body should quit the room. They all went out; and according
to his wish, left him -- with his God.

There, by himself, like Moses alone on the top of Pisgah, he seeks the face of
God. There by himself, standing as on the awful boundary that divides time from
eternity -- that separates this world from the next, he cannot quit the long
frequented haunts of the one, nor launch away into the untried regions of the
other, until (in humble imitation of the world's great redeemer) he has poured
forth into the bosom of his God, those strong sensations, which the solemnity
of his situation naturally suggested.

With what angel fervor did he adore that Almighty Love, which though
inhabiting the heaven of heavens, yet deigned to wake his slee^ing dust --
f^^med him so fearfully in the womb -- nursed him on a tender mother's breast
-- watched his helpless infancy -- guarded his heedless youth -- preserved him
from the dominion of his passions -- inspired him with the love of virtue --
led him safely up to man -- and, from such low beginnings, advanced him to such
unparallelled usefulness and glory among men! These, and ten thousand other
precious gifts heaped on him, unasked, many of them long before he had the
knowledge to ask for them; overwhelmed his soul with gratitude unutterable,
exalted to infinite heights, his ideas of eternal love, and bade him without
fear, to resign his departing spirit into the arms of his redeemer God, whose
mercies are over all his works.

He is now about to leave the great family of man, in which he has so long
sojourned as a brother! His cheeks are bathed with tears, the yearnings of his
soul are over his brethren! How fervently does he adore that goodness, which
enabled him to be so serviceable to them! That grace, which preserved him from
hurting them by violence or by fraud! How fervently does he pray that the
uninjuring, unsuffering kingdom of God may come, and that the Earth may be
filled with the richest fruits of righteousness and of peace.

He is now about to leave his country! that dear spot which gave him birth --
that dear spot for which he has so long watched and prayed, so long toiled and
sought; and whose beloved children he has so often sought to gather, even as a
Hen gathers her Chickens under her wings. He sees them now spread abroad like
flocks in goodly pastures; like favored Israel in the land of promise. He
remembers how God, by a mighty hand, and by an outstretched arm, brought them
and their fathers into this good land, a land flowing with Milk and Honey; and
blessed them with the blessings of Heaven above, and of the Earth beneath; with
the blessings of LIBERTY and of PEACE, of RELIGION and of LAWS, above all other
people -- He sees, that, through the rich mercies of God, they have now the
precious opportunity to make their Country, the GLORY of the Earth, the blessed
among nations, and a refuge for the poor and for the outcasts of all lands! The
transporting sight of such a cloud of blessings, trembling close over the heads
of his Countrymen, together with the distressing uncertainty whether they will
put forth their hands and enjoy them, shakes the parent soul of WASHINGTON with
feelings too strong for his dying frame. The last tear that he is ever to shed,
now steals into his eye, while a deep groan issues from his bursting heart.

Feeling now, that, the silver cord of life is loosing, and that his spirit is
ready to quit her old companion the body, he extends himself on his bed, closes
his eyes, for the last time, with his own hands, folds his arms decently on his
breast, then breathing out with his last parting breath. "Faller of Mercies!
Save my Country -- Comfort the brokenhearted Partner of my Soul! and take me
to thyself" he fell asleep.

May that God whom thou servedst, O WASHINGTON! hear the voice of thy prayer!
May thy blessings in death prevail for thy Country, still above the blessings
of thy life; even unto the utmost bounds of the everlasting hills may they
descend on Columbia, and on the lands where Washington was born!"

Loud were the bursts of grief, and many the tears that were shed, when the
fall of Washington was known; but in the ear of wisdom a voice was heard from
his awful shade -- "Children of Columbia, "weep not for me!" My streaming eyes
are closed in death; my throbbing heart shall beat no more. With me, the storms
of life are past, and I am at rest. -- But, weep for yourselves."

"The men of love and of moderation fail in your land. Wrath stirring gazettes
are in full circulation. Jealousies and hatreds prevail. Discontents abound.
The red sword of war hangs fearfully over your country; and the demons of pride
and ambition will soon draw it down. Then shall your enemies rejoice to see you
perish by mutual wounds, and fall an easy prey into their selfish and cruel
snares! Children of Columbia! Weep not for me, weep for yourselves. O that you
were wise; that you did but see, even in this your day, the things that belong
to your peace, before they be forever hid from your eyes"!!

Here on angel wings, the brightening saint ascended. Far and wide the air was
filled with fragrance; while voices more than human were heard warbling through
the happy regions, hymning the great procession toward the gates of Heaven.
His glorious coming was seen far off; and myriads of mighty angels hastened
forth, with golden harps, to welcome the honored stranger. High in front of
the shouting hosts were seen the beauteous forms of FRANKLIN, WARREN, MERCER,
SCAMMEL, and him who fell at Quebec, with all the virtuous patriots who on the
side of Columbia, toiled or bled for liberty and truth. But O! how changed from
what they were when in their days of flesh, bathed in sweat and blood, they
fell at the parent-feet of their weeping country! Not the homeliest infant
suddenly springing into a soul-enchanting Hebe -- Not dreary winter, deformed
with ice and snows, suddenly brightening into spring with all her bloom and
fragrance, ravishing the sense^, could equal such glorious change. O where are
now their wrinkles and gray hairs? Where their ghastly wounds and clotted
blood? Their forms are of the stature of angels. -- Their robes are like the
morning clouds streaked with waving gold. -- The stars of Heaven, like crowns
glitter on their heads. -- Immortal youth, ce^est^^l, rosy red, fits blooming
on their cheeks; while infinite benignity and love beam from their eyes. Such
were the forms of th^^^sons, O Columbia! such the brother band of thy martyred
saints, that now poured forth from Heaven's wide opening gates, to meet thy
WASHINGTON; to meet their beloved chief, who, in the days of his mortality, had
led their embattled squadrons to the war. At sight of him, even these blessed
spirits seem to feel new raptures; and to look more dazzlingly bright. In
joyous throngs they pour around him; they devour him with their eyes of love;
they embrace him in transports of tenderness unutterable; while, from their
roseate cheeks, tears of joy, such as Angels weep, roll down.

Oppressed with exquisite bliss of such honors paid for a moments virtue on
earth, he turned hastily around; he ^ought once more to exhort his countrymen
to virtue; to union; and to love. But it could not be -- this dark planet, this
bedlam of the universe is seen no more. Millions of mighty worlds roll between.
In silent extacy he adores. "Happy soul," the shining host exclaims, "happy
soul, this is but the beginning of thy joys." -- Then on they led him with
shouts, and with rapture-swelling strains of ten thousand thousand harps, to
the throne of God; whence, from a cloud of gold, sweeter than music, the
almighty voice was heard, "Servant of God, well done! faithful has been thy
warfare on earth! for the sorrows of a moment receive now the joys of eternity."

All that followed, was too much for the over-dazzled eye of Imagination. She
was seen to return, her snowy bosom quick panting, and with the disordered
looks of a fond mother, near swooning, at sudden sight of a long absent son,
now raised to kingly honors. She was heard passionately to utter, with palms
and eyes listed to Heaven. -- " O who can count the stars of Jacob, or number
the fourth part of the blessings of Israel? O let me die the death of
WASHINGTON, and let my latter end be like his."

Thou great and honored lady! who fittest alone and darkling in thy house of
mourning. Suffer me, who, in common with all America, look up to thee with
filial affection, as to the dear last remaining part of all that lives of our
WASHINGTON on the earth; suffer me to entreat thee to be comforted. What
could thou have desired for thy Washington, of riches, honors and usefulness
in life, of peace and hope in death; of glory, honor, and immortality in
Heaven, which God has not heaped on him? what could Heaven and earth, what
could God, angels and men have done more for him than has been done? since God
has given thee much, for thy beloved -- he requires much, even the acceptable
sacrifice of thy gratitude and resignation.

But that infinite wisdom forbids, soon would thy Washington, at the solemn
midnight hour, glide into thy chamber like one of those flaming spirits which
watch, unseen, the slumbers of the just. Soon would he draw aside thy curtain,
and looking on thee as pitying angels look on weeping saints, would say -- "O
Martha! O my beloved friend! why do thou mourn for me? In the days of my
trial I was faithful to Heaven, to love, and to thee; And I am happy; happy
beyond all that thou can think or ask. God has taken me away for ever from
the evils of life, from the evils of fast declining age, and the still greater
evils, of seeing thine or my country's woes. God has wiped all tears from mine
eyes; would thou, with cruel kindness, bring me back to this valley of tears?
I breathe in regions of eternal light and life, would thou recall me to this
land of darkness and of death? Oh! my beloved friend! my Martha! my wife! Exalt
thy thoughts to eternity, and finish with joy, that short task of duty, that
now remains to thee. Yet a little while, and we shall meet again; we shall meet
to renew that love that shall never know an end, and to celebrate those
nuptials which shall last forever."

Blessed above women! Thou wast, for forty years, the loving and beloved
companion of our Washington. Even in the largest company, thy converse, often
fondly snatched, was still the most endearing to him, and a ^eat by thy side
the most delightful. His children will not suffer their father's side to be
widowed. Soon as thy days are numbered, with pious hands, they will place thee
by his side. Then will the tears of millions flow. Yes, Dear honored pair! The
tears of your countless children shall water your tomb. The gorgeous monument,
with time-defying grandeur, shall arise, speaking Columbia's gratitude; and the
eyes of generations, yet unborn, shall read of your deeds, your VIRTUES, and
your LOVE -- They shall read, while the tender sorrow rolls down their pensive
cheeks,

Here lie, interred, all that could die of GEORGE WASHINGTON, and MARTHA, his
Wife.

They were lovely in Life, and in Death,
They were not divided,
Heirs of Immortality! Rejoice -- For their Virtues, their Honors, may be
yours.
" Honor and shame from no condition rise,
" Act well your part, there all the honor lies.
FINIS.

