SUBSTANCE OF A DISCOURSE; ON DIVINE PROVIDENCE, IN SPECIAL REFERENCE TO THE
MEMORY, CHARACTER and DEATH OF THE LATE Genesis George Washington, Delivered
Extempore, February 9th, 1800, BEFORE THE MILITARY OFFICERS OF PROVIDENCE.

By JAMES WILSON, PASTOR OF 2d CONGREGATIONAL CHURCH IN SAID TOWN,

PUBLISHED BY REQUEST.

PRINTED AT PROVIDENCE, BY B. WHEELER* 1800.

A SERMON.
Exodus XI* 3. Moreover the man Moses was very great."
SINGULARLY brilliant was the station, and in the highest degree important the
part allotted unto Moses. To him it was assigned by the Creator and Governor of
the Universe, to abase the despot Pharaoh, to afflict the idolatrous Egyptians,
to redress and deliver the long enslaved Hebrews: and finally to perform the
many prodigies which have excited the astonishment and commanded the veneration
of that and of all succeeding generations. But to preserve and fit him for the
accomplishment of these divine purposes, what singular providence attended
him, even from the moment which announced his birth. -- by parental affection
at the risk of life he is preserved from the murderous mandate of a policy
unexampled in cruelty; by maternal ingenuity buoyed above the devouring surges
of the Nile. In this moment of pe^il divine providence interposes, an asylum
opens ^n the ^^use of his enemy. The daughter of Pharaoh (and the ^^ver^e of
her hardened sire) beholds with compassion the weeping babe. Adopting him for
her own son ^he immortalizes her memory as the pious patroness of the greatest
of Prophets. Whilst under her sof^^^^^g care the foundation of his future
greatness is laid* for science irradiating his mind; he becomes skilled in all
the wisdom of the Egyptians. But now ^^^ived at his fortieth year, and
beholding an (...) brother feebly contending with a too powerful and insulting
Egyptian, he, under an impulsive presentiment, slays the petty despot. But his
brethren, not knowing that by him is their future deliverance to be wrought,
refuse his mediation in their quarrels; and ungenerously threatening his life
he is constrained to fly for refuge to the land of Midian, where generously
succouring the daughters of Jethro', he tarries in the land, and becomes the
son-in-law of Midian's priest. Possessed of true greatness, he cheerfully
exchanges the splendours of a court for the simplicity of the pastoral life;
and during an exile of forty years, in undecaying vigor, partakes all the
enjoyments of domestic bliss.

BUT Israel's oppressions wax heavier, their groanings penetrate the skies,
their God comes down to deliver them, their champion is forced from his beloved
solitude, he must now endure the gaze of the multitude, the bustle of a court,
and amidst the toils and anxieties of a camp spend the residue of his devoted
days. But he goes not a warfare at his own expense, he is commissioned to
Pharaoh, and arrayed in divine armor, his rod becomes a serpent; it is
stretched forth, the waters of Egypt become blood; he predicts, and murrain and
blain arrest both man and beast; the listing up of his hand is more terrible
than armies with banners. It is the signal, and reptiles and locusts in hosts
innumerable devour the blasted crops. The sun also refuses his chearing beams,
and fire, hail, and tempest fill with consternation the smitten and desponding
Egyptians. At this period it was that the elevation of character mentioned in
our text was ascribed to the Hebrew champion, viz. that "The man Moses was very
great in the Land of Egypt, in the sight of Pharoah's servants, and in the
sight of the people." -- But how much greater will he presently appear, when
according to his word we behold the sudden fall of Egypt's first born, the
emancipation and triumphant march of Israel's hosts, when at the stretching
forth of his rod the red sea cleaves in sunder, and for Israel rears on either
hand its adamantine walls; and when on the same signal it entombs Pharaoh and
his pursuing legions. But we cannot trace through forty years the progress of
his rising greatness, suffice it to observe, that as the Jews beheld in Moses
(as the instrument of divine providence) the founder of their religion and
institutor of their civil polity: So to him as an historian and prophet are all
nations indebted for the only genuine elements of the history of man; and
accurate developement of the true principles of morality; whilst in his mighty
works, the friend of religion, adoringly, beholds displayed the finger of his
God.

BUT the doctrinal inference which we would here deduce for the theme of this
occasion is, The providence of God over human affairs; and more especially as
displayed in his raising up at eventful periods, preeminently distinguished
characters, for the accomplishment of purposes in the highest degree
benevolent. Tracing then, briefly these providential dispensations, we will
advert to them as relating to the Jewish nation -- as displayed toward the
Gentiles -- and lastly, as affecting the most important interests of these
highly favored States.

As to the Jewish nation, we behold their fathers seeking in Egypt an asylum
from famine. To their descendants it proves an house of bondage. But are the
purposes of Abraham's God now baffled, or shall his promises fail of
accomplishment -- nay in the predicted deliverence of his covenant people and
overthrow of their taskmasters, we behold pourtrayed, in the most striking
characters, his compassion for the distressed, and indignation against
oppressors. Yes, ye oppressed Poles -- ye long enslaved sons and daughters of
Africa! ye hapless children of bondage, in every age and nation, in Israel's
deliverance behold the certain pledge of your own -- Whilst in Pharoah's
overthrow, ye tyrants of the earth, learn to anticipate your own swiftly
approaching doom. -- But ever Israel has reached the promised land, is their
venerable deliverer called to sleep with his fathers! Still they are not
forsaken -- their God he slumbereth not -- the faithful and valiant Joshua
leads them over Jordan. The iniquity of the Amorites is now full, and their
land becomes the inheritance of more faithful Israel. But is Joshua also called
to go the way of all flesh, and is backsliding, but now penitent Israel,
groaning under the yoke of surrounding nations -- behold in their turns what
champions are raised up, a Sampson, a Jephtha, a Gideon, a David, an Elijah and
Elisha, a Jehosephat and Josiah, and a Judas Maccabeus.

BUT when the Lord called Abraham and his posterity did he cast away the
Gentiles? Regarded then no more the God of the universe the nations whom
himself had formed. Nay even amongst the Gentiles is found the patient and
perfect Job, the approved Cyrus, and pious Cornelius, and over the interests
and concerns of all nations and individuals does the common parent of all,
unceasingly extend his watchful Providence. In the fall of Belshazzar, and
triumphs of the Medes and Persians, we behold redressed the wrongs of prostrate
nations. The Persians degenerate, and in their turn are the spoilers of the
earth; how are their innumerable hosts discomfited at Marathon! and how their
perverted power utterly broken by Macedonia's impetuous youth. Is it designed
that Greece should in her politics exhibit the models of well ordered
communities; that in her liberty should long display her all-invigorating
influence; and that as the lamp of science and the refined arts, she should
shine on surrounding and remotest nations. But to constitute this very Greece,
or to preserve it from enemies potent and malignant; how at successive and
eventful periods, as the instruments of God, do arise an Homer and Solon, a
Lycurgus and Thales, a Socrates, and Aristotle, a Demosthenes, a Themistocles
and Aristides, with others not less illustrious

Is Rome to become next the theater of events auspicious unto man? Is a greater
than Moses, under her jurisdiction, seat to dispel the mists of superstition,
which long had degraded the character and debased the hearts of men? Is he in
miracles more numerous and benevolent than the prodigies of Moses to proclaim
himself at once the Prince and the Messenger of Peace? Is he, and are his
Apostles, to disseminate through the nations that religion which, uniting man
to man, in the sacred bonds of brotherhood; and which by faith elevating them
to union with the Father of Spirits brings into vision the regions of immortal
felicity?

To effect then purposes, so superlatively beneficial, it becomes expedient
that Rome should arise, should extend her influence, civilize barbarians, unite
distant and remote provinces, and establish through her wide domain, laws equal
and uniform. But to rear and sustain a fabric so stupendous, belonged not to
feeble hands, it required the prowess and talents of a Romulus and Numa -- a
Brutus and Poplicola -- a Cincinnatus and Fabius. The amiable Scipios, and
others, with genius and virtues no less transcendant. Nor have modern nations
and times been destitute of characters great, amiable, and illustrious. Britain
justly boasts her great Alfred -- France (even republican France) her Henry the
Fourth. With Doria's greatness towers that of his country. Helvetia produces
the illustrious Tell. And even barbarous Russia receives with the arts a polish
from her first Peter.

BUT whilst the Eastern Continents thus soar each in its turn to distinguished
greatness, the Western, though more vast in extent, various in its climes, and
luxuriant in its productions, is but too much a blank in the system of the
universe; for with some exceptions it is but the haunt of the monsters of the
wilderness; or of men scarce less ferocious than their brethren of the desert.
To give it then (...) the Maps of the World; and rescue from oblivion It is
supposed that the ancients had some faint idea of this country.
so vast a portion of the globe, it required the efforts of a genius no less
penetrating, adventurous and persevering than that of the immortal Columbus.

BUT what availed it to us, that he thus exploring the trackless deep, had
enlarged the boundaries of the habitable universe; that your ancestors fleeing
from oppression civil and ecclesiastical had sought a refuge in the wilds of
America. Or that thro^^h theirs, and the toils, privations and virtues of their
children and successors, the wilderness had become a garden, and towns and
cities, numerous, populous and flourishing had arisen; I say what had availed
all this, if when a power become unnatural through pride, insolent from wealth,
and imperious through victory, now trampling on your rights and sporting with
your properties, your liberties and lives, if in this day of calamity divine
providence had not raised up for you a champion, rivalling in fame and
transcending in glory, the renowned heroes of the old world? It is true when
Britain's canvas whitened the ocean, when it groaned beneath the hosts of her
mercenaries, myriads of brave men, in whose estimation death was preferable to
bondage, suddenly arose in their country's defense, but as ardour without
discipline, and valor without order are impotent, so multitudes without a
leader must have yielded in the day of conflict* on WASHINGTON then every eye
was fixed; in him all hearts confided. Auspicious choice! he that at three and
twenty sagely counseled Braddock; who with his gallant Virginians saved from
the tomahawk and scalping knife, legions of flying veterans; will not in the
sanguine field disappoint his country's expectations. -- Nor will that citizen
who in rural scenes, or legislative councils for twenty years, has evinced the
combination of public and private virtues and abilities when victorious subvert
the vindicated rights of his native land. Illustrious man* thy fame bestrides
the Universe. Poets sing thy mighty deeds, and orators pourtray thy many
virtues; and yet thy character needs only the historian's faithful pen, simple
narration is alone sufficient; for so diversified and numerous are thy great
actions, that they contain in themselves embellishments beyond the powers of
feeble art. But as custom has authorized, and as the circumstances of the day
may require some tribute to his memory, permit me to attempt a faint
portraiture of the Mount-Vernon Hero. The character of WASHINGTON to be justly
appreciated, and properly understood, must be contemplated in a variety of
lights. It is military, it is political, it is moral, and it may also be
estimated from comparison. Nor will this variety exhaust it, it is like the
pure gold which diminishes not in the crucible. His military talents although the
most splendid, yet perhaps were the least estimable trait in his high
character; not that his abilities in the field were slender, but because the
science of slaughter seems to partake in itself of the nature of calamity; and
is only valuable from its averting evils of greater magnitude. Defensive
warfare is alone rational and just; and it was in this that our Fabius
peculiarly excelled. Yes, he was the man of whom truly it has been said, "his
prudence saved what valor would have lost." But in what a cause is he engaged,
the liberties of his country. The independence of numerous states, the glory of
a rising and vast republic hanging dubious in the pendant scale; on the one
hand are hords of veterans with every implement of destruction, led on by
chiefs long drilled in military science; on the other are the sons of freedom,
but often few in number, half armed, conflicting with hunger, nakedness and
want; but WASHINGTON is there; the die is cast, the scale preponderates, and
Columbia's chief, crowned with victory, and rewarded with the applauding voice
of his grateful country, like another Cincinnatus, retires to his beloved
scenes of husbandry.

But as in his military achievements, with prudence the most consummate, he
displayed dauntless courage* and a fortitude that was invincible; so in his
political capacity he was no less transcendant. When he assumed the highest
station in the Federal Government, that government was itself, but in imperfect
operation* no precedents to guide his dubious way, he must himself originate
them. In Europe already had the fermentation of Liberty, of Tyranny, and of
Crimes, mingled their chaotic mass. With that country these states were
connected by existing treaties. There the political horizon darkened,
tremendous concussions were felt, revolution succeeded revolution; whilst civil
liberty, religion, morality, reason and property, became alternately the sport
of conflicting factions, of regal tyrants, or of philosophising lunatics. And
whilst the most disastrous of wars laid waste the fairest provinces of the
world, this country though distant three thousand miles, yet it was menaced by
the approaching and dire calamity. But if with the preservation of our faith
with all nations, we yet enjoy so great a measure of peace, and if in those
days of adversity which seldom have had a parallel, such a tide of unexampled
prosperity has flowed in on us, I would ask, to whom, under providence are we
indebted? Or who has parried from us the blow, which robbing us of peace,
would have wrested from us, this accumulating good? Is it not to WASHINGTON we
are thus indebted? and was it not his quick, discerning mind, which foreseeing,
repelled the efforts of our foes, by his well-timed proclamation of neutrality.
But whilst the first interests of his high charge, were thus secured under his
guardian eye, need you be informed that those of smaller magnitude were also
duly cherished under his fostering hand; you have seen it in his repeated
Addresses to both Houses of the Federal Legislature; in his incomparable
Farewell Address, and uniformly through his illustrious administration of eight
years. The virtues of WASHINGTON demand now attention; but though thus
mentioned subsequent to his military and political talents, it is not from a
supposition that they were either less evident, or less valuable. The evidences
of his virtues were so brilliant and irresistible as to convince enemies and
annihilate suspicion. And so important is virtue itself, as ever to transcend
all other gifts or acquirements however splendid. An able General, or profound
Politician, if destitute of justice, of integrity, or compassion, or what is
the same thing, if void of the fear of God, from whence those virtues
originate, may become like Arnold, a traitor, or like Attilla, "the scourge of
God;" but if power or interest invites, never like WASHINGTON, the benefactor
of his Country. The victory which this illustrious man obtained over his
passions, how did it elevate him above the Ru^^ian, who was lately the chief
dependence of the leagued monarchs. Suwarrow grown gray in victory, and
conqueror in thirty pitched battles, meets with a single repulse in
Switzerland, his haughty soul chagrined, and brooding over his disaster, feels
all the mortification of defeat. He who had predicted that like a tiger he
should howl in Italy, now in rage retiring to Lindau, and yielding to all the
impotence of passion, in his chamber growls like a monster in his den. But
WASHINGTON with the same dignified composure, as when victorious, he received a
check, or sustained defeat; for resigned to and confiding in the God of
Battles, even from disaster he soon finds means to originate fresh victories.

IT is sometimes the frailty of even great men, to be avaricious; the alloy in
others is the undue love of power. Had any tincture of the former been in the
heart of the man we all admire, the corrupting millions of Britain would have
discovered the contaminated spot, had the latter been his propensity, he had
the opportunity to have become a second Cromwell. But as the virtues of
Washington were luminous so they were also solid; and for this reason because
they originated from the fear of his Creator; and because they originated here,
they were uniform through the variety of high stations which he filled, and
from this uniformity, arose that peculiarity of character, by which he is so
pre-eminently distinguished.

MILITARY Talents alone, have often procured the appellation of greatness to
their possessors; political abilities have been viewed as meriting the same
reward, and superior virtue is self-evidently more worthy of it, than either;
but when in one man we thus behold the concentration of them all, and of them
all in so transcendant a degree; we discover a sublimity and elevation of
character, but rarely if ever found amongst the frail descendants of Adam.

BUT in estimating this high character from comparison, Some little addition is
here (...); from a discourse delivered by the Author. ^n Sunday, Jan; ^th;
1880; from I These. IV. 14 occasioned by (...) personage in question.
we must recall the great theaters of action on which this very character
itself, exhibited to public view, its every trait.

WE must remember that WASHINGTON was a member of the first Congress. That he
accepted the chief command of the Colonial Armies when subjection would have
denominated him the leader of rebellion. That through a long and arduous
struggle he had not only an army to command, but in some measure also; that
army to create. That his final triumph was the establishment of his country's
independence. That in the Convention which originated the admired fabric of our
Federal government he filled the first and most influential place. -- That as
he was the first, so he was twice unanimously chosen to be the Magistrate who
should guide the supreme councils of the newly constructed government. -- That
though stricken in years, the voice of his country finds him once more obedient
to her call, and ready if needful to lead her vigorous youth against the
embattled foe. And lastly, That when his cup of human felicity is full, his
country rejoicing around him, and he just about to step into the infirmities of
old age* he in peace is called to sleep with his fathers; and with a placid
confidence worthy of his former greater greatness, bids his last adieu to
terrestrial objects; I ask where, amongst men is the greatness that can compare
with his? Amongst the Kings there is none worthy, Freedom's Champion will not
rank with those who combined to strangle her at her birth -- La Fayette and
Kosciusco, even if successful were but his pupils. Doria and Tell, though great
of stature were not half his height. The first Brutus bore some resemblance,
but he fell in battle, ever his country's cause was vindicated; in short to
form the portraiture of our hero, you must select the wisdom of a Solon, the
integrity of an Aristides, the amiableness of the Scipios, the prudence of a
Fabius, the simplicity and greatness of Cincinnatus, with the piety and
prosperity of Cyrus: concentrate these and you behold a WASHINGTON

BUT what is human glory? or what the life of the most illustrious? The one is
a vapor -- the other like the fading flower. -- Oh death* potent is thine arm;
Kings have thou slain and Nobles have cast down -- but now greater is thy
triumph, for before thee the mighty is fallen -- the man of war -- the prudent
-- the ancient -- the honorable. Venerable Parent of thy country! vain for
thee are now our plaints. The tears of millions confess to thee in vain the
weight of obligation -- thou art now beyond the reach of mortal tribute -- with
thy God alone is the measure of thy actions, with him the weight of thy reward.

THE numerous testimonials of gratitude, displayed throughout these States;
although they enhance not the bliss of our regretted Benefactor; yet they may
stimulate successors high in office, to tread a luminous path already traced;
and by impressing on our national character the ideas of ability to discern,
and eagerness, to reward merit, may contribute to wipe from Republics, the
reproach of jealousy and ingratitude toward their most brilliant and deserving
sons. But whilst we thus secure the character of being grateful and political,
let us not forfeit that of being religious; let nothing that is done favor of
idolatry; let not that tribute be paid to a creature, that is due to God alone;
from second causes let our gratitude, our affections, our hopes, all ascend to
the great, the first, the only, the transcendant cause of all. If WASHINGTON
was prepared, was raised up, was girded with strength, and made victorious, to
Jehovah alone belongs the high praise, to him who raised up the wise, the
illustrious, the mighty of all ages -- and who, should we need, and be found
worthy of them, will raise up yet to us, heroes and deliverers not less
excelling.

PAUSING now to contemplate the subjects thus discussed, we discover an error
no less popular than pernicious, viz. the modern doctrine of the equality of
man. That all men have (unless forfeited by crimes) an equal claim to the
unmolested possession of liberty, of property and life, none but the assassin,
the robber, or the despot will deny. And christianity in maintaining our
descent from one first pair, proclaims aloud our equality in nature. But when
we behold the transcendant characters from Moses down to Washington, vast
inequalities appear. We then perceive men, rising above men, even as the lofty
pine or towering cedar out tops the shrubs on which the cattle browse. And how
essential this variety, without it there were no heroes to have rescued from
oppression, no Columbus to have led our way across the dreary deep -- no Sages,
Prophets or Apostles who teach the way to God -- no accommodating artist nor
ingenuity which yields embellishment -- no Newton scrutinizing nature's poize
-- nor Herschel, who, to bring us tidings, traversed the lunar orb -- nor yet a
Bacon making visible the microscopal world.

AND through this variety, are we not admonished of the expediency of order, and
subordination in society? Is not the latter as an army in the day of conflict,
where insubordination yields but defeat and ruin? Or is it not a body politic,
with an head and various members; all suited to their several offices; no part
superfluous, but each essential, to the vigor, health and safety of the whole?
Nor let us be discouraged, should ours be an inferior station in this body. The
part alloted us, if adapted to our talents is the only one we can perform with
honor or advantage. Let us remember, that in the estimation of God it is not
greatness but goodness that is rewardable with bliss. And that superior
talents, abused or neglected here, will receive hereafter but the greater
condemnation; whilst the meanest talent faithfully occupied in this life, will
through the rewards of grace in Christ, entitle its pious possessor, to
inconcievably greater felicity and honor, in the immortal regions, than even
WASHINGTON possessed, in this world in all his glory. But I would now address
the military officers, who assembled in the house of mourning, feel
impressively, in their Country's loss, a double portion of bereavement.

GENTLEMEN, You have now heard the small tribute paid the memory of the late
illustrious Head and Arm of our Republic. Like Sheba's Queen you are ready to
say "The one half has not been told us." You know better his great worth.
There are some amongst you who stood with him in the day of his Country's
danger; who beheld him stand as an host where danger most impended, who imbibed
his spirit and learned from him to conquer. You saw him at Trenton and
Princeton nobly roll back the swelling tide of adverse war -- You saw his many
victories, his final triumph, and virtuous retirement to rural scenes. You
beheld him twice unanimously chosen to fill, with unrivalled dignity and
talents, the Presidential chair. Again he girds his armor on, and you rejoice
that under such a Leader you shall repel the hostile approaching foe. But you
have heard the tidings our Father is no more -- Have witnessed your Country all
in tears -- Our temples shrouded in the habiliments of sorrow -- and now you
wish to honor the memory of him, whose name ages yet unborn shall long revere.
Transcribe then into your hearts and lives his many virtues. If called to the
sanguine field combine prudence with valor -- scientific ingenuity with force.
In civil life be like him the first to yield homage to the laws. In office,
civil or military, let integrity, punctuality, and vigilance, characterize like
his your every action, maintain inviolably the Federal Constitution. WASHINGTON
aided in its construction and was clad in armor for its defense; it is the
fortress, in which are deposited the liberties and independence of your
Country. But above all contemplate eternity; this only is substance, all else
is shadow. What availed it in the moment of mortality to our beloved prostrate
Chief, that a nation should decree him many honors, that millions should weep
for him, or his name fill the fairest page of history? Naught then availed him
but religion. Secure then by faith the favor of him, in whose name alone is
salvation; whose death destroyed the power of death: and whose resurrection,
proclaims immortality, the portion of the just.

PERMIT me also now, to address, briefly, the assembly?

FRIENDS, Brethren and Fathers: With our deep regret we should this day also
combine grateful acknowledgements: for, rich has been the distribution of
providential gifts to these states. There was a WASHINGTON -- a Montgomery -- a
Green -- a Warren -- and many whom we must now omit -- There is still an
ADAMS, and others high in office, replete with talents and virtues. The best
expressions of our gratitude to God for characters so inestimable; will be to
encourage these his servants in their several stations, by our earnest prayers
for their prosperity, and by a cheerful and ready submission to all their
constitutional and lawful appointments.

BUT whilst we pay tribute to illustrious merit found in men, or mourn our
fallen chief; let us not forget his bereaved consort. He was freedom's
champion, she at his intimation announces the freedom of her slaves; he endured
the toils, anxieties and dangers of eight years warfare, she yielded him up,
and sympathising partook the whole. He now bath ceased his labors, but she
bereaved feels with individual force a nation's sorrow. Illustrious woman (...)
worthy such an helpmate? Thy sex too have adorned the page of history: even
from the fair and pious patroness of Moses down to thy favored self. Was there
a valiant and victorious Barak. There was a greater Deborah, or was there a
beloved John; behold the highly favored Mary, who gave birth to Mesiah, whom
highest orders of archangels worship. Yes, as in the female understanding
there is often found soil fit for highest cultivation; So in their sensibility
of heart, is a foundation laid whereon may be reared all that is amiable, that
is virtuous and worthy of true praise, and in the approaching kingdom of our
heavenly Parent and Redeemer, respect of persons shall have no place, nor male
nor female, but to the righteous of all generations shall be communicated
happiness ineffable through Christ.

AMEN.

