Julia, AND THE ILLUMINATED BARON. A NOVEL: FOUNDED ON RECENT FACTS, WHICH HAVE
TRANSPIRED IN THE COURSE OF The late Revolution of Moral Principles IN FRANCE.

BY A LADY OF MASSACHUSETTS.

"This volume, to the reader's eye displays
The infernal conduct of abandoned man:
When French Philosophy infects his ways,
And pours contempt on Heaven's eternal plan:
Reversing order, truth, and every good,
And whelming worlds, with ruin's awful flood."
PORTSMOUTH, NEW HAMPSHIRE, PRINTED AT THE UNITED STATES ORACLE PRESS, BY
CHARLES PIERCE, (Proprietor of the (...)) JUNE, 1800.

Dedication to the Public.
WHEN the following pages were committed to the press, it was the wish and
expectation of the Author to remain in oblivion. A variety of causes have
postponed its appearance; and conjecture ever busy, and curiosity ever prying,
have lifted up the veil of concealment, and many are acquainted with the name
and situation which shrouded in an happy mediocrity, it was hoped would have
escaped the observation of the world. Baffled in this her favorite wish, she
feels it a duty to apologize, with her very humble talents, for thus appearing
in public. She very well know^, that writers of Romance are not highly
estimated. She is likewise sensible that custom and nature, which have affixed
the duties of woman to very confined and very limited bounds, are by no means
likely to patronize a female writer. She feels that her conduct needs excuse,
and though the independence of her mind renders her unwilling to make one, yet
necessity obliges her to it. She is so certain that so many will acknowledge
the truth of her assertion, that she does not hesitate to declare, that not one
social, or one domestic duty, have ever been sacrificed or postponed by her
pen; and though it may be objected that the time devoted to it, might have been
better employed; She hopes that she may be allowed in some respects, to be a
judge of her own conduct; her pen has always been a favorite implement, it has
soothed many melancholy, and sweetened many bitter hours. Her abilities are too
scanty, to allow her to understand either religious or philosophical subjects
in others, much more inadequate to the attempting them herself; incapable of
undertaking the labors of history, or of attaining the sublime heights of
poetry; the only path which lay open, was that of Romance. The Revolution in
France, and the perturbated state of Europe, have opened some scenes, that
would, without these amazing shocks to the political world, have lain hid in
obscurity; to some of these she has had recourse, and many, very many serious
truths are interwoven with the story of JULIA. It may perhaps be objected, that
the (...) of our own country display a vast field for the imagination, and that
we need not cross the atlantic in search of materials to found the moral tale
or amusing story upon... But an aversion to introduce living characters, or
those recently dead, rendered Europe a safer, though not a more agreeable
theater. With real humility, and a trembling diffidence, this little work is
presented to the public, and as a mediocrity of genius, will not authorize a
hope for the approbation of the connoisseur; that it may be shielded from the
censures of the critic, is all that is expected. It comes like the humble
JULIA, soliciting patronage and protection as a boon that will insure its
success; not demanding as a due, what perhaps it will not be found to merit;
with a variety of defects, it is dedicated to the public, by

THE AUTHOR
June, 1800.
Preface, BY THE AUTHOR.
THERE are so few people that read prefaces, that they are become quite
unfashionable; and many a volume is ushered into the world, without what was
once considered as a necessary appendage; I am however induced to deviate from
the prevailing mode, and to present a few observations by way of preface.

I am apprehensive from the perusal of the title page, that JULIA may, by some,
be considered, a political work; as I have ever hated female politicians, I
think it absolutely necessary to declare it is not; entirely unacquainted with
politics, I should have viewed a revolution of the greatest part of Europe as
it respected them, with unconcern and indifference, and though the feeling
heart must bleed at the recital of the miseries which are inflicted by pride,
avarice, cruelty or mad ambition; though the tribute of many a tear, must be
paid to the sorrows of all mankind, from the unfortunate Louis, to the wretched
West India negro, yet I should have passed them by, as evils, to which mankind
will always be exposed. But when we see the greatest part of the world,
throwing off the shackles of religion, and becoming by profession, as well as
by precept, infidels; it is impossible not to consider it as a revolution from
piety, and from morality; and leaving politics entirely out of sight, we
shudder at the present view, and shrink from the distant prospect.

I am very sensible, that the story of JULIA, interwoven as it is with the
Count DE LAUNA, would if portrayed by the pen of a Constantia, or decorated by
the enchanting poetry of a Philenia, been adorned with a thousand graces, that
my simple style can never bestow; but it is with some pleasure I reflect, that
if it cannot obtain the praise of the literati, it will not offend the
moralist, and I have a prevailing hope, that its various errors will be passed
over in silence, when it is considered that the motive which induced its
publication, was a wish to do good, or at least to guard against evil.

Copy Right Secured.
District of New Hampshire, to wit:
BE it remembered, that on the 17th day of June, in the Twenty-Fouth year of
the Independence of the United States of America; CHARLES PIERCE, of the said
District, has deposited in this Office, the title of a Book, the right whereof
he claims as Proprietor, in the words following, to wit, "JULIA and the
ILLUMINATED BARON, a NOVEL, founded on recent facts, which have transpired in
the course of the late Revolution of Moral Principles in FRANCE. By a Lady of
Massachusetts."

IN comformity to the Act of the Congress of the United States, entitled, "An
Act for the encouragement of learning, by securing the Copies of Maps, Charts
and Books, to the Authors and Proprietors of such Copies during the times
herein mentioned."

JONATHAN STEEL, Clerk of the District of New Hampshire. A true Copy of
Record. Attest JONATHAN STEEL, Clerk.

JULIA, OR THE ILLUMINATED BARON.
CHAPTER, I.
The lovely young LAVINIA once had Friends!
But fortune s^is'd deceitful on her birth;
Deprived of all, save innocence and heaven!
She, with her widowed Mother, liv'^ (...).
THOMPSON.
JUST at the close of one of those delightful days, so common in the south of
France, the carriage of the Countess DE LAUNA descended into a charming valley,
and the eye of the owner, which had for several hours been suffused with tears,
was caught by the beauty of the scene; her heart had been so entirely occupied
with some recent sorrow, -- so lacerated by affliction long since passed, that
her imagination had wandered from the Coach, and had conducted her to the death
bed of her beloved friend, or the side of an afflicted brother: indeed she had
some sorrows of a nature still nearer to herself: but with an expansive heart
and unusual benevolence of soul, she frequently forgot, or at least buried her
woes in the griefs of others: -- At this time her mind was unusually agitated;
and when she caught a view of the sun now almost setting; a prospect of the
verdure with which the surrounding hills were covered, and a vision of the
lucid stream which flowed around them, she thought how often her spirits had
been calmed, and her mind harmonized, by a view of the beauties of nature:
"Surely (said she) they cannot wholly lose their effect; I will try and steal
if possible a transient tranquillity from objects so simple so sublime!" She
alighted and bidding her attendants drive to the top of a neighboring hill,
she walked on; sometimes stopping to survey the beauty of the scene, and
moralizing as she went, she thus found in some measure that tranquillity of
which she had been in pursuit. Almost at the bottom of the hill, in a little
turn of the road, she found a neat Cottage; the perfect simplicity of which
attracted her attention; a seat was at the door, a door wholly overshadowed
with grapes and woodbine; the frag^nce of the one, and the coolness of the
other, induced her to set down; -- but the voice of affliction which (...) from
the house, no sooner caught her car, than it reached her heart; and impatient
to sooth, even, if she could not relieve, she entered without ceremony, and was
immediately struck by the appearance of an old Man, who had just expired. By
the side of his bed stood a young Girl, whose face was strongly agitated by
agonizing sorrow, but it could not conceal her beauty; which even in that
trying moment, was too uncommon to pass unobserved a moment; her hands were
clasped together, her eyes (...) upon the inanimate body, and her whole frame
seemed convulsed by affliction.

The simple garb in which she was attired, was by no means calculated to adorn;
but could not veil the elegance of her person; after a second's hesitation,
Madam DU LAUNA, in a voice soft and plaintive, and a language that could not be
misunderstood, for it came from the heart and it went to the heart; thus
addressed the fair mourner. "I do not attempt to comfort you (said she) that
must be the work of time, but heaven who pities your distresses, has sent me,
to share them with you; whatever may be your sorrows, when you are calmer you
will confess them to me; and though I may not have the power to mitigate them,
yet I will join my tears with yours, and by my sympathy, aid you to bear them."
There was in the manner, as well as the voice of the Countess, something so
fascinating, so consoling, and so persuasive, that the afflicted heart felt
relief, and JULIA, somewhat soothed, suffered herself to be seated; her tears
still flowed, but they flowed in silence.

In a few moments, a young man with a woman and two peasants entered the room;
the first appeared to be a servant of the deceased, and the two others, persons
whom he had brought with him, to perform the last duties to the remains of his
master; he now informed the Countess that JULIA, which was the young woman's
name, was grand child of the deceased: "And now (cried he piteously) poor
(...), has lost her only friend; for it is an hundred to one if her uncle even
returns." This impertinent remark seemed to wound the unfortunate creature
anew, who was the subject of it; and though her lamentations were neither l^ad
nor boisterous, her heart seemed to be breaking (...) sorrows passed, and
sorrows yet to come: The Count^^^ with a tenderness and delicacy not often met
with, again attempted to soothe her; she a sured her, she should never want a
friend in her, and that she should never feel a want which she could prevent;
used to an elegant habitation, to a bed of down; and a splendid apartment, with
every convenience and superfluity of life, she determined to pass the night in
the humble cottage, and in the morning of the following (...) to prevail upon
the friendless creature to accompany her to her own dwelling, and to share her
fortune with her friends: In this view she sent some of her attendants to the
Carriage for refreshments from an Inn, and persuaded, (...), to retire to
another small apartment, while the remains of her Grand Father were inshrouded.

The Countess DE LAUNA, spent the whole night in administering comfort to her
young Protege, and so great a proficient was she in all the duties of humanity,
that the dispa^^ing girl became calm enough to listen to her gentle accents; to
thank her for her goodness, and once more to think of life without those
excruciating sensations that arose in her bosom when the Countess first
entered. "Have you always resided in this place my love (enquired this
excellent woman,) this question was prompted by extreme curiosity which the
perfect elegance of JULIA'S form had excited; by the softness of her voice, by
the propriety of her language and the gentleness of her manners; a politeness
that arise from an affectionate heart is not subdued, but aided by sorrow; that
politeness was obvious in this lovely girl; and the Countess mistook it for
that good breeding which is the result of a life spent in the world, and an
acquaintance with what is generally termed good company.

"I have no recollection of any other habitation (she replied;) my Mother was
the only daughter of the worthy Man who is now no more: I have reason to think
from many circumstances, that my Father was of birth and family superior; but
my dear Mother always appeared unwilling to speak of these things; and when I
once pressed her upon the subject, her reluctance was so apparent that I could
not prevail upon myself to wound her heart with any further enquiries: she was
very anxious respecting my education; she taught me herself the use of the
needle in its various branches, and from a neighboring town, procured masters
to instruct me in music, drawing and dancing; she purchased me books, attended
to my studies, and treated me more like a superior than a child: The
reflections I have since made, did not then occur; nor did I till I was near
sixteen years old, think with any degree of steadiness upon the difference
between the few girls I was allowed to converse with, and myself; this
difference arose wholly from our different educations; -- I then remarked it to
my indulgent mother, and begged to know why such a distinction was made; my
grand father (I said is poor,) you have always told me that we were so too; why
then expend so much money to procure accomplishments worse than useless; since
they prevent my performing the duties of an indigent girl, with the alacrity
that I ought too; surely I had better learn some useful employment that will
enable me to earn my bread. I shall never forget her reply," you were not born
my beloved child for the humble station you now fill; and I hope one day to
present you to those friends who will think themselves honored by a connection
with you: I strive to make your Education such, as will render you an ornament
to the station you will most certainly be one day called to; the time will
come, when I shall rejoice to unfold every Enigma; at present rest satisfied,
and be assured I aim only at your happiness. -- But alas! where are her
pleasing prognostics, f^ed forever from my view! passed like the clouds of the
night or the vapor of the morning, and not one ray of the sun appears to
illumine my dark and desolate path!" -- She paused a moment, overwhelmed by the
recollection: but the soothing voice of the Countess reassured and comforted
her, and she continued. "There was something so peculiar in my situation, that
it could not fail to call forth a variety of sensations; I was absolutely
forbid to stray beyond the bounds of my grand-father's farm: I never saw one
(...) man except our servant; now and then I was visited by the daughters of
two neighboring cottages, but never suffered to return their visits; but still
I was happy: My mother's assurance; my grand-father's kindness; my books, my
harpsichord, and work employed my time, and occupied my mind: I had no time for
regretting the want of pleasures that I ^ever tailed, and knew only from
reading. My mother made an annual visit at this season of the year to some
friends she had, but would never take me with her; she always tarried all
night, and never left home without giving me the strictest injunction to remain
with her father, and never leave the farm, if any thing prevented her
returning, at the period she appointed.

"Two years since she was absent but one day, and when she came home, joy
seemed to animate her countenance, and sparkle in her eyes; her whole frame was
agitated by hope: In a few days, my dear JULIA, said she, embracing me, every
mystery will be cleared, and I shall have the pleasure to see you acknowledged
as what you really are; my present joys would be too great were it not for a
sad and dreadful tale that I have to unfold. My dearest mother, said I, why
then do you keep from your daughter a secret, that will be so soon revealed*
prove that you think her worthy of your confidence, and relieve my mind from a
state of doubt and suspense. She told me with a kind of sorrowful severity her
precepts had had but little effect, if I could not check a curiosity for a few
days: you must learn to suppress it, indeed you must she added -- I have
suffered sixteen years of extreme uneasiness for you, I have lived secluded
from the world; and when I am upon the eve of reaping the fruits of all my
toil, you cannot wait three days for an eclairci^^ement which will render us
all happy; but if anticipated a moment, danger and difficulty awaits us. -- I
was hurt at my own folly; I entreated (...) received forgiveness: -- that night
she conversed with her father, and in the morning she took from a box that I
had never seen opened, a packet of papers, and after embracing me with great
affection, left us; that day I spent indulging the most pleasing hope^, and the
next I looked every moment for her return; but I looked in vain; that day and
many others were spent in a fruitless and intolerable anxiety, that I could not
describe: at length my grandfather sent Simon, his cultivator, to make
enquiry: but not a trace of her remained: Yet, still a later hope supported me,
and I kept expecting this (...) and honored parent, and recollecting all her
kindness and care, recalling every proof of her love, as well as the mystery to
which she had often alluded; while my fear that she was ^ea^, kept my mind in
continual alarm, agitation and distress: I began to think I never should see
her again, (...) looking into a newspaper, which was wrapped round some
articles that Simon had bought for our family use, my attention was attracted
by an advertisement that I still hope respected her, though I own the idea is
romantic, and now, alas, nearly exausted! it was in these words: Whereas a
female was by the machinations of an artful enemy deluded from her home; this
is to request her friends not to be distressed, to put their trust in
Providence, and to attend to the injunction she has often given. -- The life my
mother had led was always so in offensive, that I had never supposed she could
have an enemy; I knew not what to think; but I had been so wearied out with
conjecture, that I caught hold of the hope this held up; and though I sickened
at the suggestion of her being kept from her friends, I was more composed than
I had been; but the application I was obliged to make to family matters, kept
me from despair: I attended my little dairy^ cooked my grandfather's
provisions, took care that my house was always clean, and endeavored to be
cheerful to give him pleasure; thus labor was my resource, and constant
employment; a shield from discontent. I now seldom read, and the notes of my
harp, were discord; I only played a few tunes to gratify the only relation I
knew in the world. When I listened to the birds that built their ^^^sts about
the house, my sorrows were increased, for I thought they either mourned as I
did for the loss of a parent, or rejoiced in the care of one; -- but when I
watched the rising or setting sun, the calm hour of twilight, when I beheld the
milky-way, the sky bespangled with stars, my heart was listened, my mind
soothed, I became resigned, and pursued my duty with avidity. Thus I have
passed two years; my hopes and fears have abated by degrees (...); and I have
not for some time indulged either. My grand father has received two letters
from his son lately, but neither my mother or myself have been mentioned, and
this has convinced me, h^ is but a (...) brother and (...) uncle, and from him
I cannot reasonably indulge any expectation; I have I think been equally
removed from contentment and (...) and yesterday, oh madam! the sudden and
(...) event of yesterday, has deprived me of the only one upon earth, of whom I
can claim protection, or of whom I could boast affinity or relationship."

Here she ended her relation, and the Countess thanked her for her narrative,
and told her that she should return with her to the VILLA DE LAUNA. "I am rich,
my dear, and of noble blood, (said she,) but they only serve to prove that
riches cannot bestow content, and nobility cannot confer happiness: in the
midst of wealth and magnificence, I have been miserable, and nothing but the
hope of futurity, and a confidence that he who directs all things, cannot do
wrong, could reconcile me one moment to life. I admire your sentiments, approve
your conduct, and am glad that your education has been such as to enlarge your
mind and cultivate your ideas. In your society I promise myself much pleasure,
and while I live, you shall not want a friend: say nothing, my dear; I know all
you would say; but to listen to the too greatful expressions of a feeling
heart, would betray a civility that I hate, and receive a pain that is
unnecessary."

JULIA now expressed a fear that the leaving of the Cottage would be a breach
of her mother's commands: but Madam DE LAUNA convinced her of the impropriety
and almost impossibility of her tarrying there unprotected, till the return of
her uncle, who would most probably consider her as an intruder, and treat her
as such. "There is no doubt, said she, a secret hangs over your birth; with me
you will be secure; I am now going from Paris, where I have been to visit a
brother who has returned from an exile of many years, and a dying friend. I
will introduce you at my house as a young Lady of whom I have the care, my
servants are faithful; leave this place in the care of Simon -- I will write
your uncle; and when he returns he will undoubtedly disclose every thing that
appears like an enigma; in the mean time I will do all in my power to make up
to you the loss of your Friends: and I again repeat, that in me you shall
always find a friend.

The next day the humble obsequies of the old Man were performed, and the
sweetly mournful countenance of JULIA attracted all the eyes of the rustic
followers. The Countess walked by her side, and supported and encouraged her;
the genuine dignity and highly polished affability of Madam DE LAUNA; the
richness of her dress, the simple and unadored beauty of JULIA; formed a
striking contrast to the peasant groap around her, and the humility of the
Priest, his bald and reverend forehead, with his religious garb and fervent
piety; the rural spot (but a few paces from the cottage) where Pierre was
interred, formed a scene really picturesque. When they returned from the
funeral, the carriage was ready, the Countess had before given orders to Simon.
She now put a purse into the hand of the Priest, gave some money to the
attending peasants, and leading JULIA from the house, seated her in the
carriage, and the farm and the Cottage were out of sight in an instant.

Madam DE LAUNA saw her young friend so wholly engrossed by a grief that she
knew to be entirely natural, that for sometime she forbore to offer any
consolation; determined to let nature have its full play, and sensible that the
unadulterated mind of JULIA, would, if let alone, soon resume its calmness.

The mind of JULIA had indeed nothing to cope with, but sorrow; she knew too
little of the world to be suspicious, and her natural disposition was too
cheerful and to good to harbor any jealous thoughts. She had given herself up
to the Countess without one fear, and in full confidence of her merit. In doing
so, she did but justice to her exalted virtues; but she would have been full as
likely to have trusted herself to the vicious and designing, who could have
assumed the garb, and the appearance of active benevolence. But providence
beheld the innocent girl unpractised in the ways of deceit; unacquainted with
vice or folly, and sent this worthiest of women as a friend to comfort and
protect her.

CHAPTER, II.
What did I part with when I gave my heart?
I knew not, that all happiness went with it.
The Maid who loves, goes out to sea upon a shattered Plank,
And trusts to miracles for safety!
YOUNG.
HISTORY OF THE COUNTESS DE LAUNA.
AS the Countess DE LAUNA will continue to make a considerable figure in the
following pages, it may perhaps be not unnecessary to give a few sketches of
her history, and though it is so blended with that of her brother the Marquis of
ALVADA, we shall be pardoned by the candid, if some circumstances of his are
intermixed with it.

The ancient family of ALVADA and DE LAUNA, had already become connected, and
it was the fervent wish of the Count and the Marquis, that the titles, honors
and estate, should be still more intimately blended; the respective ladies had
been intimate friends from their birth, and with the enthusiasm natural to
youth and innocence, they fell in with their husband's plans, and looked
forward with delight to that period, when their grand children should be
equally dear, because equally attached to both. The Marquis ALVADA was blessed
with a son one year after his marriage; and the Countess DE LAUNA became a
mother within two years; the children thus affianced in their cradles became
fond of each other at an early age, and when the Countess presented her husband
with a son in less than three years after the birth of her daughter, they only
regretted that the Marchioness was not favored with a daughter: this wished
for event did not take place, till young DE LAUNA was twelve years old. But
this disparity of age did not prevent these friendly and affectionate parents
from indulging their favorite wish; and the Count determined at all events to
preserve the heart of his son, till CAMILLA, the daughter of the Marquis, was
old enough to receive him: with this view it was determined to send him abroad,
as soon as the nuptials of his sister with (...) ALVADA took place; that event
was only delayed, till the young lady arrived at the age of fifteen. This
marriage was preformed before all the dependents and vassals of both families;
and many of the nobility and gentry were invited to be present at a ceremony
that more strongly united two noble families. As soon as the rejoicings that
followed the wedding were over, young DE LAUNA was sent abroad with a worthy
tutor, who had strict injunctions to prevent all intercourse with the other
sex; to improve his mind and manners, and make him acquainted with every branch
of knowledge useful, necessary or ornamental. But the joys of all connected
were dreadfully damped by the death of the young bride, which followed the
birth of a son; in a few days thus event hastened that of the young (...)
mother, (...) the (...) did not survive his beloved wife a year. At his death
he left his estate to his infant grandson; his wife's fortune, with his title,
and a large landed property, descended of his son, then only seventeen, who in
his last will he left to the care of the Marquis, and enjoined that as soon as
his daughter became of age to marry, that she should be given to the Count. The
young widower, after passing a few years near Paris, at the ancient family
sent, concluded to spend some time abroad; he had loved his wife, for she was
beautiful and amiable; but the early impressions she had made, and left, were
in some measure worn out, before he quitted France; and gay company added to
the variety of scene^ to which he was now introduced, entirely restored to him
his former cheerfulness. CAMILLA had in the mean time grown in every beauty and
accomplishment, and when only thirteen, was thought a lovely ornament to a
brilliant Court. Just at that period HENRY the oldest son of the Earl of
O^MOND, on his travels through France, was recommended to the Marquis, and
became for two years, resident in his Hotel. It was almost impossible for two
persons. young and amiable, to reside under the same roof; mix in the same
company, and frequent the same diversions without experiencing the tenderest of
all sensations: Love the softest deluder of the heart, had assumed his power,
and such was his dominion that they lowed implicit, and forgetting the dictates
of prudence, and listening only to affection, they prevail I upon the Chaplain
to perform the ceremony of Marriage, previous to the departure of young ORMOND,
who was by letters commanded to return directly to England; they now supposed
themselves secure of each other, and willing to conceal their nuptials as long
as possible, at least, till the young Gentleman's friends were consulted upon
it; they parted with many tears, but in a short time she found concealment
would soon be impossible: at the discovery of her situation she was distressed:
The hope of soon seeing her beloved husband was her support; but what was her
wretchedness within two months, to be informed that he had died soon after his
arrival in England, of a malignant sever; at this period, this stroke was more
severely felt than perhaps it would have been at another. The Marquis was in a
confirmed decline; and the continual attendance of the Marchioness had injured
her constitution to a very alarming degree; from her it was impossible for
CAMILLA to hide either her distress or situation, and in this affectionate
mother she found a sympathising friend and adviser; fearful of the effects this
discover* would have upon the Marquis, she concerted a plan with the priest who
had officiated at the marriage to conceal it from him; in the execution they
were aided by the only brother of ORMOND, who arrived in France as he said,
only with a view to console the afflicted CAMILLA; shortly after his arrival,
this unfortunate young woman became a mother of a fine son, and viewing her
misfortune as a punishment for her imprudence, she implicitly obeyed her
mother, and readily consented to his being put into the care of his uncle, and
with his nurse conveyed to England. In pa^tin^ from her child, the mother gave
the severest proof of her sorrow for her past fault: she had insisted upon his
being called by his father's name, and entertaining an affection, romantic and
natural, she looked forward to that period, when, mature in wisdom and virtue,
he should become the (...) of those talents and manly beauties that had so
early won her affection. Before she got (...) from her (...), her father's
illness became so alarming, that she was obliged to spend every moment of her
time in his apartment, and her unceasing assiduity to him served to sooth her
sorrows for her Husband.

Young ALVADA was sen^ and though he quitted Italy with alacrity, he did not
leave it without regret: His filial affection was warm and fervent, and the
duty he owed (...) father, was strongly impressed upon his mind; his heart bore
testimony of his piety; but it bore testimony likewise of his tenderness, and
of the charms of SEIGNORA LAVINIA, a young lady possessed of a large fortune,
descended from a family ancient and honorable. A lady, who had all the
enchanting simplicity of rural innocence, blended with all the grace and
elegance of a court education, and trained beneath the eye of an aunt who was
acknowledged the best and most accomplished woman in Italy. It is not
surprising that LAVINIA was all she appeared; the pride and the delight of all
that knew her. Surrounded by admirers of her own country, she gave a decided
preference to ALVADA; nor did her friends wonder at this preference, for his
person was indeed graceful; his manners refined; his morals unimpeached; and
his abilities superior; with all the virtues engraven upon his heart; he had
received all the advantages of an excellent education; he was at that time more
than thirty years old, and in becoming acquainted with LAVINIA, he soon
experienced that tender, fervent attachment, that every heart of sensibility
will at sometime or other in their lives feel: he left her with vows of love
and unerring truth, and arrived in France just time enough to receive the
parting breath of his father: determined to obey his dying command, he soon
settled every thing to the satisfaction of his mother, and sisters, and in one
year he returned to Italy, when LAVINIA consented to receive his vows at the
sacred Altar; in a few months before that time had elapsed, poor CAMILLA. who
seemed to be pointed out for wounds from all sides, received a letter informing
her of the death of her son; this loss was an aggravation to her former
troubles; but still she was supported, and behaved with a fortitude that did
her honor, and when the Count DE LAUNA, returned after an absence of sixteen
years, consented to give him her hand in compliance with the promise she had
made her dying father; but previous to this step, she informed the Count of her
prior attachment, and of its consequence, the Count was one of those rare
characters in whom a sense of honor supersedes almost every other; the beauty
of CAMILLA had engaged his attention; her virtues, and he felt the full force
of a first love: But notwithstanding that, he would have left her free from
presuasion, if ORMOND had lived: he admired her frankness, and loved her the
more for her candor; even the tears she shed for his rival, endeared her to his
heart, and leading her to the Altar, he thought he possessed one of the
greatest blessings, and one of the brightest ornaments that had ever adorned
the marriage state. Upon his side it was productive of the purest delights; on
here is it was calm and not unpleasing; in giving him her hand, she had obeyed a
dying father, and a mother who loved her superior to every earthly blessing:
That mother she lost the fourth year after she became Countess DE LAUNA, her
husband's increased assiduity and affection in some measure succeeded in making
her forget her loss; and eight years passed on happily: In that time the
Marquis had brought home his beautiful and amiable wife: but at home he found
those troubles he had shunned abroad; his son now near twenty was profligate
and wicked, he had art enough to hide both from his father, but not to conceal
the chagrin he felt from his second marriage, which he supposed would produce
children to share his fathers estate, if not wholly possess his affection; thus
influenced by interest and avarice, he refused to see his mother-in-law; and
two years elapsed without an interview: his grand father had made him
independent and he resided upon his own estate; the Marquis often heard of his
excesses and grieved at debaucheries he could not prevent. The mild and gentle
spirit of the Marchioness was affected by his malice and folly; but no unkind
or repining word escaped her lips, and she strove to render her husband and
connections happy, by a constant perseverance in every virtue; but illness
seemed to effect what filial affection and duty had in vain strove to perform.
The Baron, (for his grand father had procured him a title) was seized with a
violent fit of illness, which his physicians pronounced to be mortal on the
fourth day; compunction then seized him, and notwithstanding he was but newly
initiated into the mystery of the sect that had given themselves the title of
ILLUMINATA, his conscience told him it was no shield against the hand of death;
it was then he sent to beg his father and mother-in-law, to visit him and
receive his last sigh; the Marquis and his lady obeyed the summons; an entire
reconciliation took place, and such was the effect that he recovered from his
fever, but was supposed to be in a decline. As the human heart is never softer
than when newly reconciled to an object always beloved, and for some reason
neglected, so the Marquis seemed more attached than ever to his son; in the
fear of his death he forgot all his errors; in the hope of his recovery he
hoped he was cherishing recovered virtues.

The mansion of the Baron was convenient, superb and pleasant; it was not so
large as his father's Hotel, nor so public, but it was retired, and the
Marchioness readily con^^ted to her husband's wish to continue there, till she
should be recovered from a confinement that was soon expected to take place.
This prospect gave the Marquis extreme pleasure, and the Baron seemed to share
his parent's joy; but though his fond father was deceived, the Marchioness was
not; as his sickness abated, she saw the depravity of his heart in a thousand
instances, and she felt a grief that she could ill conceal when the Marquis was
obliged by the commands of the King to make a journey to the court of Spain; he
had not been gone long when her uneasiness was increased, her suspicions turned
into certainties, and his conduct was so vile, that she wrote her husband, and
the Countess DE LAUNA, but the letters were intercepted; the Marquis was at a
distance, and when a rumor that she was unhappy, reached the Countess, she was
just recovering from a sick bed, and as soon as the Count could leave her, he
set off for the Baron's; but alas! this lovely woman was no more. Two days
before his arrival she had expired, in consequence of a premature labor: he
desired to see the corpse, and though he examined it with a critical eye, he
found nothing that could justify his suspicions, that she came to her death by
any unfair means -- this suspicion was founded on a thorough knowledge of the
Baron's character; and some acquaintance, with a set of vain Philosophers he
was connected with: but his apparent grief, the affirmation of the Physician
that attended, and the woman that was with her, convinced him he was mistaken:
her funeral was performed with great magnificence, but the Marquis' grief knew
no bounds. He at first appeared like a man distracted, and for one year he
continued in Spain, deprived of reason, and this was followed by a severe
melancholy. The death of her lovely sister was a severe affliction to the
Countess, they had thought and felt alike, and a similarity of sentiment had
created and nursed the most perfect and sincere friendship. She mourned her
loss with tears of heartfelt sorrow; but an event soon happened that called her
mind from more distant affliction, and fixed them upon her own. Summoned to
attend the Court upon the King's Marriage, she went with her husband and upon
entering the drawing room, her eye was caught by never to be forgotten, her
long loved and long mourned ORMOND. At first she thought it a delusion, a
vision of fancy, she gazed with astonishment; she doubted the evidence of her
senses; she had believed him dead from the authority of his own brother. How
then could this be? she now saw him advancing toward her with a pale face
indeed, hollow eyes; his eyes had lost all their sweetness of expression, and
the roses of youth seemed blasted upon his cheek by an untimely frost; but they
still retained their fire, and fierceness, and sorrow seemed to have taken the
place of complacency and good humor: pride and haughtiness had lessened the
reign of mildness and dignified humility. She made not these remarks; she
fainted, and her husband with wonder and afflection, carried her from the
presence. -- ORMOND, with an exclamation of surprise, followed: it was some
time after her recovery that the astonished Count could conceive the meaning of
the scene to which he had been a witness. At length the behavior of ORMOND,
left him no room to doubt that he was his early rival in her affections, and
still living to dispute his right. He loved his wife, he loved his honor, and a
long train of distressing circumstances rushed upon his view. It is not our
design to enlarge upon the scene, nor could the feeble pen do it justice. From
some things that came to light after; and that a gentleman connected with the
family related, it was learned that the noble family of ORMOND could not brook
the idea that the principal hope of their race should be allied to a catholic;
the marriage was illegal, performed without witnesses; the party under age; and
no consent from connections. ORMOND was deceived into a belief that CAMILLA was
dead; and the Priest who performed the nuptials, aided the deceit: thus both
unsuspicious themselves, were both deceived. ORMOND, had passed several years
in America, and was recalled but fifteen months previous to this event, to take
possession of his title and estate, as his father was dead, and he was now
chosen by the Court of GreatBritain, to congratulate the king of France upon
his nuptials; the moment he saw the Countess he knew her, and with one
retrospective glance, he saw into the deception -- but his temper was changed,
he was no longer the amiable youth that CAMILLA had loved, and had she seen him
as he now appeared, DE LAUNA, had never known a rival; for his temper was
revengeful, haughty and overbearing, and unmindful of her peace and quiet: The
next day he sent a challenge, couched in such terms of defiance, that it was
impossible not to accept of it; they met, fought, and DE LAUNA fell, covered
with his own blood, and sinking beneath a mortal wound; but ORMOND, escaped to
England.

The terror, the grief of the Countess, is only to be conceived by the feeling
mind, and not to be described. In a few weeks, with an heart broken by sorrow,
and a frame, shattered by illness, she followed the remains of her (...) to the
VILLA DE LAUNA, nor had she left it till within one month of the Commencement
of this tale. -- It is very necessary to add that the Duke of ORMOND had
claimed her as his wife, and pressed his suit with all the ardour of passion.
But she had steadily refused every proposal of this kind. Second marriages, she
disliked from principle; but to wed the man whose hands were stained with her
husband's blood; was an idea too dreadful to be dwelt upon, and her heart
sickened at the thought. ORMOND was lately dead, and though it is probable she
felt some pangs at this event; certain it is that she had been more calm since,
than at any period of her widowhood: Tried in the school of affliction: tutored
by the rough hand of sorrow; she now lived only for others; to bless a numerous
train of dependents; to comfort the afflicted, to bind up the broken hearted,
to pour the oil and wine of kindness and sympathy into the bosom of the
oppressed, was her business, and her pleasure: and her ample fortune, gave her
sufficient power. She had never left the retirement that was endeared by her
sufferings, and by her happiness, till called by the desire of a dying friend,
and the sickness of her brother, who had returned to France not less wretched,
though more calm; and whose afflictions were by no means lessened by the
conduct of his son: now the Count DE LAUNA, son to the BARON; this title
descending to him, upon the death of his uncle. This was the woman who became
the protector of JULIA, and to them we will after so long a digression, return.

CHAPTER, III.
Hail Novelty, thou power supreme, all hail!
We bow before thy shrine,
And worship on the Altar, of thy divinity!
It Is thou that renderest all these scenes delightful,
Adorning each with beauties all thy own:
And when sweet innocence, and Saint-like virtue
Bedeck thy votaries, it is indeed divine.

FOR several hours after they left the Cottage, silence was observed by the
Countess, and JULIA, continued absorbed in unpleasing reflections. But just as
the Sun was setting they entered a little village; a sight so novel attracted
the eye of JULIA, and she could not forbear an exclamation of surprise and
wonder; to her the little town seemed the capital of the world, and the humble
church near its center; a building of immeasurable magnitude. The Countess
enjoyed her astonishment, and rather increased the sentiment so natural to the
inexperienced, and to the innocent mind: she did not tell her that Paris was an
hundred times larger, or that the Chateau DE LAUNA, was more magnificent than
the little convent, at which she meant to tarry for the night.

She had been always acquainted with the ABBESS, and loved and respected her
person and her character, and had often said if she should ever retire to a
convent, which she had once contemplated, it would be this: is not to be
doubted but she met with a hearty and friendly welcome, and both Nuns and
superiors vied with each other to entertain the pensive and wondering JULIA,
whom the Countess recommended to their care, for the night; refreshment and
repose were highly necessary, and extremely welcome to the wearied frame of the
unfortunate girl; but for some time her agitated mind forbade its approach;
wearied nature at length found it near midnight; and when JULIA awoke at
sunrise, the next morning, she found her mind calm, and her person reanimated
with health, hope and spirits.

She met the Countess in the parlor, and after the usual salutations of the
morning, they accepted the invitation of the ABBESS, to join their early
vespers, which were performed to the admiration of JULIA. One of the sisters
showed her every apartment in the Nunnery; and in so doing obliged and
astonished her, and filled her mind with sensations so entirely new, as almost
to exclude her recent sorrows, and furnished her with a fund of necessary and
useful reflections for the day: at nine they bid adieu to these hospitable
recluses, and began a journey that was much more pleasing than the preceding
day.

The eye of JULIA, which for years had been bounded by one narrow farm, was
never satisfied with gazing upon the vast horizon; the amazing tract of land,
variegated by hills, meadows, woods and waters, attracted her ^^tention; and
though the prospects in some parts were neither grand nor romantic, though the
hand of industry had neither turned the globe, nor cultivated the soil for
miles around; yet to her it was an inexhaustible scene of delight and
astonishment. As she made her natural and lively remarks, the Countess listened
with pleasure, and saw with wonder the power of nature over an heart unused to
the world. The minutest beauties did not pass unnoticed, and what would have
escaped the observation of a commonly cultivated mind, was to her a source of
moralizing and enjoyment. You are extremely like a lovely woman, said Madam DE
LAUNA, who now sleeps in the cold embrace of death; the same beauty, the same
bewitching simplicity, the same native good sense, and reflecting powers, and
to these she added all the elegance of a Court, and possessed every virtue and
every grace in an eminent degree; the likeness struck me last evening, and this
morning too, I could not but remark it. Nineteen years ago, (she added with a
sigh,) I visited this convent with her, my brother and husband; we were all
happy; comparatively, I was so; for though I had bid adieu to those flattering
hopes of romantic felicity, that once flowed in my disturbed imagination, yet,
I was calm and contented, I enjoyed all the blessings of friendship, and one of
the best of husband's. The friend that possessed my warmest esteem, and that
husband are long since secreted in the gloomy mansions of the grave; taken away
by means the most shocking; sacrificed to the basest of passions. Forgive me my
love; I pain you when I should assuage the anguish of your heart, by a sad
retrospection of my sorrows. -- But I was going to remark, that you reminded me
of that lady, and not withstanding the difference of your lives and educations
you think and speak so much alike, that I almost fancied I saw her again;
beheld once more her fair frame, reanimated by life and restored in all its
former loveliness. When you remarked the resignation of the pensive Abbess, the
paleness of the Nuns, the sighs of the Novice, and the gloom of the Cloister, I
heard her voice in yours and found your sentiments so exactly what here is was,
that I went back near twenty years and looked around for my husband and
brother: but alas! you are all that remains of joy to me: The fleeting vision
of the original and the worthiest of men are no more; and my brother, by the
cruel events of his life, is rendered useless to society and burdensome to
himself. JULIA, with all the warmth of an affectionate heart, pressed the hand
of her benefactress to her lips, and endeavored to cheer the spirits which
were so lowered by reflections, by asking questions that introduced a
conversation that lasted till they came within sight of the VILLA DE LAUNA, and
an involuntary exclamation of pleasure and surprise burst from her lips.

The elegance, taste, fancy and art that were here displayed; rural beauty
mingled with grandeur and magnificence, elevated the mind, while they charmed
the eye: every necessary and real convenience were conspicuous, and at the same
time rendered so ornamental, that it was impossible for a person who had seen
the world and been most acquainted with the grand, and the noble, not to admire
it. The connoisseur and the critic sought in vain for faults, and vainly wished
to find something to blame, that they might display their own talents: but they
returned disappointed, though not chagrined, for the hospitality and
benevolence of the Countess, overpaid them for being obliged to commend, when
they meant to condemn.

What then must be the sensations of a girl of eighteen, who recollected no
house, but a Cottage of two rooms, and whose ideas of the superb, were formed
from books, and the conversation of an old Man, of slender abilities, who knew
but little; and a woman, whose mind was always too much agitated by
misfortunes, to pretend to give information on architecture. She could not
express her surprise; she found no words to tell her admiration, and she was
lost in astonishment: The Countess so charmed with simplicity, and ingenuous
expressions, almost forgot every thing that related to herself; but her vassals
and dependents, by the testimonies they gave of joy at her return, convinced
her that neither absence nor misfortunes could efface from the grateful mind a
sense of benefits received, when conferred in such a manner as to convince the
obliged they were conferring favors; she could not receive such proofs of their
grateful affection without tears; they assembled around the carriage with their
humble pastor at their head to inquire for her health, and bless her for her
return, while her smiles and affability were dispensing blessings and comforts
around her. Oh, my dear Madam, said JULIA, how rejoiced I am to find the world
so good and so amiable, I had supposed that there were some wicked and
miserable amongst them, but all those people look so good and so happy, that I
am sure I have been deceived. How blessed must you be in the power to render them
so happy and so good, and so glad to see you too: I had no idea that the world
was so amiable. The world, my love, said the Countess, you see but little of
the world; but yet added she, these humble and happy rustics, are an epitome of
thee.

They now alighted, and after inquiries for the welfare of all, Madam DE LAUNA
ordered wholesome food and liquors for them, and dismissed them, with an
invitation to dance upon the green that day fortnight. It was near night when
they arrived, and soon after a slight repast, JULIA was conducted to her
apartment, they consisted of a bed chamber, dressing room and closet, those my
dear (said her benefactress) are yours, they have been fitted up for some time,
and I have been in pursuit of an inhabitant for them, and am rejoiced that I
have found so pleasing an owner. The books, furniture, and musical instruments
are your own. Tomorrow I will furnish a wardrobe for you, and here added she,
taking a smiling little girl that just then entered, is your attendant, ANNETT,
you are henceforth to obey this young lady, and see that you do nothing to
displease her. Do not, my dear good lady, said JULIA, thus oppress me with
benefits, I want no attendant, suffer me to attend upon you, it will be much
more becoming. Not one word, my dear, as you value my esteem, you are my
friend, my companion, and as such my equal, and not a servant. But let me do
something, said the beseeching girl: -- Let me u^dress you every night, let me
read you to sleep; let me hall you every morning at your rising; attend you at
your toilet, and by all the little trifling little offices in my power, in part
repay, or at least, express my sense of your goodness, and my gratitude. Ah
JULIA, cried the Countess, you are too insinuating to be denied, and if I let
you petition, I know I shall grant what you ask; so remember, that I refuse you
the liberty of asking such favors as this. Good night, my love: ^ay your repose
be peaceful; and with an embrace she left her.

The next day JULIA attended the Countess in several visits of charity, and
beheld the effusions of benevolence and gratitude with so much pleasure, and a
pleasure so new, that she began to think her very being was changed, and that
her heart was filled with sensations to which she must have ever been a
stranger: but for her excellent friend; the native condescension of her heart,
that humility of soul, which the amiable delight to cherish and encourage,
taught her to be affable to all around her, while the innate dignity of
conscious rectitude and conscious honor, forbade every thing like servility or
meanness. She soon grew beloved by the servants and every day rendered her more
dear to the Countess. She was never tired of rambling over the pleasure
grounds, of setting under groves of Orange, Lemon or Citron, or attending to
the feathered songsters, that every hour serenaded them, nor had the lombardy
Poplar, the lofty beach, the graceful Elm, and the venerable Chestnut, less
beauties, because intermixed with less plenteous exotics; they were all
surveyed with enthusiasm and delight, and she literally "looked through nature.
up to nature's God."

The Countess had real pleasure in informing her mind, and felt a sincere
satisfaction in making her acquainted with every thing that could either please
or impro^^ her, and the mere she knew of her native, good sense, the happy
temperament of her mind and disposition, she became more attached. There is
nothing that more endears an amiable dependent to a truly generous heart, than
a knowledge of that very dependence, and a sense that it is in the power of the
benefactor to render the obliged entirely happy: such were the Countess, and
JULIA, and a sense of obligations on one side, and a wish to oblige, joined to
good humor, frankness and good abilities, all concurred to cement the
affection which they naturally felt for each other; thus grateful and
affectionate, JULIA passed four weeks tranquil and happy, the peasants had
their ball, and she was delighted that she had learned to dance; but till now
had never been a partaker of the pleasing exercise and now at the desire of her
patroness, she danced and found the music so animating and so agreeable that
she enjoyed it highly. She was likewise plea^ed to see them happy, and one so
blessed as to have the power to make them so.

CHAPTER, IV.
SURE Gratitude is the most pleasing, as well as the strongest emotion of the
human heart; -- and he who does not feel its force, is wretched.
ABOUT three weeks after, the Countess was informed, that a stranger wished to
speak with her; she ordered him to be admitted, and was surprised, to see a Man
near forty years old, who was an entire stranger to her. What are your
commands, friend? she asked. The man replied, he had waited upon her by her own
direction, upon account of a letter, which he then held in his hand, and which
he said he had received three weeks since. The Countess immediately recollected
the letter she had written from the Cottage, to JULIA's uncle. Are you the son
of Monsieur PIERRE? (said she.) I am, Madam, he replied. It Is my uncle
exclaimed JULIA, in a tone of pleasure; and she arose and advanced toward him;
he stepped a little back and replied, no, young lady, I have not that honor.
How! cried the Countess, did not you say your name was PIERRE, the son of the
old man, who died at AVIGNON. I am his son, Madam, but still I have not the
honor to be related to that young Lady; it is upon that account that I have come
here, otherways I should not have been so bold, and given you this trouble.
After a moment's hesitancy, the Countess rejoined, this young lady was the
granddaughter of your Father; her relationship would reflect honor upon any
one; why then do you deny her as a neice? she wants nothing of you. Excuse me,
Madam, said the man, and you Mademoiselle, pray, believe me, I should think
myself highly honored by being your uncle, for I am a poor man. a servant; and
you a fine young lady; but I should act a dishonest part were I to say I am
your uncle. Who are you then, interrogated the Countess, and who is she? if she
has been deceived, act a generous part, and undeceive her. She now saw JULIA
almost sinking under her various emotions; Emotions too strong not to be
impressed upon her face. Do not give way to these agitations my dear, cried the
kind, the feeling woman, I will always be your friend, and you shall never know
the want of a relation. I know your goodness, and I feel it, Madam, but do
forgive this weakness; to find myself denied by the only person that I could
claim as a relation. She would have proceeded, but tears stopped her utterance.
The Countess again demanded of PIERRE, who she was? He stopped a few minutes,
as recollecting himself, at length he said, my father was a poor, a very poor
man, he never had any child, but myself; my mother died when I was but three
days old; my father was never married again: when I was twelve years old he put
me out as a lackey, to attend upon the Chevalier St. ENNO: and he himself was
entertained as a servant to the young Baron DE LAUNA. I went with my master to
CLEAVES, and never saw my Father until I was twenty years old; he then came to
visit me, and told me he had quitted the BARON's service, and was obliged to
change his name; he said he had the care of a woman, and a little girl, who
owned a farm at AVIGNON, and that he should in future live upon it; but as he
did not understand the cultivating of it himself, he should keep a servant.
When I asked him who this woman was, he said she went by the name of VALLACE,
but that was not her real name, and she was obliged to take great care to
conceal herself and child, as its life would be in danger if discovered; my
Father told me that he depended upon my secrecy, and charged me in my letter
never to mention it to any one but ourselves. I have lived sixteen years at
CLEAVES, with a Monsieur D^NVILLE, and have written my Father regularly once a
year; his answer always told me he was well, and that he wanted for nothing;
this made me quite easy; but when I heard by SIMON of his sudden death, and
from your ladyship's letter found I was supposed to be heir to what he left, I
thought it was my duty to inform you of the truth; as to this young lady, she
is the right owner of the little land my father cultivated, and the house he
lived in, and I wish it was as much again, for your sake Mademoiselle; for
SIMON tells me that you were very kind to my Father, and if it is in my power
ever to serve you, I shall be glad and ready.

Both JULIA and the Countess continued some time in a state of astonished
silence; at length the former thanked him for his good wishes, and asked how
she should proceed. I am pleased with your honesty, my friend, you shall not
lose by if (...) I am not surprised at what you told me, I never supposed JULIA
what she appeared; I will take it upon me to say, the Farm and the Cottage are
yours, with all that belong to it; I only beg you will be silent concerning
this affair; if you can leave your service, I should advise you to reside at
the late habitation of your father; I am persuaded you can make a comfortable
support from the land that surrounds it, and if we should want your evidence,
we shall know where to apply. JULIA confirmed the promise of her benefactress,
and as soon as PIERRZ left them, he took possession of his new abode, and was
from that moment a faithful adherent to the Countess.

As soon as he left the room, Madam DE LAUNA embraced her young friend with
expressions of the tenderest satisfaction; I am afraid, my dear, (said she)
that I am so little minded as to feel what is called family pride; I am almost
ashamed to confess that I already love you better than when I supposed you were
descended from old PIERRE. Do not mistake me, in imagining that I can suppose
any grade of life, however lowly, excludes the virtues, nor that there is any,
but is at some times graced with all that is good and amiable; but I cannot help
thinking these instances very rare; this I do not impute so much to any
original defect, as to the effects of a narrow and confined education; the
society to which they are habituated; and the narrow sphere in which they move.
I thought from my first seeing you, that you could not be in any shape related
to the man of the Cottage, and I have no doubt you are descended from, or
connected with some of our chief Nobility; I doubt it very much, (cried JULIA,)
but I am not enough acquainted with the world to dispute the justice of your
remark; though I own my dear Madam that there is a forlornness in the idea of
not being the acknowledged relation of one person in the world; of not knowing
one person in whose veins one drop of my blood ^lows; that is so painful, that
I would gladly barter it, for what I should feel to know myself nearly related
to one of your honest tenants. Conceive yourself related to me, then (said the
Countess,) call me by the endearing appellation of Mother, consider me as such,
and no one will prove a tenderer one. Oh! my Child, if my son had lived, I
should indeed be a mother, but providence has denied me such a blessing. I
should be ungrateful to providence, replied JULIA, if I did not acknowledge the
vast, the mighty blessing I received; forgive then my revered, my beloved
benefactress, this momentary laspe of gratitude, you are indeed more than a
mother to me. Such was the tide of sentiment that so tenderly rushed upon her,
that to have restored the child of the Countess, she felt she would have given
up her own life, and such was the similarity of emotions that swelled in both
bosoms, that the Countess conceived without explanation the full force of her
virtue and gratitude.

To dissipate these sensations, she proposed an airing, and after a pleasing
ride of several hours, in which their eyes had been regaled by the most
delightful views, and their spirits refreshed and enlivened by the cool air and
fragrant breeze; when upon their return, she ordered her servants to drive back
of the little road, and cross the river where it was fordable. She here pointed
out some prospects that JULIA had never seen, and such a universal harmony
seemed to pervade all nature, that every painful idea was succeeded by calmness
and tranquillity. But this tranquillity was interrupted by the horses taking
fright at the fall of a tree upon the opposite side, and in spite of the
driver's endeavors turned down the stream, and were in a moment beyond their
depth; and the carriage instantly overturned. JULIA was uppermost, and the
servant who retained his presence of mind, burst open the door of the coach,
and with difficulty dragged her out and drew her to the shore. Quite exhausted
with his burden, and heavy with his wet and cumberous clothes, he could do no
more, and the Countess must have inevitably perished; but the sudden appearance
of a young man raised a hope in his mind: for God's sake (he cried in a
convulsive agony,) Monsieur, save my Lady, she is drowning in yonder carriage.
The impetuous stranger waited not, but plunging into the water, he was in a
moment* by its side. The horses were by this time cleared from their tackling,
and had disappeared with the driver; the coach was full of water, and the
Countess sunk senseless to the bottom; the intrepid youth entered, and with
great difficulty forced her from it, and in a few minutes brought her to the
shore; but not one symptom of life or animation, flattered them with remaining
life. By this time several stout woodmen were collected, and the Ladies by the
direction and assistance of the young stranger, were conveyed to a small
cottage close by the edge of the wood. The extreme ignorance of the people was
such, that they now thought they had done every thing that could be done, and
but for the persevering care of her deliverer, his former exertions had been
thrown away; the surgeon had been sent for from the Villa, but before his
arrival, the aid that was then necessary, would be no longer needful; he
ordered two countrywomen that were in the woodman's cot, to undress and put
both the ladies into a warm, but very coarse bed, and with volatiles, that were
found in the pockets of the Countess, he assisted to rub their temples and
hands; in a few moments JULIA recovered, but when she saw her friend and
protectress, apparently dead, her agony became extreme, and she relapsed into a
state of insensibility. The young gentleman with active and humane zeal,
distributed his care and attention alike to each; It was more than half an hour
before the Countess gave the least symptom of returning life; and then it was
so very weak and faint, that one less animated than her preserver, would have
given up the attempt as hopeless, and improbable. But his exertions were
continued till she opened her eyes, and attempted to ask where she was. At that
moment the surgeon arrived, he immediately opened a vein, and gave her a
cordial, which she swallowed with some difficulty, and JULIA who had now
recovered a second time, had the inexpressible joy to hear him say she would be
quite well in an hour; in this, however, his sanguine hopes outran his
judgment, for though she recovered her voice and recollection, she was still
weak and dangerously ill. JULIA, my love, said she, where are we? and what
place is this, that we are got to? I thought we were in the water; I am sick
and dizzy; I believe I have had a dreadful dream. The emotions of JULIA were
such as deprived her of the power of expression, she could only clasp her arms
around her and weep; joy, sorrow, gratitude, fear and hope, alternately
asserted their power, and such a variety of sensations, struggled at once for
vent, that her reason was almost overpowered. To calm the tumults of her mind,
and to satisfy the Countess, the surgeon gave her an account of her danger and
escape, and begged her to be composed. An opiate which he administered, had the
effect he wished, and after a few hours repose, the Countess declared it her
intention to return to the VILLA, and begged her deliverer would accompany her.
The young man hesitated for a few moments; he felt it would look as though he
wished for thanks, and perhaps reward, for an act of humanity, that he would
have performed with equal avidity, for the beggar or the king, for his friend
and his enemy; and his heart which was warm and generous, revolted at the idea;
but that heart was susceptible to the charms of beauty and innocence, and he
felt himself drawn by a power that he did not comprehend, for till now he had
never given a decided preference, to any one of the sex; nor did he understand
the nature of a charm so sweet at to be irresistible, in the pressing
invitation he received. A coach and attendants were sent from the Villa, and
Madam DE LAUNA felt a sincere joy to hear that her servant had been saved,
though both of the horses were drowned. She now rewarded every person who had
been so active in assisting her; and at nine in the evening arrived at Villa.
Her servants had been told she was dead, and most of them, with many of her
vassals had come with agonizing hearts to the wood, and nothing but the
absolute injunctions of the surgeon, and his declaration that her perfect
recovery, depended upon the calmness of her mind, could moderate their joy, at
finding her alive. But those that had not left the house, when they saw her,
became quite frantic, and made the air resound with their acclamations of
pleasure, and their conduct upon this occasion was the most convincing proof of
her goodness and their affection. They got around her deliverer, and were so
clamorous in their demonstrations of gratitude, that one less interested or
less amiable, would have turned with disgust from them. But the innate
benevolence of FRANCIS COLWORT, his love of merit, the noble frankness of his
disposition, were such, that he enjoyed those transports that gave him an high
idea of the worth of the Countess, and of her young companion. JULIA, who was
entirely recovered, refused to leave the apartment of her friend for the night;
but it was with great reluctance that her consent was granted.

Mr. COLWORT, was conducted to the best apartment, by the housekeeper, who
wished him every blessing, and left him in possession of the best and greatest;
an heart pleased with having performed an act of humanity, and a conscience
void of offense.

The next morning the Countess was not well enough to breakfast in the parlour,
but she sent to request her guest would take his morning repast in her dressing
room. Both she and JULIA were prepared to esteem a man who had rendered them so
essential a service. For JULIA, her heart was so grateful, and she viewed the
benefit she had received as of so vast a magnitude, that had he been old, ugly
and deformed, her glowing imagination would have painted him young, lovely and
amiable. But the aid of imagination was entirely unnecessary to add one charm,
or one grace, to the manly form and intelligent countenance of FRANCIS COLWORT.
In that countenance, animated by good sense and benevolence; she beheld the
index of one of the best of minds, and a counterpart of her own, where virtue
and genuine dignity of soul, presided; and a high sense of honor sparkled in
his eyes; courage tempered by discretion; good humor, untinctured by meanness
or servility, and a frankness that did not even border upon insolence or ill
manners; and when he entered the apartment, with a step firm, and a manner
majestic; with a graceful, modest and easy dignity; it is not at all
surpriz^ing if she viewed him with sensations of admiration, almost amounting
to reverence; and when the Countess attempted to thank him for the service he
had rendered her, he spoke of it in such a manner, as show he did not hold the
act in any estimation; but was rejoiced that the life he had been so fortunate
as to save was so valuable; as he assured her, he should have taken the same
care of the most insignificant of his fellow creatures; and her heart, which
was pained by the sense she had of the obligation she was under, became quite
calm and easy; and after a few minutes the conversation turned upon general
topics, and the forenoon was passed in the social, familiar manner, that is so
endearing to old friends, and minds of similar sentiments; mutually pleased
with each other at the first sight: sensible of the pleasure of obliging, and
being obliged. A few hours made them acquainted with the worth of each other,
and they were in that time mutually charmed. With frankness and without
hesitation, in answer to the Countess inquiries, he informed her that he had
come to France, upon some business for an uncle, who had been the guide of his
youth; as he had at a very early period lost his parents, that he had performed
the affairs that called him from London, and now meant to spend a few weeks in
rambling over the country, previous to his return, and that he soon intended to
make a voyage to America. My uncle wishes me to go into trade, [said he,]
because he has accumulated a large property by traffic, and I wish to visit a
great people whose struggles for liberty, have emancipated several millions
from tyranny and oppression; who have laws without an arbitrary government, and
liberty without anarchy and confusion. I confess the character I have heard of
them has excited an ardour rather uncommon in me, to be acquaint with them; and
as I mean to establish a commercial correspondence, my plans will not interfere
with my uncle's, and I flatter myself we shall both be gratified. But does not
the length of the voyage affright you (said the Countess,) by no means Madam,
he replied. In what time can it be performed, (asked JULIA,) he informed he
that it did not usually exceed five weeks, but adverse winds, he added,
sometimes rendered it four times as long. What an amazing while, (sighed
JULIA,) to be tossed upon the bosom of the deep; and yet I think a view of the
boundless Ocean uninterrupted by any other object, must be sublime. I think so
too, cried the youth, and own I wish to behold it; and yet its sameness must
tire a vacant mind, or a mind that is always in pursuit of novelty. But a mind,
young man, (replied the Countess,) that always carries about a fund of
knowledge, and useful entertainment, will never be tired of viewing the grand
and the sublime works of nature. It surprises me, said COLWORT, that so many of
its real beauties pass unnoticed, except by few; we see every day the rising
and setting sun, but how is this grand object unnoticed, except by few, and the
heart alive to enthusiasm and delight, can never see them without renewed
rapture and delight, and the sensations must be unutterable, when in all its
majesty it is beheld withdrawing its splendour from this our horizon, and
retiring to bless and enlighten other regions. I can never (said JULIA,) behold
its arising without a pleasure that I have no words to express. It reminds me
of some truly noble and worthy heart, who sets out in the morning determined to
fulfill all the duties of the day, to bless and make all they meet happy. The
same simile holds good at its setting, (rejoined COLWORT,) for it retires, like
the excellent person you mention, satisfied with having done right, and in all
the majesty and pride of virtue: But ladies, I fear I intrude; I shall carry
away some of the sweetest and most refined impressions, and if I could hope to
be remembered by you, it would shorten and sweeten my voyage. You are not going
(said the Countess?) indeed I shall not permit it. I shall tarry in France but
one fortnight, Madam. Tarry here then; you have seen the Capital, and from
hence you may ramble around the country; we will either walk, or ride with you.
I have intended to take a little tour, for some time, for the sake of my young
friend: with you added to our party, we shall receive much more instruction,
and pleasure too. If I consult only my own heart, Madam, I shall gratefully
accept your invitation; for I am sure I must be happier here, than elsewhere;
but I fear I shall intrude upon your goodness. Leave that to me, replied the
Countess, JULIA knows my heart, and she shall tell you when you intrude.

CHAPTER, V.
"Love creeps in unawares, and steals us from ourselves."
IN the afternoon JULIA played upon her harpsicord and accompanied it with a
voice soft, sweet and harmonious: COLWORT found a flute; he joined the little
concert, and the judicious selections of songs added sentiment to the charms of
melody. After some time spent in this rational and pleasing amusement, they
left their instruments, and COLWORT asked the Countess if she was extravagantly
fond of music. I cannot say that I am, she replied; I love a little of it; a
good song and a sweet voice, pleases me; when I used to dance, I admired the
violin; the sound was enlivening; with church music, I am delighted; it is a
part of the service that ought never to be omitted, or abridged: it excites
devotion, it elevates the heart, and it softens those religionists that are
either too austere, or too rigid, and I own I am always an enraptured listener.
How comes it about, Madam, cried COLWORT, that performers of music, or those
who possess that art are so often addicted to vices? is it not because it
softens the heart, and debilitates the natural fortitude of the mind, and
leaves it exposed to pleasures that enervate the noblest faculties of the soul?
Your remark is new (she replied) and I believe just, for I have observed the
votaries of sensuality, are generally attached to it; I have never thought with
your SHAKESPEARE, that the "man who has not music in his heart, is fit for
treasons, robberies and murders:" It is an illiberal remark: I have found many
persons who had neither ear nor taste for music, and yet possessed every
virtue: When sentiment is expressed by an harmonious voice, and an amiable
countenance which has breathed harmony of soul and sweetness of disposition; I
am a warm admirer of it, but am ashamed when I hear people talk of dying, of
fainting, merely at the magic of sweet sounds and I am almost persuaded that
the charms of a rational and refined conversation will be preferred by all who
are capable of joining in it.

The next week was spent in excursions around the country, and as the Countess
was not perfectly well, JULIA, at the desire of her friend accompanied COLWORT
either in the carriage, on horse back, or in his walking rambles, and every
moment passed together, served to endear them to each other, by discovering a
similarity of sentiment, taste, and disposition; they almost forgot the hours
of retirement before they parted at night; and they arose early in the morning
to meet with renewed pleasure, to communicate some remark, or some idea, that
had occurred since they parted, or which had been before forgotten.

One week flew by, on wings of down; another had passed imperceptibly, and a
third was nearly elapsed; the Countess beheld a growing attachment, and she
beheld it with pleasure and approbation; she marked its progress with
satisfaction, and resolved to render it happy. She observed one day a cloud
upon the face of COLWORT, and asked the cause; I have been in a dream of bliss,
for I had almost forgotten the sorrows of one who is entitled to my love,
respect and gratitude, (he replied,) but this moment reflections has come to my
aid, and reminded me of my duty. I see you are surprised, and I am sure you
will forgive me, if I explain the cause of the only regret, that I can know in
your company. My uncle has only one child, a lovely daughter, who was till
within two years, the principal pride and pleasure of his life; but she formed
a connection that has blasted all his hopes in her. She married a man totally
unworthy of her, and went with him to America: she is now in destitute
circumstances, deserted by her husband, and suffering all the stings of poverty
in a foreign country. It is to bring home the unfortunate ELEANOR, to restore
her to parental love, and protection; that is my principal inducement to go to
America. It was the thought of her woes and of her father's sorrows, that
embittered one moment spent here. Before he had finished, or they had time to
comment upon this information, a servant entered with a letter from his uncle:
he opened and read it without one apology, and found it was time to leave the
enchantments of the Villa, and return to the affairs of the world; but he could
not help betraying some emotion, his countenance became more softened. Both the
ladies asked if he had received any bad news; yes, indeed, said he, I have,
though I ought not to think it so; but I am summoned directly to London, the
ship in which I embark for America, sails in ten days, and tomorrow I must
attend the calls of duty and leave those I love best upon earth. If that is the
case, said the Countess, why then do you leave us? why take this hated voyage?
you are sensible of the amazing debt I owe you; and if I know any thing of the
human heart, you will be happier here than elsewhere; suffer me then to fix you
here for life, or if you prefer England, there is no need of going to America,
to establish your fortune. I consider you as my children, and as such I shall
speak to you; I know you do not wish to impose upon each other, or deceive me:
I am perhaps better acquainted with the progress that a tender affection has
made in your hearts than you are yourselves: It is innocent, my amiable
friends, and you need not be ashamed of it; I have been an interested observer,
from the moment you first met, till now; I am drawn toward you both, by cords
that I do not perfectly understand; but let the sentiment be derived from what
source it will, I own I love you both, better than I do any other object, and I
would seign render you happy: I will leave you for a few moment, and then
return to hear upon what you have decided; only remember this, that an ample
fortune waits your acceptance; and that whatever place you fix upon, for your
abode, I will be either an inmate, or a neighbor.

She went out, before either COLWORT or JULIA, could recover from their
astonishment, to attempt expressing either gratitude or acknowledgement.
COLWORT emboldened by this opening, waited but a few moments, till the
tumultuous confusion of his heart had in some measure subsided, before he made
an avowal of an attachment as sincere and tender, as it was impassioned, JULIA
listened almost sinking with blushes, and fluttering with a rapture till then
unknown; his words vibrated upon her ear; they conveyed to her heart the
softest, sweetest pleasure; and though overpowered by the impression, yet she
would not have exchanged the sensation for any other she had ever known;
unacquainted with the world, coquetry and prudery were equally strangers to her
unadulterated mind, and she had attained that happy medium which is the result
of pure nature, and with a frankness and modesty untinctured by art or
affectation; she acknowledged a preference to his virtues and his person, of
which she had till then been a stranger, and which she believed would continue
as long as her life; but shrinking from concealment, she told him the little
story of her former days, and owned herself unacknowledged by any relation,
friend, or protector except the Countess, to whose humanity, she was indebted
for all the advantages she enjoyed; while COLWORT admired the native honor of
her unsullied mind, he loved her the better for her misfortune and frankness,
and her narrative had raised Madam DE LAUNA, to a pinnacle of excellence in his
estimation, that no one had ever attained to before.

Their conversation was broken off by the entrance of the lady, that now
occupied almost an equal share of their esteem; but in attempting to express
his thanks, he found it impossible to do justice to his feelings; he then
confessed that his voyage to America was inevitable; that gratitude and
affection to his uncle, required it; and declared he thought he should never be
happy, though equally blessed by love, friendship and affluence, until he had
restored his unhappy cousin, to the arms of her parents; he promised however
that six months at farthest should return him to the Villa, and then it JULIA
would receive his hand, he would settle in any part of England or of France,
that was agreeable to JULIA and her benefactress; that his own fortune, though
limited, was not dependant upon another, and he should choose to depend upon his
own exertions, for increasing it, rather than upon the bounty of any one. I own
to you Madam, (said he) that bound to you both by the ties of gratitude and
affection, that possessed of every other wish of my heart, I should not be
happy unless blessed with your society; I have now, Madam, made a candid
confession of my heart, thoughts and situation, and you will judge if I ought
not to pursue the plan I had originally laid down; I make a sacrifice indeed,
but where would be the virtue in performing my duty, if I did not; love,
friendship, esteem, gratitude and interest, bid me stay in this delightful
spot; again gratitude and honor bid me leave it, for a while, but I trust to
return shortly and part from you no more: suffer me my beloved JULIA, and do
not let your delicacy shrink from the avowal, to call you mine, suffer me in
the presence of this best of women to swear, eternal fidelity and amity to you,
and let her witness an exchange of vows, lest if either, should suffer one
light or inconstant thought, to interfere with its truth, this benefactress and
friend, so interested for both, may be an evidence against us. I cannot but
approve your intention, (said the Countess,) though I grieve at the necessity
that tears you from us; I will be responsible for JULIA, I will be responsible
for you, and I hope before the expiration of a year, to give you to each other,
and see you united beyond the power of ought, but death, to separate you.

It would be only a repetition of what has already been repeated a thousand
times, to go in to a detail of what passed between JULIA, and her lover. He
took his leave of her the next day, after promising to write long and
circumstantial letters, and with an heart filled with love, gratitude,
admiration and regret, left the VILLA DE LAUNA, for Calais, at which place he
meant to take a packet for Dover.

The Countess and JULIA, felt a vacancy in their hearts, after his departure,
that was painful, nor was the void filled up by finding his place at the table
deserted; so forcibly were their minds impressed at his absence, his intended
voyage, and the dangers which imagination presented as his attendants, that
whether, walking or riding, he was the continued subject of conversation; a
topic which never tired them.

As soon as he arrived in London, he wrote them, and though his letters were of
necessity short, they very forcibly expressed the sensations of his heart.
Before they received these letters, he must have been several days upon his
passage; yet every change of weather was observed and attended to; and JULIA
never looked at the moon, but she thought her esteemed COLWORT might at that
moment be contemplating the same object: his miniature that he had sent her
from London, was her constant companion, and the day after she had received it,
the Countess came into her dressing room with another picture in her hand; look
here JULIA, said she, holding it up, whose likeness is this? Dear Madam (said
the surprised girl) it is Mr. COLWORT, did he send it to you, it is indeed a
great resemblance; yes (rejoined the Countess) it is a resemblance, but I dare
say taken before his birth; this picture, my dear, was designed for the man I
loved as fondly as you do Mr. COLWORT, though not with so much prudence: May he
never change as the original of this (...) and may your attachment have a very
different termination to my unfortutunate love; they compared the pictures, and
the difference, except the drapery, was so very trifling, that one might have
been taken for the other. I saw the amazing resemblance on the first of your
lover's arrival, (continued Madam) and am almost ashamed to own that my
partiality for the CHEVALIERE arises in some measure from his likeness to the
unfortunate author of all my sorrows; at first I supposed there must have been
some relationship; but upon inquiries, I found he was wholly a stranger, except
from report to the family of ORMOND, but it is really surprising, that two
persons, no ways connected by the ties of blood, can be so much alike. JULIA
saw that her friend was much affected, and though no subject could be more
pleasing to her; though she would have delighted to trace the cause of this
resemblance, from feature to feature; yet she turned the subject to some other,
and asked some questions that no way concerned her, only as they served to
withdraw the mind of the Countess from see^^ that had long since passed; a
retrospect of which always depressed her.

CHAPTER, VI.
BEAUTY, has superior force, when attendant upon the chamber of sickness; and
the angel never looks so fair, as when softening the calamities to which
mortality are incident.
NOTHING happened for several weeks worth relating; but one morning when JULIA
went into the chamber of the Countess, she found her so much indisposed, that
her affectionate heart took an immediate alarm. Madam appeared calm and
composed, and though she would not acknowledge herself so ill as she appeared,
yet she told JULIA, that she was apprehensive of a sever, and informed her that
a number of years before, she had been attacked in the same manner, and that
though her life was then spared, the physicians had declared she could never
survive so cruel a distemper in future. I have a presage (said she) that I
shall not recover; -- I wish to perform some necessary business, and to send
for an advocate from the next town: I have neglected this duty to along, and
fear my reason will not be (...) to perform it now.

The grief of the affectionate JULIA, cannot be described, but it did not for
one moment prevent her fulfilling every duty of friendship. When the physician
arrived (...) looks were clouded by anxiety, his answers doubtful, and he even
urged the Countess to finish her worldly business as soon as possible. This was
only to make a will, in which she bequeathed JULIA, fifty thousand crowns, and
the like sum to COLWORT: the residue of her noble fortune, excepting legacies
which were large and liberal, to her servants, would devolve upon her brother,
the Marquis ALVADA, and his son the Count DE LAUNA.

When the servants knew that their mistress was making a will, they filled the
house with their lamentations, and every apartment echoed with their
affliction; as for JULIA, here is were silent, and though her grief was not of the
boisterous kind, her sorrows were deep and afflictive. She attended the bedside
of her friend every moment, and presented every medicine to her lips, her soft
hands fixed the pillow that supported her throbbing head, and wiped the damp
drops from her forehead and temples, her arm was always ready to assist her,
and when she fixed and placed the bed and clothes, a kind of transient ^ase
seemed to follow.

The Marquis and Count were sent for, but before this was done, the Countess
lost her reason, and suffered all the pangs that the delirium of a fever could
inflict, the physicians were detained at the Villa, and for some days a
conflict was maintained between a good constitution and a dreadful disorder,
and which would get the victory was doubtful; upon the ninth day after shifting
her position a thousand times, she sunk into a deep sleep, in which she
continued for six hours, the physician sat upon one side of the bed and JULIA
upon the other, watching that breath that they expected every moment to leave
the worn-out frame of their expiring friend, and now and then wetting her
parched lips with a liquid that the nurse had prepared. The doctor declared
that if she ever awaked, she would be in some measure recovered, or else in the
last agony of expiring nature. The last hour of this sleep appeared the longest
of JULIA'S life; she counted the seconds as they moved upon her watch, and
listened for the clock to strike twelve, with an impatience that she had never
known, as if the hour of midnight was to decide her fate, for it was the
opinion of all, that the Countess would not survive that time.

But the clock had struck twelve; and it was near one, when awakening with a
deep sigh, she stretched out her feeble hand, and asked for something in such a
manner, as declared she had regained her perfect recollection. JULIA had kept
her sorrow within due bounds, but she could not so easily conquer or control
her transports. She threw herself upon her knees; kissed the hand which she
held in hers, and in a delirium of joy, she thanked heaven for this recovery;
declared her self the happiest creature in the world, and embraced the doctor
with a thousand expressions of frantic extacy. The sensible son of GALEN, found
it necessary to curb her feelings. For the present, he persuaded her to be more
silent, and calm, which he assured her were highly necessary, as the Countess
must still be kept very quiet.

She obeyed him, but though she observed almost a death like silence, she could
not subdue her joy; she seemed to move on air; every care was lighter than
down, and she could with difficulty refrain from embracing every one who
approached her.

This night was a crisis that declared the Countess a candidate for lengthened
life: in the morning she was much better, and though her recovery was slow, it
was attended with the most pleasing presages.

The very day after her disorder had assumed a favorable aspect, the Marquis
and his son arrived; though the utmost caution was used in informing her they
were come, yet she was obliged to take sometime to prepare her mind for an
interview, and sent out the doctor to receive them. In less than half an hour
she became so composed, that they were introduced; she held out her hand to her
brother, said she was rejoiced to see him and thanked him for this visit. The
Marquis who loved her tenderly, embraced her with emotion, and the Count
expressed his satisfaction to find her out of danger. After they were seated, I
cannot support a conversation myself (said she very weakly) that task must
devolve upupon my friend, Mademoiselle VALLAICE, who does me the honor to
reside with me. -- The Marquis now turned, and for the first time beheld the
elegant form and interesting face of JULIA; simple and unadorned, habited in a
white Robe de Chamber, her beautiful hair straying over her fine forehead, and
her charming mild eyes fixed upon the languid face of the Countess, animated
with hope, and expressive of extreme sensibility; she returned the salutations
of the Marquis with a graceful curtsy, and a gentle inclination of her head;
she offered him her chair that he might set by his sister, and the soft accents
of her voice which tremblingly expressed the feelings of her heart, vibrated
upon the ear of the old LORD.

It was many years since he had experienced any emotion at the sight of youth
and beauty, but the beauty of JULIA was of that nature to arrest the eye, to
reach the heart, and to engage esteem and respect from every beholder. The
Marquis felt his whole soul drawn ^owards her, he gazed upon her for some
moments, he looked with surprise; and tried to define his feelings, he
attempted in vain to address her, he observed her hair that fell in luxuriant
abundance about a neck, whose extreme whiteness can never be emulated by art.
She now arose to present the friends of her benefactress with a cordial; her
motion rapid and easy, became again the subject of wonder. Where did you meet
with this young lady, sister? By an accident, the most fortunate to me, (she
replied.) JULIA added, the accident was indeed an happy one for her. The
sweetness of her voice again fixed his attention. Oh! CAMILLA, (said he) such
was once the loveliest of women; say, did you never think she resembled -- The
Marchioness (interrupted the Countess,) yes, brother from the moment I saw her,
the likeness struck me forcibly; but I see you are moved, I am sorry you have
seen my JULIA; she will absent herself, I am sure, if the sight of her, pains
you. -- Certainly (cried JULIA.) I would not for worlds give a moment's pain;
she was going, -- No, (said the Marquis detaining her) your absence would
indeed distress me, I am an old Man, Mademoiselle, and you may permit an old
Man to look upon you; for indeed I find a pleasure in it, that I am not
accustomed to; I am both old and unfortunate, say, will you indulge me with
your society, for there is a charm in it, that I thought was lost forever.

Oh (said JULIA with impassioned fervor) if I can indeed give pleasure to the
beloved and respected brother of my benefactress, even a momentary pleasure, I
shall indeed be happy; too happy, too much honored, and grow vain. Amiable
creature, (said the Marquis) where are your parents, tell me that I may
congratulate them upon so great a blessing. Alas! she replied, I have none, and
except your excellent sister, not one friend in Europe. Then you shall be my
daughter, (he said) I never had one, and will be a father to you, say will you
own me for a father?

Happy Oh most happy shall I be (replied the grateful girl, to call you by so
respected, so endearing a name, and on my knees, I thank you for this
condescension. He embraced her with tears, and she joined her tears with his;
she wondered at emotions so new, and so pleasing, and when she beheld his hair
whitened by sorrow^ rather than years, the furrows which grief had impressed
upon his face, she felt so much love, veneration, respect and sympathy, as
altogether formed a combination of sensations, which, till then, she had been a
stranger to.

During the first part of this conversation, the Count had regarded JULIA with
looks very different from his father's; his eyes had wandered over every charm,
and confessed its power; and he thought her an object worth his attention; but
when the Marchioness was mentioned, he had retired with some emotion to the
window, till the Countess prayed her brother to introduce his son to his
adopted daughter; you are an old Batcheldor, Nephew (said she,) but you must
guard your heart, and think of (...) only as a sister, for my young friend has
given aw^y all her more tender affections. With the air of a man of the world
and gallantry, the Count assured his aunt he thought her caution necessary, and
that he would endeavor to regard Mademoiselle only in that light that would be
most pleasing to her.

CHAPTER VII.
HE is an INFIDEL, then trust him not!
He doubts futurity, do not believe him!
He laughs at revelation, and a GOD!
Oh spurn the Monster from you!

IN one week the Countess was so well as to leave her chamber, and in less than
two to ride out, and associate with her family as usual. Returning health
brought with it cheerfulness, and all its pleasing attendants. She was anxious
to render the Villa agreeable to her brother and his son; for, though she
detested the character of the latter, she wished to try what effect she could
have upon his mind, when at a distance from his vicious associates.

The Marquis grew every day fonder of JULIA, and she looked up to him every
moment with increasing reverence and affection. The more the Count became
acquainted with JULIA, the more dangerous he found her; too lovely not to be
admired; too constant to change, and too frank to dissemble: But
notwithstanding his opinion he formed of her fidelity, his vanity represented
himself as irresistible, and he began to form hopes, and to think that a
connection with her virtues, would restore him some of those he had lost; and
secure to him the good will and favor of the Countess, which he had penetration
enough to know he was not possessed of; with this thought he strove to render
himself agreeable to her, and assumed a merit that he was a stranger to; but
while lavish in the praise of virtue, though loud in his declamation against
vice; she saw through the veil; penetrated through the cloud he had wrapped
himself in, and found he was an infidel. "For though his tongue dropped manna,
and could make the worse appear the better reason," yet she looked and found
that all was false and hollow; nor was he such a novice in the human heart, as
not to read hers, he was indeed an adept in deception himself, and understood
the character of mankind as well, if not better, than people in general; he saw
that JULIA despised him, and he could not hide from himself that he deserved
she should.

He was indeed a very singular character, his mind was never formed for virtue,
and early in life he discovered traits of a designing, artful disposition; his
father was very young, and at that time absent; he was flattered and caressed
by all who knew him; and at the age of fifteen, put under the care of one of
the worst of men, who knew how to render the vices, and weaknesses of others
subservient, to his own interest. This man was a member, though a concealed
one, of the Illuminati, and he saw what an advantage would accrue to the
society, by adding to their number the principal of ALVADA and DE LAUNA's
family, whose great estates would enrich them, and whose power would serve as a
protection; with this view he indulged all his pupil's vicious propensities;
turned all religion into ridicule, and learned him to conceal his vices with
art and caution. The young man was an apt scholar, and by the time he was
twenty, had committed some crimes that made even his tutor shudder; he had
indeed been successful in concealment, but some little piccadilla as they were
called by his party, had escaped him, and sealed his character with the stamp
of infamy, in the opinion of every person of worth and merit; nor could any
pretentions to virtue ever restore it to any thing like purity. Dark in his
designs; sudden in his resolves; obstinately attached to his own opinions; vain
of his understanding; and though in many respects ignorant; proud of his
talents, and after all, though courageous in the prosecution of his designs, he
had a latent weakness and imbecility of mind, or rather cowardice of thought;
for, it could not be called conscience, that sometimes made his associates
afraid to trust him, though they scared to refuse him their confidence, for he
was envious and malicious. Thus, though hated and despised, by them all, he was
their ruler, held their lodges at one of his houses, and was now next in
dignity to their Grand Master; he hated royalty, yet was sometimes so vain, as
to aspire at the possession of a scepter; he laughed at religion, and he
trembled at its power and wished, to possess it; he turned virtue into
ridicule, while he had known it existed; and he adored honor, at the moment he
sneered at its dictates; as a slave to vice, he was unacquainted with reason,
for its laws had never once controled one vicious thought, nor prevented one
bad action. This was the Count DE LAUNA, a man who had not been one fortnight
at the Villa before he made serious proposals to the innocent and amiable JULIA.

Never was the power of virtue more fully proved over the vicious, than in the
present instance; not that virtue embodied, could have made a lasting
impression on a mind so vitiated as the Count DE LAUNA; but it had a transient
effect, it arrested him in his career, it stopped the progress for the present,
and it occasioned a lapse in his illegal pursuits. He was never tired of the
company of JULIA, and though her whole conduct was a censure upon his own, and
he saw he was indebted for the little civility and respect she granted him, to
his father and aunt, though he feared she hated him, yet he loved her as a
being of superior merit. When he came into her presence, he lost that haughty
triumph that was so evident in his countenance and demeanior, and became
humiliated to such a degree, that he despised himself for his servility which
he found himself unable to conquer.

The Marquis enjoyed in the quiet of the Villa, a satisfaction, to which he had
been long a stranger; his health was benefitted; his mind was calm, and his
reason, which had been much deranged, was perfectly restored; the Countess
observed this change with pleasure; she loved her brother and did every thing
in her power to prolong a visit, that rendered her much the happier; his son
was in his opinion restored to virtue, and JULIA whose whole attention was
marked with a kind of reverential attention, performed for him a thousand
little offices, that more properly belonged to his domestics; when he entered
the room where she was setting, she arose involuntarily; if his seat was
inconvenient, or unpleasant, she was sure to fix one more commodious; if he
walked, she attended him; if he slept, as he sometime did in his chair or
sopha, she played some soft tunes upon the harp or piana; if he wished it, she
read to him, and in short she became so necessary to his comfort, that he was
uneasy without her; thus she cheated him of his sorrows, and concealed her own;
for she was uneasy about COLWORT of whom she had heard nothing since his
embarkation for America.

Thus passed three months, and the Count had exerted every talent to prevail
with JULIA to accept his hand and fortune, but all his persuasions proved that
those talents which had been so successful with other women, were nothing to
her, and he had the extreme mortification to find, he had not advanced one step
farther toward her favor, at the end of three months unwearied constancy, than
when he began the attempt.

More company now appeared at the Villa, these were Mademoiselle GYRON and
DONNA OLIVIA a Spanish lady; this last lady was distantly related to the
Countess, and had taken this opportunity to play off her hitherto successful
charms upon the Count. Mademoiselle GYRON, had always felt the warmest esteem
and love for the Countess; she was certainly a fine woman, and though an air of
pensive sadness was evident, and though she wished to conceal it, it was always
observed. She had heard with extreme satisfaction of her late recovery, and she
took this opportunity to renew their old friendship, and congratulate her upon
her returning health.

The Chevalier ENON, a coxcomb and an Italian Nobleman, who was a kinsman of
the Marchioness, attended these ladies, and they came prepared to render this
party as pleasurable as possible. DONNA OLIVIA, was a finished Coquette; she
had beauty, and she added to it an haughtiness that was insufferable to good
minds; but which pleased men of a particular description, but the mild and
modest JULIA felt so humbled by it at first, that she seemed to shrink from
observation, and it was several days before she recovered her usual ease and
gentle dignity. The Italian was an old beau, but his heart was honest and his
ideas often truly diverting.

The Countess introduced JULIA as her ward, and as she knew the power of wealth
over the human heart, she intimated that her fortune was considerable, this was
done merely to save her young friend the mortifications that any slight or
neglect would occasion. By the men she was pronounced a divinity. Mademoiselle
was charmed with her, and as she had a large share of penetration, had studied
the mind of man, and knew the world; she saw that some mystery hung around her,
and she was determined, though not from a bad motive, to develop it if
possible. But the praises that all concurred to give her, ensured her of DONNA
OLIVIA's envy; she looked upon her as a simple country girl, whose beauty she
was obliged to acknowledge, but was inintirely unacquainted with the beau
monde, and treated her with that neglect that she supposed the world would
approve of, and that was most likely to pain her. But with all her simplicity
the noble minded girl heeded not her neglects, and if she felt it, her conduct
was such as proclaimed her innate superiority.

For one week the Chevalier was in love, he dressed, danced, sung and talked
nonsense, but all to no purpose; JULIA was diverted with his follies, and he
^ound the pursuit vain, and like a true Frenchman grew himself sick of it.

DONNA OLIVIA exerted all her talents to please the Count, and it is certain
that he appeared to be pleased, and paid her an attention at once flattering to
her, and surprising to his friends. The truth is, he was tired of his
unsuccessful attentions to JULIA, and estimating her by some that he had
formerly known, he supposed the fear of rivalry would alarm her jealousy and
wound her pride, and in the end serve his purpose better than the marked
respect and deference he had hitherto paid her. With this view he actually made
love to OLIVIA, who wished for nothing so much as to secure her conquest, and
pleased with her lover, flattered herself that she should soon become Countess
DE LAUNA; this idea was really suggested by an affection to the Count's person,
independent of his rank and affluence; but for one moment it did not exist in
his bosom, he had never once thought of matrimonial fetters, unless JULIA,
would put them on for him, since he ceased to teaze her with professions that
were irksome to hear, and which would have flattered the pride of most women,
only gave her pain; she behaved with her usual ease and good humor, and was
always calm and serene. The Countess was happy to see her friends and the whole
party were most agreeably entertained.

One morning, after the subject of conversation had shifted several times,
according to the whim or fancy of the company, it turned upon men of honor and
the common acceptance of the word.

"HONOR's a sacred tie, the Law of Kings;
"The noble MIND's distinguishing perfection."
What can be more binding upon a man of nice honor, (said the Count,) than his
honor; what pledge to sacred, what so solemn! Why nothing replied the
Countess,) nothing, and yet I do not believe the English Moralist ever meant to
have the sentiment you have quoted, applied to our modern men of honor, a
principle of rectitude and of religion, will render the word of a plain honest
man, of ten times more consequence than what you call a principle of honor. And
yet cried OLIVIA, the mind must be mean and suspicious, that would not trust
the word of a man of honor, even if it had not all the good qualities that you
seem to think necessary. I think, (said the Countess) that a man has no
reasonable pretentions to honor, who is destitute of those requisites; and I am
sure no word was ever more wrongly applied; no term more prostituted, than that
which is the subject of Conversation. These men of honor as you call them, and
as they call themselves, will undoubtedly defend their reputation, at the
risque of their lives, even if that reputation, has been stained with every
infamous, every vicious deed; they will pay their debts of honor, and cheat the
honest tradesman, who furnishes them with the necessary articles of life; they
will fight for their king, their country, or their honor; but I believe there
are but few of them who would not seduce the wife or daughter of his friend,
bring distress into his own family, blaspheme his God, redicule religion, and
trample upon all laws but those of honor. Indeed I think (continued she,) that
a man must act from higher principles, before he can be called a man of honor,
he must be fearful to offend a God of purity, who sees into his most secret
thoughts, words and actions; he must in compliance with the commands of that
God, do to all men as he wishes to be done by; when this is the principle he
proceeds upon, he will be literally a man of honor, such a man may boast the
noble distinguishing perfection with propriety, and such a man is the American
WASHINGTON, he has fought, bravely fought for his country, but I never heard of
his fighting a duel: he has really protected the rights of man, and avenged the
injuries of his fellow-citizens, but never brought sorrow or ruin to the
families of his countrymen; in him, the wives, daughters and widows of America
find a friend and protector. Let no one henceforth claim the sacred title of a
man of honor, unless he can like him, "keep a conscience void of offense
toward God and toward man." But a modern man of honor is a more dangerous
character, than a downright knave, who is known to be a villain, and scorns not
to be called so; for the former acts in disguise, and in deceiving others,
often deceives himself; the world infatuated with the glare of his character,
will admire, fear and trust him: perhaps, there are some whose inclinations
always side with the laws of honor and virtue, for we do find persons who are
possessed of so tranquil a temper, and have so happy a temperature of blood and
spirits, that they are inclined to do right and virtuous actions, even without
any fixed principle; but these persons are in great danger of falling into
temptation; their ease and imbecility of mind may betray them into evils, which
require principle, and fixed ideas of virtue of shun; and in general I am
persuaded where a principle of religion does not prove a safeguard to honor,
that however dazzling it appears, when the inclinations, the interests, or
wishes can be indulged at its expense, honor is found an insufficient barrier,
and flies as a phantom of the morning, or as the ignis fatuus of a vapory
night, and leaves the deluded wretch plunged in vice and misery.

I know your assertion to be just (said Madam GYRON,) and I will produce an
instance that has fallen within my own observation. A man of the highest sense
of honor, who had fought to establish it, who was admired and even esteemed by
all, became at one and twenty, when his ideas of honor or rather his character
was at its Zenith, the guardian of a young lady just then fourteen, the
daughter too of his best friend and protector: Her fortune was pretty
considerable, her person rather pleasing, her life had been innocent; her mind
pure, and her heart unadulterated by art, or the world: But this man of honor
within one year seduced her from the paths of virtue, deprived her of her
honor, and rendered her a wretch indeed; he was then married, but when five
years afterward he left his wife; when he had stripped his unhappy ward of her
fortune, and left her in a Convent almost in want of the necessaries of life,
he then refused her the only reparation in his power, and left her still to
suffer: But when by the death of a distant relation, she became mistress of an
ample and independent property indeed; this man of honor again sought her out
and would again have deceived her, for he offered marriage: But she nobly
scorned him and sought a great, a lasting revenge, a revenge that has planted
his pillow with thorns, and till this moment he lives a sufferer in continual
fear, that he shall be punished for a crime of which he is not guilty; but
still by some he is considered as a man of honor; his story is concealed, but
how much better would a principle of religion and rectitude of heart have been,
than this ideal, fantastic honor which he professed; the one would have served
as a refuge in distress; would have shielded him from the commission of guilt
at which his soul shrinks with horror; would have left him peace of mind, if
suspected, and he would not shudder, as he now does, lest the thunder burst
over his head, and the red lightning blast his guilty conscience.

But (asked the Count,) what was the nature of this revenge; it could not be
too great, for he was indeed a villain. That is a secret, she replied, but it
was great and glorious. The Countess was about to make some remarks upon
revenge, and its consequences; but upon casting her eyes upon Madam GYRON'S
face, she beheld it unusually flushed, her eyes sparkled with the fire of
passion, and her whole frame appeared so agitated, that she dropped the
conversation, and proposed a walk.

CHAPTER VIII.
BLESSED be the man, his memory ble^^ at least,
Who found this art, thus to unload the breast;
And taught succeeding times an easy way,
Their secret thoughts in letters to convey.
To baffle absence and secure delight,
Which till that time was limited to sight;
The parting farewell spoke the last adieu,
And lessening distance past them lost to view,
When for a wise the youthful patriarch sent,
The Asses, (...), and the ^teward went;
But not a line, that could the lover show,
Or let the Maid her future fortune know;
The rings, the bracelets, wooed her hands and arms,
But had she known of melting words, and charms,
That under secret seals, in covert lie,
To catch the soul when drawn into the eye;
The fair Assyrian had not took his guide,
Nor her soft hands in chains of pearl been tied."

SCARCELY had they left the house for the garden, when a servant came running
after them with a packet of letters; the superscription declared COLWORT was
the writer, and the cheek of JULIA, underwent a deep suffusion that increased
her beauty; the Countess broke the seal with impatience, and presented JULIA
with her letter, who retired to read the sentiments of an heart faithful and
affectionate, and shed tears of pleasure over the suffusion of that fancy, and
that tenderness, of which it was her joy and pride to be the object. But we
will follow the example of the amiable girl, and since her delicacy would not
allow any one to peruse the young man's epistle, except the Countess we shall
carefully conceal it from the uninterested reader. But the Countess was pleased
with the contents of here is, and ever anxious to communi^ate her pleasures to
others, she seated herself in an adjoining alcove, and at the request of her
friends, read as follows: --

Boston, (in America) January 25, 1798.
I REFER you, dear Madam, to a letter, that I yesterday wrote your amiable
ward, for my sentiments of gratitude, love and friendship, and have now set
down to follow your direction, and shall endeavor to write in such a manner,
as will afford you satisfaction, and shall think myself very happy, if I am
successful.

The very day of my arrival, after a pleasant passage, I was so fortunate, as
to hear of my unfortunate cousin; poor girl, her wretched husband it seems is
no more, and now upon the banks of Kennebeck, almost upon the confines of the
United States, she has found a shelter, and but for some humane persons there,
she must have suffered every evil of poverty and distress. I wrote her a few
comforting lines, and enclosed a sum of money for her present occasions, with
an affectionate letter from her father; this I sent by the person who gave me
the above information, and was determined (...) follow myself in a few days,
but have been prevented by a continued fall of snow, such as I never witnessed
in Europe; and I am informed it will be almost madness, to undertake this
journey within ten days, as it is more than two hundred miles.

Within the last week, I have made my bow to many, and delivered my letters of
recommendation, and in consequence of them, been waited upon by many gentlemen,
and entertained with a magnificence that was to me quite unexpected; plain
hospitality would have been much more pleasing. I assure your ladyship, that
this new world imitates the old, so well, that it would be difficult to say
which is the original; the gentlemen have their clubs and gaming tables, and
the ladies have, what in London, would be called routes, but in this town are
termed mere tea parties; even cards are not mentioned, but they are constantly
introduced, and met with every where; the ladies play as high as circumstances
will permit, and though the fatal mania, that has destroyed so many families,
has not arisen to that height here, that it has in Europe, I think the worst
consequences may be expected, and I have never beheld a beautiful women seated
at the card table without thanking heaven, that she was neither my wife, or
sister, it has always appeared not only ridiculous, but mean, that our very
amusement should become a matter of traffic, and that we cannot spend an
evening without suffering discordant passions to interrupt our serenity, with
the hope of gain, or fear of loss; it is indeed worse than loss of time, for it
is vainly trifling with what is most precious -- our temper and disposition; it
is indeed spoiling both; for I have never met with a woman who had practiced
gaming one year, but evil passions had so coroded her heart, that they were
imprinted upon her face, and gloom and disappointment, overspread that face
upon which smiles and good humor used to appear in their most bewitching
charms. How much more amiable, how much more feminine does woman appear, when
conversation or books, or any other rational employment constituted there
amusement, or occupied there time, than when spending it in this shameful
manner; and what dependence can be put upon a woman whose good humor depends
upon the turning up of a card, or whose cheerfulness may be dispelled by the
casting of a dice. But I will hope that here, as well as in Paris or London,
there are many even of the first councils, who have never shuffled a pack of
cards, or shook a dice box.

A few evenings since, I was so fortunate as to be introduced to two ladies who
are famous in the literray world; Mrs. MORTON, the darling daughter of the
muses, who writes under the signature of Philenia, and Mrs. MURRAY, the refined
and the elegant Moralist, who has taken that of CONSTANTIA; these ladies are
very different, and both very engaging; Mrs. MORTON is still a very lovely
woman, though she is the mother of a considerable family, and has grown up
daughters: her Beacon-hill, an epic poem that I have read before I left Europe,
is enough to place her in the first grade of poets, but I have since I come
here, seen some little fugitive pieces that are softer, and I think brighter
effusions of genius.

I have seldom met with a woman who converses more sensibly or with more
propriety upon every subject, than Mrs. MURRAY; she has lately published the
Gleaner, a periodical work, in three volumes, that does great honor both to her
head and heart; this production is not half so much praised and encouraged as
it ought to be, and I believe that a little mean envy prevents its being
admired according to its merits, and am persuaded that thirty years hence, when
the ar^able author sleeps in dust, when her heart has ceased to vibrate at the
praise of virtue, or recoil at the idea of vice, the Gleaner will be as
universally read and admired, as the works of our Addison, and will be a very
able competitor, to the spectator. I have dined with this lady, and was charmed
with my entertainment, and pleased to find that her literary pursuits did not
interfere with her domestic virtues; she is a most excellent wife, and one of
the best of mothers, and the perfect order and arrangement of her household,
declare her a complete house-wife; she employs every hour usefully, and her
employments do not interfere with her conversation, which is always sensible,
lively and instructive, and let the subject be what it will, she always renders
it interesting. I have but seldom known any one so pleased with the praises of
others, or so willing to commend sister excellence, and defend an injured and
absent person: I am much pleased with her poetry, and join many of her friends
in wishing she would consent to give a few volumes to the public.

Your ladyship will perhaps wonder to hear me talking of good housewifery and
economy, for through I have the honor to address the Countess DE LAUNA, yet I
have been brought up in a merchant's family, and my good aunt plumed herself
upon her good management, and was really one of the most notable dames in the
world: Besides you have told me what a charming little dairy woman my JULIA
was, when you first found the dear Cottager; and the perfect order that
presides at the Villa convince me that your Ladyship has not a contempt for
what in an high station may be considered only as a subaltern virtue; but in
the middle style of life, as well as amongst the industrious citizens and
tradesmen, ought to be held of the highest grade, and the want of it has
brought misery and ruin upon many a family; a steady pursuit of economy and
attendance upon domestic affairs would have preserved from distress.

I have been more than once delighted when business has obliged me to call upon
a mechanic, to find at an early hour his wife up, his breakfast ready; his
children clean, and his humble habitation in order; smiles of unaffected
cheerfulness have overspread every face, and irradiated every countenance, and
he has looked forward to increase of wealth and respectability, through the
agreeable medium of industry in himself, and good management of his wife. I
have more than once too left this pleasing picture of domestic bliss, and after
an hour or two, called upon some of my more fashionable acquaintance, I have
there beheld just at twelve, or perhaps one, just risen from her uneasy
slumbers, a woman who apeing high life, has spent her night at the virgils of
the card table, and who has been sacrificing her husband's property, her own
reputation and honor at the haunts of dissipation, and upon the altar of folly:
Gloom, chagrin and caprice, have been pictured upon every feature of her face,
and her fashionable dishabille has been far less becoming, than the c^arse, but
clean calico in the former house, while smart replies and deep fetched sighs,
have declared the husband's heart ill at ease; and want of regularity at the
breakfast-table, and order in the room, that ruin and hornebred quarrels were
following close upon the heels of bad management.

Thus it is, my dear Madam, our father's toil hard to give us an education, we
become gentlemen, and most readily spend what has been earned by the sweat of
their brows, and ours sons or grand-sons at fartherest must return to labor or
all the ills of poverty: I am now, my dear Madam, speaking of those in a
middling rank of life, and my thoughts have not aspired at nobility; indeed my
acquaintance with those have been limited, for though I have now and then met
with a (...), or a lady Sarah, and been a few times in company with some of our
nobility, yet I can only boast of knowing the Countess DE LAUNA, and in her and
her family have met with ancient hospitality, and every other noble and
condescending virtue.

Last evening I went to the theater for the first time, and acknowledge I went
with an unreasonable prejudice upon my mind; used alone to the play houses in
London, I had no idea that I should meet with a good house or good performers,
the play was the production of one of our best English poets, and I was most
agreeably surprised to find the ornaments and scenery, not only pretty and well
fancied, but really elegant, and before the end of the first act, I became so
much interested by the just as well as comic acting, that my mind strayed not
from the stage for the evening: I was much pleased with both the male, as well
as the female actors; and am inclined to think if due encouragement is given,
that Mr. HODCKINSON, will become as famous both in comedy and tragedy, as
GARRICK was in Great Britain. Many things have been said and written against
theatrical amusements in this town, and much opposition was made to the
building of a theater; I have heard the arguments upon both sides, and confess
I am inclined to think a well regulated playhouse, and a well chosen, and well
performed play, can never injure the morals or manners of a person of any
worth, and of what consequence are those, who are already spoiled? The human
mind is ever in pursuit of something; it requires amusement to relax it after
business, and those who are too great, or too indolent to attend to business or
improvement, will seek amusement at the tavern or gaming table, if no better
place presents, and I am much mistaken if either of them are more injurious to
the minds, health and estate of our young men, than a theater, and I have no
doubt, but if one was not permitted, some more detrimental mode of spending
time, would be invented and without its utility.

I am persuaded your patience is quite exhausted by this long letter, but I
have followed your directions, and tried to prove whether your assertion was
just, when you said, it could never be tired of the letters of your friends. I
shall leave Boston in a few days, and shall send this with small packet of
books, by a ship, that fails for London, in a week: from thence it will be
forwarded to you. Shall I appear impatient when I confess I long to accompany
it? I should indeed be ungrateful to my uncle, if I returned without fully
accomplishing the errand upon which I came; or if I could let any selfish
consideration prevail with me to ask, or even to permit my unfortunate cousin,
to undertake a winter's voyage; I hope I shall treat the poor girl in just that
manner, that is calculated to heal her wounded heart; I would not hurt her
delicacy by doing too much or too little; I trust there is no danger, but an
attention so much pointed, as to make her feel an obligation, would weigh heavy
upon her naturally generous heart, and be constantly reminding her of favors,
that she will conceive to be much greater than they really are: Now a woman
would manage this matter much better; your sex, at least the generous part of
them, understand all the little thousand delicacies and decencies, which belong
to each other, better than men; but I will leave reflections, and with an
assurance of love, gratitude and esteem, assure your ladyship that I am your
devoted,

F. C.


CHAPTER IX.
PRIDE is the source of discord, strife and war,
And all the heavy train of heavy woe,
Which wait, on wretched MAN! the direful sting
Of envy, and the dreaded frown of scorn,
And gloomy discontent, and black despair!

THE Count had been a concerned spectator of JULIA'S emotion, at receiving
COLWORT'S letter, and though the omen that he drew from it was discouraging; he
was determined to make one more attempt, to gain her affections in an honorable
way, and if he succeeded, to be as much reformed, and for as long a time as
possible; but if he failed, to press a project that his own dark bosom had long
harbored.

With this view, he followed her to a little summer house, in the garden, after
dinner; as soon as she saw him, she prepared to leave him, and pursue her walk;
I entreat, Mademoiselle, (said he with some solemnity) that you will resume
your seat, and permit me the pleasure of a few moments conversation with you;
she was silent, but sat down; after a little hesitation he resumed: It is now
four months since I have known you, and in that time, do me the justice to
believe, that my heart has not ceased to beat for you, nor for one moment has
my mind been employed on any other subject: He was going on, but she
interrupted him, with, I am sorry to hear it, my Lord, I hoped indeed that your
mind had regained its usual occupations, and was employed, in a more useful
manner; I beg your Lordship will not think me disrespectful, but I wish to be
excused from saying any thing more, upon a subject that has already wasted too
many moments; nothing has happened to change my mind, and I assure you that it
remains the same. "A few minutes (said he,) is no great sacrifice, even to an
enemy, and surely, JULIA, you will not deny that to me, while I plead something
in my behalf that you have not yet attended to; I do not remind you of the ease
and affluence that will be yours, if you consent to make me happy; nor do I
mention a splendid title; I know you are above such paltry considerations; but
I would wish you to reflect one moment, upon the advantages, they will most
certainly confer; superior to any you could ever receive in a connection with
the Chevalier COLWORT, if you should ever meet him again, which I think very
uncertain; you have known this young adventurer but a short time; he has but a
small fortune; you must leave the friends who love you, to whom you are
attached; you must leave France, a charming country, where your cheerfulness
will endear you, and make you respected, and reside amongst strangers; upon
that haughty, unsocial Island, you will be despised; as a foreigner,
particularly as a French woman; for a depend upon it, no friendship, no amity
can long subsist between a native of Britain and France; the aversion is
rooted, it cannot be erased; it will embitter your future days, and render you
unhappy; tied down to their cold and frigid rules, you will be without the
consolations of love or friendship; for they are capable of neither; but if you
consent to give me your hand, you will live with the Countess who loves you;
you will be adored as the mistress of all around you, and the possession of
unbounded wealth will give you the power to succor the afflicted, and to
assist the needy. My former life, has not been what I could wish, for upon
reflection, I have been guilty of follies that I grieve for; of imprudence,
that I regret; but it is rather my misfortune, than my fault; for I am
persuaded. I never should have erred as I have done, if I had, at an early
period of my life met a JULIA: It is in your power to perfect a reformation; it
is with you to save me not only from present sorrow, but perhaps from future
misery; you will make my father happy by presenting his son a penitent and
reformed: Oh, JULIA, do not turn from me an averted face; do not be deaf to my
entreaties, but smile upon me, and give me that dear hand, and say you will be
mine.

I am grieved, my Lord, (said JULIA, as soon as he had ceased speaking,) that
you should after four months acquaintance with me, entertain so poor, and
suffer me to say so unjust an opinion of me, as to suppose me so unstable, and
so inconsistent: I wish you happy, my Lord: I wish it for your own sake, for
that of your excellent father, and for your much loved aunt: If you have been
guilty of follies, I hope you will in future be more circumspect; a
consciousness of having done wrong generally precedes repentance, and from my
soul, I wish you happy; I wish you may find a woman much more capable of making
you happy, and more capable to move in so high a sphere, than the humble girl
you now address. I feel the force of what you have said; am sensible of the
honor you do me; but, my Lord, why will you wish to deprive me of the only
quality that would entitle me to your esteem? In becoming yours, my Lord, I
must forfeit my vows, break through a sacred and solemn engagement; a voluntary
engagement too, and thus lose my own good opinion, and lose with it all hopes
of happiness. No, my Lord, I am incapable of a conduct so vain, so trifling,
and so frivolous: I refuse the profound honor, my Lord, because I am engaged to
another, and because wealth, and a title however adorned, however noble and
exalted, could not compensate to me the loss of my probity; the loss of the man
I sincerely love and esteem, and suffer me to say, the loss of your Lordship's
good opinion.

She arose to leave him, but he threw himself between her and the door, with a
countenance inflamed by anger, and a frame agitated by conflicting passion, he
swore she should not leave him: think for a moment, (said he,) before you seal
your ruin, this is the last time I will ever put it in your power to reject or
receive; I have already thrown away too much time upon you, but you shall be
mine, be heaven, you shall.

Never, my Lord, (she replied,) I never will be yours, nor will I seal my ruin,
by giving a consent to what I should detest myself; for, reflecting upon for a
moment, with any degree of complacency. Never, cried he, enraged; the time will
come, when with all the ardent fondness of your sex, you will beg in vain for
the honor you now reject; by heaven, he added, while fury flashed in his eyes,
I am half a mind to murder you and myself; but the time will come, for revenge,
when, and that shortly too, you will repent this madness; but penitence will
then come too late, and self reflections will render you doubly wretched; you
shall never see that cursed adventurer more, never see again that infatuating
savage.

I rejoice, my Lord, (replied she, almost smiling from the complacency of the
idea,) I rejoice that your power is not adequate to your will, and that my fate
is in the hands of one, who can control both you and I at pleasure; who with
one thought can bid this whirlwind of the passions cease, who will never put it
in the power of a vain mortal, to say what shall, or what shall not be done;
there is no situation, my Lord, above his reach, nor no one so humble as to be
below his condescending care and kindness; he has promised to protect the
orphan, and as such, my Lord, I will depend upon him: Let me go, said she,
firmly, I insist upon being detained no longer; I insist upon passing, and she
passed him with a spirit that amazed him; leaving him astonished at her
fortitude, and his mind a prey to conflicting passions.

But the fortitude of JULIA forsook her; as soon as she had left him, a kind of
indignant desperation had supported her in his presence, but she hurried to her
chamber, burst into tears, and was giving full vent to her emotions, when she
was interrupted by Madam GYRON, who had been in pursuit of her, and was
surprised to find her in such a situation: Dear Mademoiselle, said she, what is
the matter? JULIA could not answer; what is the matter she repeated, it is not
a reprehensible curiosity, for that I could suppress, it is a better motive
that makes me inquire into this extraordinary emotion, perhaps my advice may be
of service to you; do my dear JULIA, confide in me, and whatever may have
caused your grief, it shall be a secret, if you wish it, and I am sure you will
never repent the confidence that I solicit.

It was indeed a release to JULIA to unfold to this friendly and sensible
woman, the present cause of her sorrows, and to receive with gratitude the
advice she offered her: Madam told her in return, that she highly approved of
her refusal, and spirited behavior: I know him to be a villain, (she added,) I
know such things of him as make me shudder only to think of; but his threats
are not to be despised, for he is powerful and malicious: I would have you
behave as usual to him; he will, I fancy, soon leave the Villa, and then
constraint will be no longer necessary; but do not inflame him to revenge, by
informing his aunt, till his departure, and I believe we shall all be glad of
his absence. I fancy, said JULIA, DONNA OLIVIA will not acquiesce in your
sentiments, but I suppose she does not know him as he is. DONNA OLIVIA, my
dear, has been used to affluence from her cradle, she cannot exist without it;
her family is ruined, her fortune spent, she loves the Count, and such are her
ideas that she would accompany him to the Altar, though he stood confessed the
villain before her, and she knew that his heart was engaged to you.

Is it possible, (said JULIA,) that any one can think or feel so? Why, I had
rather labor for bread, and receive the scanty pittance of hard earned
industry, than to be the wife of such a man. And so had I, (replied Madam,) but
my dear, we must go down; take no notice of what has passed, and I will
contrive, in a day or two, to free you from such a constraint, as the presence
of that wretch will inflict.

They then joined the company, and had the satisfaction to find the Count was
not with them: indeed he was too much discomposed to associate with any one,
and with a confidential servant had rode out. This man had been long a faithful
auxiliary, and he now disclosed to him, schemes of the blackest die; nor did
the fellow miss this opportunity to inform his master some hints that had
dropped from a servant of Madam GYRON's, which the guilty conscience of both
the Count and the man immediately suggested, alluded to a transaction that had
passed some years before, and fearful lest any thing more should be said, he
concluded to leave the Villa.

In pursuance with this resolution, he did not return until the Countess and
her guests had retired; he then waited upon the Marquis in his bedchamber, and
formed an excuse that obliged him to depart immediately for Paris; the Marquis
admitted his excuse, and at his request consented to say every thing to the
Countess and her friends that was necessary: He took leave of his father that
night, and before the rising of the next sun, was with all his attendants, half
a league from the Villa.

The company were surprised to find he had left them in that abrupt manner, but
all readily admitted his excuses, except DONNA OLIVIA, who could not conceal
her chagrin, and disappointment; but before night she received a summons to
visit her brother who was very ill, and Madam, GYRON, who had come in the same
carriage readily agreed to return with her, and the Chevalier signified his
intentions of accompanying them the next day.

The Countess unwilling to be so soon deprived of the society of her friend,
urged her longer stay, and the Marquis and JULIA added their most pressing
persuasions to her invitation, but she pleaded some business that must be soon
attended to, and promised a longer visit when the coming winter had excluded
other visitors.

The Italian concluded to stay a few days longer at the Villa, and then return
immediately to Spain, and not go again to Paris. The next day he remarked that
JULIA, had a happy mixture of the French and Italian in her countenance: You
have all the vivacity of the one, said he, with all the bewitching softness of
the other; was your father a Frenchman, Mademoiselle? Indeed I do not know,
(she replied,) while the crimson that mantled upon her check, discovered that
her mind had underwent a sudden emotion. Not know, (he repeated, amazed at her
answer;) not know of what country your father was? I never was so happy as to
know a father, (she said, while her voice trembled as she spoke.) Was your
mother an Italian? she interrogated.) Of that I am likewise ignorant, (...) I
believe she was a native of France. Perceiving that his questions embarrassed
her, he dropped them, and soon after sought the Countess, who finding he knew
something of JULIA, told him part of her story with a strict injunction of
secrecy. In a few days he left them, and the Countess, her brother, and JULIA,
again enjoyed that social intercourse which constitutes the sweetest happiness
of congenial souls.

CHAPTER X.
GOOD after ill, and after pain, delight
Alternate, shifts the score, like day and night;
Good unexpected, evil unforeseen,
Appears by turns, as fortune shifts the scene.

IN about four weeks they were surprised one afternoon by the arrival of a
number of men attended by two officers, who entered the apartment, in which the
Countess and her friend were seated, without ceremony, and seized upon JULIA,
as a prisoner of state: It would be impossible to express the surprise or
distress of the Countess, and the trembling girl; they begged an explanation,
and desired to know for what she was arrested; what was the crime alleged
against one so innocent and inoffensive. I should be sorry to offend your
ladyship, said one of the officers, I only do my duty, nor do I know for what
Mademoiselle is arrested; here is my warrant which you may read.

The Countess read with astonishment, and found it was under the great seal,
and that it commanded to seize the person of JULIA VALLAICE, a resident at the
Villa of the Countess DE LAUNA, and conduct her to the frontiers of the
Kingdom, and then deliver her up to the Spanish Officer, who was one of the
present company. It was in vain for the Countess to expatiate with these men,
or to oppose a power so superior; the Marquis had rode out, and all that she
could do was to assure JULIA, that she and her brother would most certainly
her; that they would first attend at Court and obtain all the information
necessary, and use all their power for her release. It was in vain that she
persuaded them to tarry till the return of the Marquis, and till her carriage
could be got ready. All the indulgence that could be obtained was for JULIA to
take a trunk of clothes, and that ANET should go with her in a carriage, which
they had brought for the purpose of carrying her. The Countess put a purse into
her hand at parting, and gave another to the officers, who promised she should
have every care and attention paid her during her journey. She hung upon the
neck of her generous benefactress, she wept upon her bosom, while the Countess
half distracted, knew not what to do, or how to conduct herself. Trust in your
innocence, my dear, said she, trust in him who is the father of orphans, and
the friend of the afflicted. Oh, Madam, and must I leave you, must I indeed be
dragged from you? We part, but for a short time, said the Countess, I will be
with you in a few days; she could add no more, for the officers separated them,
and put the trembling JULIA into a carriage that waited.

This transaction was so sudden, and so unexpected; the transition from liberty
and happiness, to slavery and misery; from all the blessings of friendship, and
the most elegant and refined society, to the company of men whose persons were
unpleasing; whose manners were rough and disagreeable; had taken place in so
short a time, that when JULIA found herself shut up in a close carriage with
the officers, and ANET, she could hardly suppose herself awake; she thought it
must be a dream, and she tried to shake off the fetters of sleep, that she
might escape from so dreadful a vision. But her efforts were vain, she found
indeed it was a reality, a painful reality; and instead of the soothing, the
sentimental friend, the charming Countess, she was driving from her, in
company, that she almost feared to look upon.

She endeavored to recollect every passage of her life, to look back upon her
infant hours, to form some probable conjecture, if possible, for what crime she
was now a prisoner, but it was in vain; she only ransacked the annals of an
innocent heart, of a life void of offense. She then searched the records of her
memory for an enemy, and here indeed she was more successful, for reflection in
a moment presented the Count, he had threatened her with vengeance, and now in
idea her accuser, her judge, and her jailor, stood confessed, the Count DE
LAUNA. She saddened at the horrid thought, and the hints and caution of Madam
GYRON, rushed upon her mind, and brought such a confusion of afflicting images
and suspicio^s, that she almost sunk under them.

From this state she was recalled by the tears of ANET, who sat crying opposite
to her, and who had for a few minutes been forgotten: she now endeavored to
comfort the little girl, by an assurance that the Countess would soon follow,
and that whatever happened to herself, she would be taken care of; the voice of
JULIA, who stiffled her own uneasiness, and appeared as calm as possible,
operated like a charm upon her affectionate attendant, and restored her to
tranquillity: She assured her lady that she would gladly go with her all over
the world, and that she was only distressed for the Countess, and her, and
would be quite easy as to what concerned herself.

JULIA now began to question the officers concerning the cause of her arrest;
the Frenchman could not, and the Spaniard would not give her any information,
and after a few fruitless enquiries, they all continued silent, and the mind of
JULIA, wandered back to the Villa, which was now for behind her; she saw, in
imagination, the anxiety and distress of the Marquis, and his sister, and
almost fancied she heard their voices, as they talked of her; she sometimes
too, thought of COLWORT, and a sigh followed. Her uncertainty was an
aggravation to the anguish of her heart, and she wished this state of suspense
over, let the end be ever so dreadful; for she thought a certainty of the
worst, could not exceed her present affliction. In consideration of her
attendant, she concealed her fears and combated with fortitude the agonizing
surmises that she could not dismiss: I every picture that her fancy drew, the
Count stood foremost, and there was no evil that she dreaded, that could bear
any comparison to those she feared from him, and her heart sunk at the idea of
meeting him.

It is not our intention to describe her journey, nor the towns and villages
she passed through; they only stopped to change horses, and for refreshment,
and traveled with such expedition, as left JULIA, no hope of being overtaken
by her friends, until they reached the place of their destination. Upon the
frontiers of the kingdom, the French officer left them, and JULIA had reason to
regret his departure: The Frenchman was humane and civil, he had told her the
names of the towns they had passed, and given her some sketches of the
inhabitants, and she had endeavored to divest herself of personal fears, enough
to attend; in some measure she had succeeded, and she found his communications
a source of satisfaction: But the Spanish officer, who now took her into his
custody, was haughty and vain, supercilious and illnatured; and had besides a
really weak understanding.

With this man she continued some days longer; had her constitution been less
firm, she must have sunk under the fatigue of such a journey, with a person and
mind so harrassed by constant fatigue and agitation: But a kind of desperation
kept her up, and her fortitude seemed to increase with her trials, and she
found the resources she had within herself, more numerous, than she supposed
them.

At the close of the fifth day, they arrived at M --, and JULIA was told her
journey was terminated here: But when the coach stopped before a large high
house, dark looking and ill contrived, she trembled so, she could hardly
alight, and her tottering limbs would scarce support her, for she there
expected to meet the Count; but here she was mistaken, for she was only met by
too bad looking men, and an apparently innocent woman, who conducted her up two
pair of stairs into a large Chamber, with a small grated window, little
furniture, and a bad fire; the weather was now cold, and she felt the want of
that cheering element; and when she found herself only with ANET, and heard the
door shut and the key turned upon her, her heart died within her, and overcome
with fatigue and cold, she found herself incapable of taking off her outside
garment, and sunk into a chair, and for a moment become insensible either to
the miseries of retrospection or anticipation.

The cries of ANET, soon brought up the woman, who exerted herself for the
relief of JULIA, and her recovered reason was softened by sensibility, which by
a gush of tears, in some measure, relieved her almost bursting heart: She
accepted the repast that the woman had provided and becoming in some measure
calm; she suffered the bed to be warmed, and went immediately to it, after
insisting upon her little attendant being a partaker of it. This was the first
time she had been undressed since she had left the Villa, for the purpose of
repose, and it now seemed to fly from her entreaties, and she wooed it with
wishes that seemed to drive it far from her; but toward day she sunk into a
profound slumber, and did not awake, till the woman, she had seen the night
before, came to inform her that two persons waited in an adjourning apartment
to see her.

She arose to dress herself with such a confusion of thought, and hurry of
spirit, that she could hardly put on her clothes; her face was pale and
languid, a faint blush just tinged her cheeks; her hair which had not been
dressed for many days fell in a kind of natural curl about her neck and
forehead, and though her eyes had not lost their brilliancy, they were more
soft and gentle than usual; yet the mild and resolute fortitude of her mind was
impressed upon her countenance, and she prepared to accompany her attendant
with dignity, tempered with sweetness.

She was only led to an opposite chamber, where she found two persons, one a
young man of a pleasing but troubled aspect, and the other an old one, who wore
an appearance of discontent and suspicion: They both met her at the door, and
seemed equally surprised at the elegance of her person, and manners; the glow
upon her cheek was hightened to crimson, by a sensation of mingled fear and
indignation of conscious virtue and assured innocence; with an air of respect
they requested her to be seated, and assured her that no injury was intended
her, and that if she was not entirely satisfied with her apartment, she should
immediately be put into possession of a better: She replied that she did not
complain of her accommodation, she only wished to be informed upon what pretext
she had been torn from her friends, and treated and confined as a prisoner.
They replied, she would soon be informed of every circumstance, and that
reparation should be made for every appearance of injury she had received; they
then conversed upon different subjects and dropped no hint of what related to
her confinement and situation; she endeavored to join in the conversation which
was several times addressed to her.

In near an hour after, three men entered, one of them produced the materials
for writing, and the others began to interrogate her concerning her former
life. They explained to her the nature of an oath, and then with great
solemnity administered it to her, when she laid her hand upon the book, which
she observed to be the Bible, she trembled, but she lifted her heart up to
heaven for support, and went through the awful ceremony without hesitation.
They asked her where she was from? She answered that she did not know. Where
she had lived? At Avignon, until about six months ago, since which, with the
Countess DE LAUNA. Who were her parents? Her father she had never known; her
mother, she described with the circumstance of her loss. She answered all these
questions with clearness, and without any apparent reluctance, and was again
with respect, conducted back to her apartment, and the door once more locked
upon her.

CHAPTER XI.
OH Memory, thou fond deceiver,
Still importunate and vain,
To former joys recurring ever,
And turning all the past to pain;
Thou art like the world, the oppressed, oppressing,
Thy Smiles increase the wretches, woe,
And he who wants each other's blessing,
In thee must ever find a foe,
GOLDSMITH.
IN a short time refreshments were brought, of which she eat, more, wish a view
to gratify ANET, and induce her to follow her example, than from inclination.
She then asked for a book, and a volumn of Hannah Moor's Poems was brought her,
this had been left by an English prisoner, when he was liberated by accident;
as she understood the language almost as well as her own: She read it with
pleasure and delight; and in the perusal of that beautiful poem, upon
sensibility, almost lost herself, and her sorrows. But some lines that seemed
to allude to minds and situations like her own, brought her back from the
illusive fields of poetry, and she sighed when she looked upon her dismal abode.

Three days passed as the first, with little or no (...) The woman brought her
meals regularly, and behaved with respect and attention; but she began to find
so inactive a life, even if it were divested of the anxiety she suffered, and
free from confinement, irksome and tedious. She had been used to active
industry from her infancy; not an hour of her life had passed unoccupied; she
considered idleness as the parent of every evil, the nurse of every vice, and
employment as one of her greatest privileges; she had always arisen before the
sun, and work, books and amusements, had filled up every moment; she never had
found the day too long; but now, shut up in a lonely prison; no book, no work,
no music, and no one to converse with, except ANET, she found the time hung
heavy upon her hands, and "chide the tardy minutes as they pass.' She got the
keeper of the prison to procure her the implements for drawing, and some books;
the first he got agreeable to her direction; but he had no taste, and was
ignorant and superstitious, and he brought her some devotional tracts, and she
threw them by, for neither instruction nor amusement could be gathered from
them.

She had some turn for drawing, but what could she exercise that talent upon;
her high grated window only gave her the prospect of a dark narrow street, with
a large brick building, the back of which was toward her, and which seemed
contrived to prevent the rays of light or wholesome air, from entering her
gloomy apartment, it indeed sufficiently excluded them, for she had not seen
the sun, since her residence in it.

She indeed sketched the figure of some haughty Spaniards as they walked by in
solemn state, wrapped up in their black cloaks; but the sameness, soon tired
her, and she could not row as formerly, draw from imagination; her heart was
chearless, and her mind too gloomy, and she chose not to tinge the canvas with
those sombre shades, and she threw by the pencil; her mind was inventive, she
asked the woman that attended her, for work; plain useful sewing she preferred,
and she was soon furnished, and in this found a resource against her sorrows,
and a solace in her affliction. She instructed ANET to work, and the jailor's
wife began to find a benefit from their industry.

While her fingers were so usefully employed, her mind was at liberty to range
at pleasure, and in imagination she often visited the Villa; often felt the
embraces of the Countess, and her brother; often too, fancy represented them as
coming to her relief, and she accompanied them in their journey, found them
stopped at the door of her prison, listened to every noise or ring of the bell,
and almost expected to see them enter her apartment. Some times too, she
crossed the Altantic, and beheld her beloved COLWORT enjoying all the pleasures
of liberty and peace, improving his mind by observation, or occupied in
soothing the broken spirit of his cousin, and cherishing her infant with
tenderness and benevolence.

Her mind had never known suspicion, and she was saved a vast deal of
uneasiness, that mean dispositions are subjected to; she had never for one
moment doubted, the continued affection and friendship of the Countess, or her
brother, and a shadow of jealousy had not for one instant clouded her
dependence, upon the constancy of COLWORT. She sometimes gave way to fear; that
sickness prevented her friends from coming to her relief; and then, indeed, she
was wretched.

In less then a week, she received another visit from the gentlemen who had
waited upon her at first, underwent the same interrogatories, and returned the
same answers; and was again reconducted to her prison. Six days passed on as
usual, and her patience became almost exhausted; and when led again to the
presence of the persons, who had twice before questioned her, she begged to
know how long she was to suffer this confinement, and what was alleged against
her? I wish, Madam, I could answer you, said the eldest, but I cannot. And why
not, cried JULIA, with some spirit, I am unused to ask favors, but in this case
surely, it is natural, and excusable; I only beg to be informed, why I am thus
confined? I have been torn from friends that I love, from a situation that was
delightful, from society that was dearest to my heart, and hurried along for
several hundred miles, and after that, confined in a dark and gloomy prison,
without friends, without society, and without amusement; not one intimation is
given why I thus suffer? To sufferings, I am resigned, and will be satisfied
with the decrees of those who have my fate at their disposal; all I ask, is an
end to this state of suspense, and I think I have a right to demand an answer,
and a relief to the painful sensations that doubt occasions. Three weeks from
this, Mademoiselle, (returned her interrogator,) the Lord High Advocate, with
the other Judges, will return to this city, the court will then set, and a
final decree will be given. Good God, said JULIA, am I to be arraigned before
the Lord High Advocate, and tried as a criminal, as a state offender; what have
I ever done to merit this treatment? You are not to be treated with such
ignominy, replied the youth, nor are you to be brought as a criminal before any
tribunal, and no one who looks upon you for a moment, would credit an assertion
so improbable.

I did not wish for a compliment, she answered, I only wish for information.
And that, he said, is the only request that cannot be granted; we are bound by
the most solemn oaths, not to declare for what you are confined; if we break
those oaths, we are perjured. If that is the case, said JULIA, sighing, I must
aim at resignation; patience is a virtue often called into exercise, and long
and frequent use only, increases it; when our virtues lay dormant, and
inactive, we do not justly appreciate them; it is practice that shows how
really valuable they are, and how great their utility is. Indeed, said the
young gentlemen, we are grieved for you, and wish for nothing more, than to
have the power to relieve your mind from suspense, and your person from
confinement. It is evident that you can practice every virtue; you are too
lovely and amiable, to permit us to doubt it. Were I happy, sighed JULIA,
seignior, perhaps your compliments might make me vain; I am at present too much
the reverse to be elated. He bowed, and she was again led back to her chamber,
with a heart doubly oppressed; she thought she saw in the countenance of the
young man, pity for her fate, while the old one seemed to betray ill nature,
and squint suspicion. What they had said respecting a court and a final decree,
created a thousand new images of horror; her mind recurred to the direction she
had received from her mother, not to leave the Cottage; again PIERRE, the son
of the old man, had said, her life when an infant, depended upon the
concealment of her real name; that she thought was now discovered, and her life
would than be sacrificed to some interested enemy. She had often wished, she
could remove the veil, that wrapped her birth in impenetrable obscurity; that
veil she now supposed would be soon removed, and her death close the scene;
even to that she looked with some degree of impatience; so greatly did suspense
aggravate every evil she suffered: In the affection of the Marquis and his
sister, she was secure, and she had expected they would have come, or sent to
her succor: She still hoped they would appear; but, the sad idea occurred,
that perhaps, they were withheld from giving her any assistance, by that hand
of power, that had confined her: perhaps too, they had upon inquiries found her
state so hopeless and desperate, that every attempt was laid aside, as
fruitless and unavailing. In these reflections she indulged, until her mind
became a perfect chaos, and so much agitated, as to be little short of
distraction. She traversed her apartment with hurried steps, till after ten,
when she heard a low step approach her door, the key was turned with evident
caution, and she beheld the young man enter, whom she had seen in the morning.

He was alone, and approached her with evident confusion and respect. Forgive
this intrusion, said he, forgive this unseasonable visit, which is meant, if
possible, to relieve you from some of the disagreeable things that surround
you. Your meaning is so very kind, replied JULIA, that I am willing to overlook
the impropriety. Have you any good news for me? Have my friends arrived? Is
suspense and concealment no longer necessary? I have heard nothing new,
Mademoiselle, I do not even know your friends, and I am bound by a solemn oath
not to reveal the reasons of your confinement. But the knowledge of it will
injure no one, but myself; and free you from suspense, and I could not rest
till I had relieved you, even at the expense of my honor. And do you think,
said JULIA, that I would buy transient ease, to myself, at such a price? No
sir, if my curiosity is not to be gratified, except at the expense of your
truth, I will sacrifice that curiosity, great as it is, and endure this
suspense, until I may with honor be relieved from it. There was a heroism in
the principle, that exerted a spirit that arose almost to enthusiasm; it taught
her the value of virtue, and learned her how much easier it was to endure
unmerited sufferings, than pleasure purchased at the expense of truth, even of
another; the first she had borne for weeks; her health was good, her nerves
strong, her capacities for reflection or reasoning, for business or amusement,
by no means impaired; her appetite as good as it could be without exercise;
but, at the idea of the last her heart sickened, her limbs trembled, she became
pale, and she would not have involved a fellow creature in guilt, for a world
and liberty.

The young gentleman gazed upon her with astonishment; he had that morning seen
her distress; he observed, she had pleaded with an energy of language; with an
air of affliction, and had almost melted the heart of his companion, and now
when her sorrow was heightened by their refusal, when anxiety and agitation was
impressed upon every interesting feature, she could nobly refuse to have her
heart eased, her curiosity gratified, and her favorite request granted, rather
than suffer a stranger to forfeit his word, or to lose his honor. This was a
stretch of virtue, a noble height, to which CARLOS had never supposed any
mortal could aspire to.

I am charmed with your character, Mademoiselle, said he, and hope that you
will not entertain too low an opinion of me; your beauty and your sufferings
led me astray; your fortitude and honor have restored my scattered reason, and
I hope I shall be able to follow so noble an example. I thank you, said JULIA,
for your consideration; to know that any one sympathizes with me, is a relief
to my sorrows; and I shall always be grateful for the favor you intended me,
for I shall always remember what a price you would have paid. He hesitated a
moment, he looked upon her face, and the virtue that had until then reigned in
his heart, was not proof against her soft and gentle beauty; he would have
bartered it, to have made her happy, for it was death to see her miserable. It
is in my power, Mademoiselle, said he, it is in my power to free you from
confinement, but shall I do it, or not? you yourself shall determine; upon your
decision my fate now hangs; I will this night prepare a carriage, and set out
with you for your friends; but he added with a sigh, it is highly probable this
may cost a dear and respected father, his life; yet it is a risque, I am
willing to run; a sacrifice, I am willing to make; a proof that I am this
moment ready to give. Heaven forbid it, said JULIA, I would rather suffer
imprisonment for life, with innocence, than by such a step incur the deserved
punishment of a guilty conscience; no seignior, I am at length content to await
the decrees of fate and its appointed time, for my death or rerelief, but I
will not involve you in my distresses, and I advise you, seignior, to
appreciate virtue at too high a rate, than ever, even, for a moment offer to
part with her; do not suffer either your sympathy or benevolence to betray you,
to lose your honor or fortitude; they then become weaknesses, and are no longer
virtues. I entered your prison, he replied, with sensations very different from
those I shall feel at leaving it, I then pitied you as unfortunate; I now envy
you as one of the first and noblest of characters; but amidst the glare of your
virtues, I must still do homage to your beauties, I must, Mademoiselle, I must
devote my life, myself and fortune to you; Oh suffer me to hope, that when this
gloomy scene has passed, when this eventful period has elapsed, that one thing
may be remembered with pleasure; Oh promise when that time comes, to listen to
my vows, and to unite your fate with mine. I should indeed be guilty, she
returned, of what I have always considered as unpardonable, if I hesitated to
assure you, that though you will always possess my gratitude and esteem; that
all my more affectionate thoughts, have long been in possession of another; let
this be sufficient, and drop the only subject that I cannot listen to with
pleasure. I will obey you, said he, though no one can tell with what anguish of
heart I relinquish an hope, and the only one, that I had permitted to irradiate
my prospect; that prospect is alas, more dark, more gloomy than ever, for
should the events of an approaching trial be as I apprehend, I shall leave my
country, and commence the life of a wretched wanderer, for how could I support
life and reason in a country dyed with the blood of a parent. Since I have seen
you, I have indeed encouraged an hope, that matters might not turn out so
badly, but be they what they will, I now find I have bid adieu to that
tranquillity that can make any place dear to me. Do not, interrupted JULIA, let
such melancholy fears tinge your mind; things may all be well, and it is a
folly to anticipate evils that may never arrive, and wisdom to be deluded by
hope; you are still very young; I don't know what scenes of sorrow you allude
to, but there are but few sensations, but may be effaced, and the transient
impression, that perhaps gives you pain at present, may and will soon be
forgotten. I fear not, Mademoiselle, he replied; indeed I do not wish it, for
if I am to gain tranquillity only by losing some of the most delightful
sensations; I own I have not fortitude to relinquish them. No greater proof can
be given, cried JULIA, of the futility and folly of such sensations, than not
wishing to part with them, when they are only productive of pain, and cannot be
indulged with honor; for my part, my prospects are enveloped in ten fold
misery, and every step I take, renders them darker and more perplexing; the
absolute uncertainty I am in, at present, forbids my anticipating; but I own
that hope, even now throws a ray of light upon them. I wish it could be
extended to you, and I think if you catch only one gleam of so delightful a
soother, you ought to encourage it. You are, indeed, he sighed, a delightful
soother, but it is dangerous to be with you. I ought before this, said JULIA,
interrupting him, to have put an end to this visit, and I thank you for so
timely an intimation, and assure you that the pleasure of social and friendly
conversation, has so relieved my mind, that I forgot I was acting with
impropriety. Do not wrest what I said, he cried, to such a meaning, and permit
a longer stay; for the moment, I quit you, I become a prey to gloomy doubts,
and dark despair. Indeed, said the gentle girl, were I to follow only my
inclination, your request would be granted; but, it is time for you to go, and
I must insist upon it: She looked upon her watch, it was near twelve, you will
carry my best wishes for your happiness and tranquillity. Good night, he said,
as he opened the door; you have taught me what it is to be virtuous, and to be
miserable. Virtue and misery cannot long dwell together, she observed, as she
bade him good night. He repeated the wish; the door was now lo^ked upon her,
and she retired to rest; and the pleasure she realized in the consciousness of
having made a sacrifice to honor, was so tranquil, that a balmy sleep soon
bound her cares in a sweet oblivion.

In the course of three weeks she underwent several examinations, which all
terminated as those already narrated, at (...) of these, she was told that in
three days she would appear before the Judges, and the old gentleman asked her,
with much civility, if she did not want any thing to prepare her for this
appearance. She answered him, that she had or could procure, every thing she
wished for, but her liberty; that with respect to her appearance, it was
indeed, but of little consequence, in comparison to the event of that day,
which, though dreaded, she ardently wished for.

CHAPTER XII.
HEAVEN has no rage like love, to hatred turned,
Nor HELL a fury, like a woman scorned.

IT is now time to return to the Villa de Launa. When the Marquis returned from
his ride, he was met by the servants who informed him of the departure of
JULIA, and in a very incoherent manner, gave him a detail of that event,
stupefied by his information, it was with difficulty he reached his sister's
apartment, who could only confirm what he had already heard. Though as much
shocked and distressed as the Countess, he endeavored to sooth her by every
argument that he could make use of, and assurances that every thing should be
done, to release and restore her to them.

Early the next morning they set off for Paris, and as soon as they arrived at
that city, the Marquis applied to the king; LOUIS received him with
condescension and affability, the unfortunate Monarch, who has since drank the
cup of affliction to the very dregs, had just began to experience the sorrows
that showered so thick about him; his heart was open to the woes of others, and
he wished for nothing more than to see his people happy; but he could give the
Marquis little information, and referred him to the Spanish ambassador; upon
waiting at his Hotel, he was told, he was gone to pass a week with a friend in
the country. The next morning he appointed to follow him, but the exercises of
his mind and personal fatigue, had brought on a fit of the gout, which fell
immediately on his stomach, and confined him to his bed. The Countess, who
loved her brother, and shuddered at the* idea of his death, could not leave him
for a moment; but though her anxiety for JULIA, was in some measure suspended
by this new affliction, yet she was not for one moment forgotten. Six days
after his first attack, she received a visit from Madam GYRON, who had but just
heard of her being at Paris. As soon as the Countess informed her of the cause
of her journey, and of her suspense and uneasiness for JULIA, that lady with
all the warmth of true friendship, offered to go herself to the Spanish
Ambassador's, and learn the cause of JULIA's arrest; she said he was a relation
of here is, and would, she knew, deny her nothing.

She set off that very day for the country, and when arrived, heard some things
of real importance to herself. Confused and agitated, she returned to Paris,
wrote an unsatisfactory note to the Countess who was still confined to her
brother's bedside; was present at the nuptials of a young lady she had
educated, and a young man she had adopted as her son; got the depositions of
some persons of respectability; and then, with the new married pair, set out
for Spain, bearing letters from the Countess, accounting for the
non-fulfillment of her promise, and fully fraught with love and tenderness.

We now return to JULIA, who the evening preceding her appearance at Court,
found her mind much agitated beyond its usual habit; she could not sleep, and
arose early the next morning, that she might be ready when called for; she
attired herself in a simple white robe, a small cap, placed after the manner of
the country, upon the top of her head, was her only borrowed ornament. But her
soft and luxuriant hair, of the brightest auburn, curled in a thousand natural
but becoming ringlets, would have ornamented a face less beautiful than her
own, which did not need the aids, which less handsome females find so necessary.

At nine o'clock, she was summoned to attend, and with a palpitating heart,
obeyed the summons. The Court had not long been seated, the council upon both
sides convened; the concourse was great; when attended by a thousand graces,
with an air at once humble and majestic, JULIA made her appearance; instantly
the eyes of all were fixed upon her, and a murmur of applause ran through the
building: She was led in by the jailer, and ANET was by her side; her
appearance operated like a charm; even the Judges viewed her with partiality,
and the Council, for the defendant, hoped every thing, from an appearance so
prepossessing. It is now time to disclose the cause of her arrest, and her
mysterious confinement.

Seignior DON PEDRO, a Spanish gentleman, had died of grief, for the loss of an
amiable wife; he had left an only child, a daughter, to the care of his
brother, DON GASPERD, and by his will, bequeathed his whole estate to that
brother, if his infant daughter should die before she attained the age of one
and twenty; but if she lived until then, her fortune was to be at her own
disposal. The child was brought home to her uncle's house, but being seized
with indisposition, was carried into the country, with her nurse, about six
months after the death of her father; from that time she had never been seen,
and when inquiries were made for her, answer was given, that she was in a
Convent for her education; doubts had arisen in the minds of many; the uncle
had been unhappy and gloomy; but about three months previous to the arrest of
JULIA, the brother of the child's mother had returned from the East Indies, and
immediately demanded his Niece; DON GASPERD at first equivocated, then said she
was dead, but being unable to prove this, declared she had been stolen by her
nurse, as he supposed, for the sake of some valuable trinkets, which she had
about her; that he had used every expedient, though secretly, to discover her; he
could never find her. The newly returned uncle, who had loved his sister with
extreme tenderness, immediately supposed that her life had been sacrificed to
secure her fortune, and directly commenced a prosecution against him, as the
murderer of his sister's child; this happened just before the Italian nobleman
(who had long known DON GASPERD, and who entertained no doubts of his
innocence, visited France; he there saw at the Villa DE LAUNA, JULIA, and
hearing her story, immediately supposed he had found DON GASPERD'S neice; with
this news, he sat off for Spain, and an edict to summon her to appear, was made
out, but her maternal uncle, DON ELZIVER supposing this all a deception, and
burning to revenge the murder of his niece, got an order from the King to the
Ambassador, for JULIA to be arrested as a culprit, and that secrecy should be
more strictly adhered to, pledged himself in an oath, and had the same
administered to CARLOS, the amiable son of DON GASPERD, that she should not be
informed of the cause of her confinement, till she appeared before the Judges.
Notwithstanding the prejudice he cherished, and which had convinced him, she
was an impostor; he was charmed with her beauty, majesty, and innocence; her
good sense and artless, though brilliant remarks, he could not help admiring; and
her extreme frankness, almost convinced him, that if she was a deceiver, she
herself was deceived; and though he wished to release her mind, he had strictly
adherd to the oath he had taken, while CARLOS had lost his reason, in his
admiration of her beauty and pity of her sufferings.

In this august Court, before thousands of spectators, before the opening of
the cause, JULIA was informed of these particulars; and though she could not
prove that she was not the neice, or any ways connected with her, yet a
pre-sentiment, persuaded her, that she was not; she had underwent a strict
examination, previous to the information; the clearness and precision of her
answers, and her artless manner, and her own remarks, had convinced all, that
she was no impostor. After this necessary delay, the trial went on, and the
Counsel on both sides displayed talents and abilities, that could not sail to
please lovers of eloquence, although the subterfuges that they made use of,
struck the innocent heart of JULIA, with disgust. Several gentlemen, with true
Spanish gallantry, pressed forward to support and attend JULIA, who had no
friend near her; (CARLOS being too much interested to witness a decision, upon
which the life of his father depended;) she was indulged with a seat, and her
countenance betrayed the various agitations of her mind.

The advocate for the prosecutor, endeavored to prove, that JULIA was an
impostor; that the real neice of DON GASPERD was murdered; they brought forward
the perturbated state of his mind; imputed his gloom to guilt; and expatiated
upon his avarice, upon his equivocating with Don ELZIVER, of the falsehoods he
had told him, and the many shifts he had made use of, to get rid of this
affair; and now, said one, he has found a needy adventurer, and has compromised
the matter with her; and is willing to give up the fortune of the poor murdered
orphan, rather than his own life.

JULIA, could hardly refrain from speaking, but her indignation sparkled in her
eyes, and was flushed upon every feature of her face.

When it was time for the advocate upon the opposite side to speak, he plead
forcibly in behalf of his client, and endeavored to prove him innocent of the
crime alleged to him; when near the close of his defense, he produced evidence
to prove, that JULIA was under the protection of the Countess DE LAUNA, treated
by her as a daughter; by the Marquis as a child, and entitled by the will of
both to an hundred thousand crowns; is it likely (said he) that so noble, so
exalted a female, as the Countess DE LAUNA, would become an accomplice in so
dark an affair? Is it likely that the Marquis ALVADA would abet any one in a
scheme, to rob a man of his right, or to protect his murderer? But, said he, we
have in the face of this lady, the fairest and most convincing proof of her
innocence, (and he threw up the gauze veil that shaded, but could not conceal
her beauty,) look at her, added he, and say if she can be guilty; does not
innocence and every virtue appear in every feature; and appeal to every feeling
heart, against the injustice done her? Does not the varying crimson tell you,
how great is her indignation at this insult, and how much her soul would recoil
at the idea of deception? I will not say that JULIA VALLACE is niece to Don
GASPERD, but I will undertake to prove that she is no impostor; he then
endeavored to touch the feelings of all, by representing in terms pathetic, the
crime of injuring beauty and innocence; when unprotected by wealth or power;
the horror of condemning a man upon any, but the most positive proofs, and the
misery that would be deserved and endured, if Don GASPERD should be condemned
and suffer, and in any future period found innocent. The judges inquired, if
JULIA had no one of the jewels about her, for which the infant had been
supposed to be stolen; the uncle said that amongst them was a miniature of her
mother, and that she had a mark upon her arm occasioned by a burn. Upon
inquiry, JULIA owned she had worn a picture, that she had always supposed to be
her mother's, but by the direction of the person from whom she received it, had
kept it out of sight; she produced it, some persons declared it to be the
picture of DONNA ELVIRA, but most of those who remembered that lady, thought it
was not; they remarked that the eyes of DONNA ELVIRA were black, those of the
miniature a soft blue; the features and color of the picture were rather mild,
than striking; they were rich and delicate; a pensiveness seemed spread over
them while, DONNA ELVIRA was sparkling, and to some had the appearance of
boldness, JULIA was remarked by all to resemble the portrait; but DONNA ELVIRA,
was different, though lovely. The picture was returned, and with a dignified
modesty, she replaced it in her bosom.

She was next questioned respecting the mark, and when the glove was pulled
from her soft white arm, it was apparent to all. This was regarded as an
unequivocal proof; but some of the judges wished to defer a decision, till the
Countess DE LAUNA could appear, but the parties and populace pressed so loudly
for an immediate verdict, that they became decided in favor of Don GASPERD, and
he was solemnly acquitted; and JULIA acknowledged as his niece, and the heiress
of his brother's fortune.

Congratulations flew around the Court; Don GASPERD thanked the judges, and
CARLOS who was informed of the happy issue of this dreaded trial, half
breathless with joy rushed into the Court, and with frantic emotions embraced
his father, declared his gratitude, and kneeling before JULIA, acknowledged her
as his beloved cousin, and the savior of his father; his dutiful emotions
interested every one in his behalf, for every one had long loved his virtues,
and Don ELZIVER forgot his suspicions, and saluted JULIA as his niece.

But amidst this confusion of joy, a groupe of four persons entered the court;
and pressing forward, attracted the general observation; they consisted of
Madam GYRON, who stood foremost; an old woman who had the appearance of a
domestic; a modest, a pleasing looking young man and woman, dressed in a most
magnificent manner.

The appearance of these persons who advanced to the bench, regardless of
forms, had so interested the curiosity, that when she solemnly demanded an
audience, it was instantly granted. -- Don GASPERD, grew pale at her approach,
and JULIA could not conceal the joy, which animated every lovely feature in her
face; when she beheld a friend of the Countess; instead of addressing the
court, she turned to JULIA, she took her hand with tenderness, she pressed it
with veneration to her lips, shall I give you pain, my dear, said she, if I
prove to a demonstration, that you are no ways connected with Don GASPERD; that
not one drop of his blood ^lows in your veins; that you are not entitled to a
single crown of that fortune, that has this day been decreed to you; that you
have no claim upon them, whatever: I know I shall not pain you, for your soul
is noble, you do not need wealth, and you love justice two well, even if you
did, to keep or wish to keep the property of another. I am come to prove you
are not his neice; I bring in my hands proofs that cannot be disputed. Many
persons, said she, turning round in this august assembly, have already
acknowledged that they recognize me, and I am sure that the only child of Don
FELIX DE GYRON and his amiable CISILLA, will be acknowledged; in me you behold
that injured daughter (she stopped, as if overcome by the sense of what she was
about to unfold) but what she had already said, had fixed attention and raised
curiosity to that height of expectation, that a silence almost like death
ensued; every face was impressed with the magnitude of what they imagined, they
should hear; and a stillness pervaded the court, uninterrupted by even a
breath; she continued, I am that child, and at the age of fifteen, was left by
my father, the friend, and protector of Don GASPERD, to his guardianship; the
consequences have proved, how mistaken my poor misguided father was, in his
choice, and how unworthy Don GASPERD was of the confidence reposed in him; he
seduced me from the paths of virtue, robbed me of my honor, stripped me of my
fortune, and left me in obscurity, to misery, and want; by the death of a
distant relation, a few years after, I became mistress of a plentiful fortune;
I had then enough to educate my son, the fruit of my shame and dishonor; but
my country was the country of my seducer, and was hateful to me; I resolved to
leave it, but before I went, instigated by revenge, I stole the infant orphan
of his brother, and with her nurse conveyed her to France. I took care that her
identity should be proved, beyond the power of even a doubt; I placed her in a
convent, I educated her as my own, and three weeks ago I gave her to my son in
marriage; do not hesitate one moment, to determine upon the truth of what I
assert; here is the miniature of DONNA ELVIRA; her mother; here are the jewels
that was upon her daughter when pilfered from her uncle's country house; here
is a paper that contains proof, that I stole, educated and married her; if
other witnesses are necessary, here is the nurse, who has not lived one day
from under the same roof with her. I acknowledge that revenge stimulated me to
commit this crime, and but for Mademoiselle VALLACE, I should have pushed it
still farther; I saw at one view all the consequences; I was the first that
infused suspicion into the minds of the populace, I had it hinted to Don
ELZIVER; I kept it alive, and I meant to, till the law had, as I hoped it
would, executed my full vengeance upon Don GASPERD, and his life, had paid the
forfeit of my lost honor: But when I heard that JULIA, the innocent, the
amiable JULIA, was implicated in the affair, that she was by some considered as
an accomplice; I could delay no longer, and have come from France, to sacrifice
a just revenge upon the shrine of forgiveness and mercy; for this purpose, and
this alone, I am come; here is the daughter of DONNA ELVIRA, and the niece of
Don GASPERD; if a doubt remains, let those who knew her mother, look, and
acknowledge the striking likeness in her child: GOD has fixed it as an
indelible mark, to ascertain the truth of what I have declared: this young man
is my son, the son too of Don GASPERD; and the husband, of his niece. Here she
stopped, and it was impossible to withhold belief; the truth found its way into
every heart, and every mind felt the force of conviction.

The resemblance of the young lady, was acknowledged by a large number of
persons, who had known her mother; the declaration of Madam GYRON, and the
nurse were admitted, and the decree in favor of JULIA reversed; but her heart
thus relieved from suspense, her person at liberty, and her innocence owned by
all, found a pleasure that the wealth of Indostan, could not have bestowed; she
saw in rightful possession of that fortune, that a mistaken justice had but one
hour before decreed to her, innocence, youth and beauty; she saw her husband
apparently worthy; she beheld Don GASPERD, though vicious, in many respects,
cleared from an unjust aspersion; Don ELZIVER, satisfied, and though she
shuddered at the revengeful character of Madam GYRON, yet she remembered her
misfortune and pitied her errors; she saw too a prospect of a speedy return to
France, and longed to converse with Madam GYRON, alone.

But to return from this digression, Don GASPERD, acknowledged the justice of
the vengeance that he had so severely suffered by, and offered every reparation
in his power, owned her son, and embraced his niece with every mark of
tenderness. Don ELZIVER, followed his example, and embraced her with more
tenderness and more avidity, than he had JULIA, for though her person and
talents were really superior to those of his niece, yet his heart bore
testimony of the validity, of her claim; and nature, pleaded so powerfully in
his bosom, and when he viewed the features and countenance of his sister upon
the face of her daughter, that the force of blood overpowered his fortitude,
and he could not refrain his tears; as for the generous CARLOS, delighted that
the innocence of his father, was so fully cleared, that his life was spared,
and all parties reconciled, with all the warmth of fraternal affection, he
embraced his new brother, and told him with what joy he should divide his
inheritance, and what was still dearer, his father's affection with him.

They all attended Madam GYRON, to her house, and every offer of reparation was
made to JULIA, but the disinterested girl, who enjoyed the joys of others,
found herself fully repaired for all she had suffered, in finding those
sufferings, the means of doing good.

CHAPTER, XIII.
HEAVEN first taught letters for the wretch's aid,
Some banished Lover, or some captive Maid.
POPE.
AS soon as a moment, could be found Madam GYRON, delivered a packet from the
Countess, and the tenderly affectionate explanations which they contained,
removed from her mind every remaining anxiety. She was invited to return to
France as soon as possible, but desired to reside with Madam GYRON, until an
opportunity presented her with good company, as companions, and she was
empowered to draw upon a merchant in Spain for what money she wanted; a letter
too was enclosed from COLWORT, breathing forth the expressions of a sincere and
affectionate heart; to her surprise, it was dated in Virginia, and near the
residence, of the sage of Mount Vernon, -- It was as follows: --

Virginia, America, March 28.
How difficult is it, my dearest JULIA, for the heart which within a very few
days has vibrated with pleasure, sunk with horror, and throbbed with gratitude,
to express a tender and pure affection to the best and dearest of women! How
very different, to clothe its sensations, in language, that can be pleasing to
her affectionate bosom, and not unacceptable to her delicacy? but while I
write, such a crowd of contending emotions, press upon my mind, that I know not
how, to preserve consistence, or method, in this letter of narrative, for such
it will be; yes, my JULIA! the man whom you have honored, with your esteem; the
man who triumphs in the dear idea of calling you his; the man whose chief
delight shall be to make you happy, has shuddered with the fear of losing these
inestimable titles; he has been in the very shadow of death, and trembled upon
the very verge of eternity.

"Even then when horror froze his blood,
"His heart was filled with love for thee."
And in the moment, when struggling nature worn out, with a long, and arduous
contest, was about to quit the wearied frame forever, the image of JULIA, was
before my eves, and seemed to forbid an approaching dissolution; it was then
that I found how much dearer you were to me than life; how much dearer, than
all that life contains besides you! It was in that tremendous moment, that
every dear friend and beloved connection, pressed upon my recollection, that a
multitude of sins presented themselves to my view, and but for the idea of a
SAVIOR, would have added to the dreadful scene, terrors too distracting to
have been supported with reason; but I cast them upon him, who is willing to
save; and even then a bright gleam of hope, illuminated the dreary prospect,
and pointed to a futurity, where no storm shall disturb the calm, of
everlasting happiness.

But, I am forgetting, that you are still unacquainted with the cause, of these
reflections; indeed I am sometimes so lost, to the distance that is between us,
and so pleased to recollect the cord that so strongly drew us together, and
entwined a mutual affection, from the day of our first acquaintance, that I
feel as though every transaction of each must be known to each other, and often
in my mind's eye, behold the fair form of my JULIA, and look to see if an
approving smile irradiates her charming countenance; it is then, that the soft
delusion; the flattering dream ceases to deceive me, and reality, sad reality,
places three thousand long, long miles, between us; but neither time, nor
distance, can irradicate the tender and strong attachment, that your virtues
have impressed upon my heart, for it has stood the ^est of death, and even the
gloomy tyrant had not the power of erasing your image, from a bosom that is
entirely filled with you. But let me leave this effusion of affection; this
tide of tenderness, let me restrain; and proceed to inform you of the events
which have brought me to Virginia, and thrown me into the care and protection
of the Hero of America; the boast of New England; the dread of her enemies, and
the sage, patriot, and illustrious farmer of Mount Vernon.

Finding it impossible to procure a passage from Hollowel, to either France or
Great Britain, I found some difficulty in persuading my poor unfortunate
cousin, to leave a place where she had received a thousand attentions, and
kindnesses, from the inhabitants, who are possessed of every social and
hospitable virtue, for Boston, which had been the scene of her most severe
afflictions. She was greatly altered, and wished not to associate with the gay,
or the great; indeed she wished to be secreted from all the world, till in the
arms of her parents, her faults and sorrows were forgotten. She yielded to
necessity, and my entreaties; and with her lovely infant accompanied me, to
Boston; a passage soon presented, and we embarked on board the two Friends,
bound for London, on the tenth of this month. The ship was large and
convenient, and every comfort, was procured, that could render the voyage
agreeable, to my fair companion, and her infant charge; for the first day the
wind was fresh and favorable, but upon the next, it changed, and our course was
altered: it continued unfavorable, without any violence, until the twentieth,
or rather the night of the nineteenth, when a dreadful storm commenced, with a
violence that astonished our ablest seamen; until twelve o'clock, of the
succeeding day, our vessel stood its heaviest shocks, and the rising billows
seemed not to affect her tall masts and hardy sides; but then we struck against
a sunken rock, and with a most tremendous noise, both main and foremast come
upon the deck, and were levelled with the ocean.

It would be impossible to paint, the horrors of our situation; the water now
poured into the sides of the ship, with a dreadful roar, and speedy
dissolution, stared us in the face; in this state our ship fixed firmly to the
rock; every heart seemed to sink; and as the last resource, the long boat was
got out, and it was unanimously agreed to leave the vessel, which in a very few
hours must go to pieces: it was then I had a proof of the strong effects of
maternal affection, no persuasion could prevail upon my cousin, to trust her
child in the arms of any one, but herself; her maid had before crossed the
atlantic; and to the honor of woman, be it spoken, acted with as much presence
of mind, as the oldest seaman on board; but not for one moment would she trust
her darling with her. She held him fast, pressed to her bosom, and the little
fellow seemed to think his mother, his best protector, for he hung around her
neck, and hid his little face upon her shoulder, while her fears seemed only
for him. In this state, while every sea dashed over us, and every other moment
buried us beneath a wave; with the utmost difficulty we got her into the boat,
and while I was preparing to follow, a billow foaming with redoubled fury,
parted it from the ship, and left me behind. It was not without the most
distressing emotions, I saw it borne aloft upon the top of the surge, and anon,
overwhelmed in the sea. I was the only one left upon the wreck, as my servant
had taken upon himself the care of MARY, who was in the boat before, her lady.
For some time I followed it with my eyes, and saw it buffeting the storm, when
I beheld a man plunging into the ocean, and swim toward the wreck. Judge what
was my astonishment, when I found this to be the faithful fellow, who had
attended me, as a servant, and finding I was not with the crew, chose rather to
share the fate of his master, than seek safety without him. He was an able
swimmer, and soon reached the vessel, which he entered with more apparent
pleasure, than he had left it; my heart was melted at this proof of his
affection; and he immediately proposed to get the small boat out, and try, if
in that, we could not reach the shore, which we now saw within a few miles;
with amazing exertion, we at last succeeded, and having got the boat into the
sea, jumped into her, and in less than a minute the ship parted in the middle,
and disappeared from our view; we now endeavored to row to land; but our hands
were benumbed with cold, and we were too feeble to go at any great rate;
however we were within one half mile of it, when a w^ave overturned our small
boat, and we were thrown into the sea! It was here, that death in its most
dreadful shape, presented itself to my view; but in a few moments, my senses
were lost, and even JULIA, was shut out from my imagination. I cannot describe
as I ought the succeeding scenes, and therefore will pass them by. When I came
to myself, I found I was surrounded by negroes, who were doing all in their
power to recall the vital spark, which seemed totally extinguished. Before I
could open my eyes, to behold these sooty sons of Africa, the fair vision of my
beloved JULIA, flitted before my imagination, and revived my fleeting spirits.
My bodily pains were exquisite, nor was my mind composed. It was sometime
before I could conceive of my situation, and I had stared around with vacant,
but astonished looks, upon the surrounding objects, when the plaintive voice of
my cousin, caught my attention; she was in terms quite incoherent; lamenting my
fate, and blaming herself as the author of my death. But when she saw that I
was alive, her joy became almost frantic, and I found by her frequent addresses
to her boy, that his life was preserved. Gratitude taught me to enquire for my
servant, as soon as I could use my voice, and my cousin told me, he was just
recovering his recollection in an adjoining hut. She then informed me, the crew
in the long boat, had got sale on shore, and that we all owed our lives to the
hospitality of these Negroes. I never had entertained that narrow prejudice,
that affects some people, that a dark skin, cannot cover a fair heart. It is
the complexion of the mind that stamps the man, a wretch or an hero; but still
I was surprised, at the kindness and attention of these slaves. Upon enquiry, I
found we were upon the estate of the best and greatest man, in the world; and
that these kind protectors were the servants, or rather humble friends, of the
Illustrious WASHINGTON; from him they had learnt to follow the dictates of
humanity, to obey the impulse of benevolence, and to tread the broad paths of
philanthropy. See, my dearest JULIA what the example of the great and truly
noble, may do; these people are in a state of hostility with all civilzed
nations; the love of self preservation teaches them so to be; in general, more
at variance, with their masters, than with any others; nor is this to be
wondered at; for their masters are their tyrants. Yet behold them here
performing every kind office; nor is this surprising, they are the servants of
WASHINGTON; this wonderful man has made them happy, and learns them to make
others so. Oh, my JULIA could the limits of a letter permit it, I could tell
thee such things of this man; could paint his domestic virtues, in such a
light; and inform thee of the thousand acts of virtue and benevolence, as would
fill thy gentle bosom with surprise and pleasure; but it is what this
conveyance will not permit; suffice it to say, we are at present fostered in
the bosom of this virtuous and noble family, whose revered chief, is my
protector, friend, and benefactor; he has put it in my power, to prosecute my
voyage; and as soon as my cousin is sufficiently recruited, we shall proceed
from here to Philadelphia, and then take passage for London; and I hope by the
permission of Providence, to be with my dearest JULIA by the first of June,
there to claim the promised blessing; and receive the richest present, heaven
in its indulgence, could bestow. I shall not comment upon the dangers I have
escaped, nor the mercies I have received; but trust your own feelings for a
copy of my reflections; adieu my JULIA, join your prayers with mine, that the
life of the best of men, may long be spared to his revering country, and his
excellent family, and to add to the happiness of JULIA, and her,

F. COLWORT.


Before the reading of her letters, JULIA, had retired, to a magnificent
apartment, that was by Madam GYRON's direction, prepared for her; and joy in
tumultuous tides rushed upon her mind, so as to deprive her, when she reflected
upon the events of th^^ momentous day, which had decided upon the fate of so
many; which had unveiled scenes so uncommon, and in which fortune had so often
shifted; she found it impossible to close her eyes, until midnight, when a
balmy slumber, sealed in forgetfulness, its transactions.

CHAPTER, XIV.
OUR passions gone, and reason in their room;
Amazed, we view, the mischief they have done:
So when the storm is over, the winds are laid,
The calm sea wonders at the wrecks it made.

IT was late in the morning when she awoke, and her first thought, was to
return immediately to France; anxious to embrace her friends, she forgot the
difficulty that might attend her journey.

Upon joining her friends below, she found CARLOS with them, whose impassioned
looks declared, how tender his feelings toward her were, he made the most
affectionate inquiries for her health, and upon bearing her resolution, joined
Madam GYRON and her son and daughter, in persuading her to tarry, till some of
her friends were going to France, unless she would permit him to attend, which
he most ardently wished to do; as she could not be prevailed upon to accept
this proposal, she concluded to tarry a week or two, till a gentleman and lady
who called to see Madam, and who being about to travel to Paris, requested the
pleasure of conducting her, to her friends. Of this invitation she accepted,
and the conclusion gave great pleasure to the family, she was with, who all
began, not only to admire, but to love her.

In the course of twenty years, Madam GYRON had to calm the perturbation of a
mind ill at ease; visited almost every city in Europe, she had by turns,
partaken of all their amusements, and for a season, entered into all their
dissipations, but she found it an ineffectual cure for a diseased mind, and
sought in vain for a remedy, while she nursed that deadly passion, and bore
about her all the distempered malice, of indignant reputation and lost honor.
She was wealthy, and her liberality gave her friends and flatterers; her
talents and her accomplishments had procured her both admirers and enemies; but
her temper was soured by ill-treatment, and disappointed love; and she was at
times so capricious, as to quarrel with those she loved best. This unhappy
propensity involved her in many difficulties, and in the midst of her chagrin,
she sometimes sought in solitude, a relief, that society could not give her.

Solitude, is indeed a relief, to a wounded spirit; it is a balm, to a
distempered mind; but it is insufficient to those, who cherish an unforgiving
temper; for in solitude, we look in upon ourselves, and we cannot forgive the
injuries we receive. The investigation must distress us, and we turn from a
retrospect so disgusting. As for Madam GYRON, she had never found a wish to
forgive Don GASPERD, and of consequence, those retirements that gave leisure
and time for reflection, convinced her it was her duty to forgive him, had
become irksome and disgusting to her; to have heard of his death, would have
distressed her, if death had approached in the natural way; for to such an
height was her thirst of vengeance carried, that she sometimes enjoyed in idea,
the pleasure she should receive, in being the principal agent, to inflict an
ignominious death. It was in vain for such a mind, to seek for peace; she first
began to feel compunction, when she returned to France, and beheld her son
amiable and accomplished; she then contemplated his marriage with Don GASPERD's
niece, who was truly lovely. She almost forgot her scheme of vengeance, and
hearing at that time, he was really under arrest, and that JULIA was likewise
implicated in that affair; she formed a resolution of going directly to Spain,
and laid a plan of proceedings which she put in execution, as has been already
narrated.

She had now acknowledged her crime; made all the reparation in her power; a
perfect reconciliation had taken place; her mind was freed from the sting of a
wounded conscience; from intended iniquity; her temper sweetened; and in the
society of her amiable son, and daughter, she forgot she had ever been injured.
Or being so, ceased to think of it; her natural cheerfulness returned. Her
unbounded wealth, put it in her power to gratify every whim, and she now
displayed her taste and elegance, by magnificent balls, and entertainments, in
honor of the newly married pair. In these, she imitated the fashion of almost
every court in Europe; balls, operas, masquerades, and routs, at which all the
nobility and gentry at M --, were invited, with all the strangers of fashion;
and the Spaniards for a while forgot their stately gravity, and mingled in the
motley dance of the sprightly Frenchman, and listened to the soft music of the
enervated Italian.

JULIA was obliged to partake in all these dissipating scenes; she was
followed, flattered, and caressed; and indeed her person was so lovely as to
attract universal attention; while the sweetness of her manners and affability,
gained her the love and admiration of all; though her cheerfulness charmed
every heart, her perfect prudence, and innate delicacy, seemed to repel every
impropriety; and her admirers, declared that the sensations she created, were
such a mixture of respect, love, esteem, and friendship, that they had never
been sensible of before.

At first the novelty of every thing carried a charm that could not ^ail to
delight her; but they would not bear repeating; they palled upon reflection,
and she soon grew sick of this continual round of amusement, where not one
moment was given to thought; and reflection was banished, by gaiety; and she
longed for the quiet scenes of the Villa, where sentiment gave a zest to every
enjoyment; and virtuous and rational amusements, rendered every scene pleasant,
refined, and instructive. She sighed for the society of her benefactress, and
longed again to attend the venerable Marquis; she saw much company, but found
little society; she gained many acquaintance, but her heart sickened for the
blessing of friendship; she was introduced with ecla^, to a great deal of the
gay world; but she found, but little substantial enjoyment; and after a day
spent in gaiety, and what is usually termed pleasure, she retired with regret,
to her own apartment, affrighted upon reflection, that she could recollect no
praiseworthy action, or useful pursuit. There she always found ANNET, who
recollected that Mademoiselle had lost much of her color, and was thinner, then
she had been at the Villa.

With Donna ELVIRA, she had but a few leisure moments. That lady was indeed
amiable, but she had just escaped from a convent, to enjoy all that love,
wealth, and rank could bestow. She loved her husband, and his mother; she found
the world as gay as she wished it, and as happy; every one was interested for
her, and she was interested by every thing. She had been ushered into life, in
too extraordinary a manner, not to engage the attention of all, upon first
fight; and she went from one scene to another, with astonishing avidity.

Her husband, who had made the tour of Europe, and was well acquainted with the
world, was pleased with so new a character, and as he loved her, likewise loved
to gratify all her wishes, but he did not then see, the danger to which a
lovely, young, unexperienced woman, is exposed; indeed he was really good, and
had but very little of the Spaniard, in him; yet he sometimes looked beyond the
present, trifling period; and with some degree of impatience, contemplated a
scheme of retirement, and sighed for a more rational life.

CARLOS was the only one, except this gentleman, in whosse society JULIA, could
really take pleasure; their good sense, and extensive knowledge, was a fund of
information, and gave her much satisfaction; for CARLOS, she felt a kind of
fraternal friendship. He was amiable, and worthy of it; but she feared to
indulge the social intercourse, that true friendship requires; for
notwithstanding, the pains he took to suppress his feelings, she saw that he
loved her, with enthusiastic passion; but in the husband of Donna ELVIRA, she
found a friend, who esteemed her person; revered her virtues; admired her
talents, and upon whose advice she could depend.

Two weeks, and double that time had elapsed, and still she waited for her
companions; she grew every day more impatient, to return, and when at the end
of another week, she was informed that they would set out in three days, she
was transported with joy.

Madam GYRON, who loved her fair guest, determined to give a masked ball, as a
particular compliment before her departure. It was to be after the English
fashion, and cards of invitation, were distributed to all her acquaintance.

JULIA, had from her earliest infancy, accustomed herself to do that which her
conscience would approve; however she might be persuaded to the contrary. She
had an innate and lively sense of female propriety, and never had she once
deviated from it. She had always thought it, highly inconsistent, with the true
dignity of a young woman, to appear in a borrowed character. For this reason,
she refused any garb, that would disguise herself; or for one moment mislead
another. Madam GYRON, persuaded in vain, and her eloquence was all lost, upon
her fair inflexible. I cannot, my dear Madam, said she; indeed I cannot act in
a character, that providence has not given me; it has placed me in a very
humble station; it has alloted me a very plain and easy part; it is my duty to
perform it well; nor will I militate against its decree, by taking one that is
not assigned me. You are very humble indeed, my dear, (replied Madam,) but
surely your modesty and humility, will not be offended at the dress and
character of a nun. But (cried JULIA,) neither my conscience, or inclination,
would permit me to be a recluse; I must refuse, and beg you will no longer
persuade me. But indeed, I shall be a queen then; what assume the appearance of
royalty! My most ambitious thoughts never aspired to it, for one moment.
Strange girl, (cried Madam,) be a shepherdess then. Not by any means, Madam, I
do not aspire to be above myself; and I do not mean to descend. You should
remember, my dear JULIA, that you are the friend and companion of the Countess
DE LAUNA, and by appearing with propriety, you do honor to her election, and
attachment; but if you do not, you disgrace her choice. I am persuaded,
returned JULIA, very seriously, that my present conduct would meet with her
approbation; I shall dress in a manner much above myself; because I will show
the world, I glory in being her dependent; that I am indebted to her, not only
for the conveniences of life, but for its elegancies: But after all, I will
not forget, that I am a humble cottage girl; and the child of her bounty; is
the plain, and simple JULIA VALLACE. But I am sure, replied Madam, that the
Countess would not have your appearance so singular, as to occasion remarks. I
know my dear Madam, notwithstanding your kindness, (said JULIA,) that I am
really too insignificant, to attract much attention, if my conduct is
inconsistent with the ettiquette of the place, it will be attributed to
ignorance, and in a few days at farthest forgotten; but if I did that, which I
was conscious was wrong, I am sure the sense of it would hurt me for many
years, and embitter some of my pleasantest moments. Well then, replied Madam,
take your own way; for I find you will not adopt mine. Pray, my dear Madam,
(said JULIA,) do not be offended, nor impute my refusal to obstinacy; there are
few things, I would not do to oblige you; I must ever feel under a thousand
obligations, that I can never return to you; and I hate the appearance of
ingratitude. Tell me that you are not angry with me. Embracing her with
affection, Madam assured her, she did not think it possible, for any one to be
offended with her: I have but one fault, to find with you, said she, you are
too good, and too submissive; I wish you were not half so faultless. JULIA
kissed her hand, and went to her chamber, where she dressed herself in a style
of elegance, superior to what she had ever worn.

The rooms were hardly opened, before she found herself surrounded, by
characters of all descriptions; from the king to the link boy; from the queen,
to the opera girl; Dutcheses, and nosegay women; nurses, and women of easy
virtue; bishops and sailors; and in general, she could not help observing, that
people assumed those characters they like best, and in which they are the least
likely to shine, as they were most opposite to those which providence had
assigned them. She soon discovered CARLOS, whose impassioned voice, the moment
he addressed her, rendered his mask an insufficient disguise. At first, she was
pleased with the motley scene, and the remarks she made to CARLOS, declared her
pleasure, and told at the same time, how soon it tired.

Just as the company were summoned to supper, a tall mask offered to tell her
fortune; she held out her hand, and desired he would exert his utmost skill. I
will tell you one thing, fair lady, (he said,) while he examined the spotless
palm of JULIA, you will meet with a sad disappointment; the friends you mean to
visit, you will not see for some time, and many is the trial, that you will go
through, before you are so fortunate.

Though JULIA had never given credit to astrology; though her heart revolted at
superstition; though she knew her informer acted in a borrowed character; yet
so perverse is the human heart, that she felt her spirits depressed for a
moment; the prediction cast a shade upon her cheerfulness; and gave a sombre
tincture, to the ideas, that had before sprung from the gay scene; which
surrounded her, and hope of more rational enjoyment.

After supper, she danced with CARLOS, and the company did not separate till
morning; she retired languid and fatigued, to her chamber; and a disturbed
sleep followed the hurry and bustle of the night.

CHAPTER XV.
WHERE ever I turn my wandering feet,
Dread disappointment's form I meet;
Still rising to forbid the promised joy,
And each expected happiness destroy;
Each hope to blast: each bliss corrode,
And drag me, to her dark abode;
Oh resignation! do thou there attend,
And be to hapless youth, a faithful friend;
For see with frowns and ^ullen air,
She comes attended by the fiend despair;
Oh save me! snatch me from her dreaded sway,
Oppose her power, through life's short day;
Be thou my guide; my mind elate;
Teach me to rise, superior to my fate.
MISS R. W. B.
WHEN she awoke from a disturbed slumber, she found herself much indisposed; a
violent headache, cold, shivering fit, and a difficulty of breathing, declared
her really sick; she however got up, and as she was to set out for France, the
day following; she determined not to complain, attributing it to the fatigues
of the preceding evening. She found her appetite entirely gone, and her
attempts at cheerfulness and conversation, was vain, and she was obliged to
retire early, and take a medicine, that her friends prepared for her.

She was so determined to be well the next morning, that when she arose after a
sleepless night, she persuaded herself, that she really was so, and with
trembling hands, and limbs that could scarce support herself, she put on her
riding habit, and assisted ANNET to put up her things; and was quite ready,
when Madam GYRON entered the chamber and informed her that her traveling
companions were come by appointment, to breakfast with her, and would set off
immediately after.

It was with difficulty she got down to the breakfast parlor; and there her
altered looks were observed by all; who united to persuade her to defer her
journey, for a few days longer, or at least, till she was better; she assured
them she thought the excursion, would be of service to her, and that she did
not doubt she should be quite well, before she had been an hour in the
carriage; as they saw her heart was much set upon going, they did not oppose
it, but after breakfast, of which she did not taste, when she arose to bid
farewell to the friends she was leaving, and attend those with whom she was
going, she faultered and sunk into a chair, unable to support herself a moment
longer, and was carried back to her chamber, almost insensible of every thing
around her.

The exertions of this morning, and of the preceding day, had so accelerated
the progress of her disorder, that she found it impossible, to withstand the
violence with which she was attacked.

A physician was immediately sent for, and upon his arrival, did not hesitate
to declare, she had taken the small pox; the eruption began to appear, and she
grew delirious.

The family had before had this disease, so fatal, to female beauty; yet they
were thrown into to unusual consternation; the manners of JULIA had been so
attractive, so mild, and unassuming; her voice so sweet, and her whole conduct
so gentle, that every domestic in Madam GYRON's house was distressed at her
sickness, and interested in her recovery. As for ANNET, unable to assume the
fortitude of her mistress, she became almost distracted, and was obliged to
leave an appartment, in which her distress, was so loud, as to disturb the
patient.

Madam GYRON and her daughter never left her for a moment; the best of nurses
were procured, and the ablest of the faculty consulted, and every thing done to
render sickness bearable; for the first seven days, the poor sufferer was
insensible, to her pains, and her disorder wore an aspect, so alarming, as to
be pronounced mortal; but upon the eighth, it assumed a more favorable
appearance, and came to a crisis that flattered them, with hopes of the most
happy event; it was then that she recovered her recollection, and knew the
persons around her.

Madam GYRON wished to make her suppose, that she had been sick with a fever;
but the imposition did not take, and she begged to be informed what was the
nature of so distressing a malady. Her mind was so debilitated by her
suffering, that it shared in her corporeal weakness; and when she learned she
had the smallpox, she shed some tears; but in a few hours, she gathered
strength sufficient to assist her fortitude, and she returned fervent thanks to
heaven for her returning health, and was perfectly satisfied, that the entire
loss of beauty, should be the consequence, of her illness. She recovered by
slow degrees; the tranquillity of her spirits, and patience, aided every
medicine; at first her friends supposed the ravages made in her person, would
be dreadful, but were agreeably disappointed, to find as she recovered, the
impression wore out, and before she was able to leave her chamber, scarce a
mark remained.

Madam GYRON, had deferred writing to the Countess, till she was better, and
entirely out of danger, as she knew it would be impossible, for her to take a
journey, at that time, and she wished to save her from the pains of suspense;
so that the very next post after she heard of her illness, she received a
letter from JULIA, informing her that she should soon be able to commence her
journey, to France; the benevolent heart of this worthy woman, was rejoiced at
this news, and she sent off one of her own carriages, with her woman, and two
men servants, to wait upon JULIA from Spain, and fraught with letters,
breathing the most tenderly affectionate expressions, from the Mar^uis, as well
as his sister.

JULIA was so much delighted at this proof of the Countess's attachment, that
it accelerated her perfect recovery, and rendered her doubly impatient to be
with friends, whose affection, even abscence and affliction could not lessen.
She had it in her power, to reward ever person, in Madam GYRON's house, for
every trouble she had occasioned, and for the various proofs they had given of
their regard, and attachment. And with redoubled gratitude, and affection; with
many tears and few professions, she took leave of friends that she found
herself bound to, by ties of friendship and obligation; and set off for France,
seven weeks after she had prepared to go there before.

The son of Madam GYRON, and the excellent CARLOS accompanied her for two days,
and then le^t her to finish her journey, only with her domestics. CARLOS wished
to have gone still farther, and even to Paris, but she excused herself from
consenting to this request. She esteemed and valued this young gentleman, but
she was not blind to the progress that an hopeless passion had made in his
heart and constitution, and longed for that absence, that she thought would
ease, what could not be rewarded. This young gentleman immediately after his
return to M --, embarked for London, hoping by change of scene, and a variety
of objects, to erase in some measure from his heart, an attachment, that
rendered him wretched.

For several days she traveled unmolested; but when with in half a days
journey of Paris, when she was in anticipation, of enjoying the embraces of the
Marquis, and his sister, and longing to spring from the carriage to their arms;
the coach was stopped by four men, on horseback; one of whom opened the door,
and desired JULIA to alight; at first she supposed the persons footpads, and
offered them her purse, while her waiting woman and ANNET produced theirs for
the same purpose; but the men refused the money, and told her it was herself
they wanted; the woman clung around her, but her cries and their entreaties
were equally vain; they dragged her from the carriage; and seated her in a
chaise, that was in waiting, and two of them entered with her and bid the
postillion drive on.

This transaction seemed performed by the power of magic; and she found herself
between two ruffians, and almost before she had the power to recollect herself.
But when she looked behind and saw her own carriage driving slowly the opposite
way, she grew almost distracted, her reason was upon the point of deserting
her; and in language almost frantic, she demanded to know by what authority
they had forced her from her servants, and begged to be restored to her
friends. One of the men replied, he acted by the direction of a master, whom it
was his duty to obey, and that she was going were she would find servants
enough, and friends too, if it was not her own fault.

She found arguments thrown away, and entreaties lost, and knew it was worse
than folly to attempt resistance, she therefore was silent, revolving in her
own mind the probable consequence of this event. But to what end were her
conjectures, and how impossible for her to conceive the extent of the horrors
that now surrounded her. Her tears flowed without control, and she sat back in
the chaise quite absorbed in grief, while her companions did not notice her,
and engaged in a conversation that would if she had attended too, given her a
worse opinion of them, than she could conceive any one of the human race
deserved. But her thoughts were busily employed by the Marquis, the Countess,
and her lover, whom her imagination painted as distressed at her absence, and
endeavoring in vain to rescue her. A gleam of hope sometimes appeared to
assure her, that such active measures would be taken, that she should be
restored to her friends. A youthful mind, and a good one, will always form
expectations, that some fortunate event, may restore the blessings they have
lost, and present those they wish for; while judgment, matured by frequent
disappointment, and by misfortunes, will acknowledge the hope, romantic, and
the wish vain, and futile.

The little acquaintance she had made in the world, had convinced her of the
power of monney. Her purse was well filled, and she hoped by that means to
procure her liberty. She did not doubt but the Count was her persecutor, she
still dreaded his power, yet flattered herself that she should be able, with
the assistance and care of heaven, to elude his arts, and escape the evils he
had prepared for her; upon observing one of the men with attention, she thought
she had see him before. He was tall, and had a stoop in his shoulders, and
while she endeavored to recollect, when his voice convinced her, that he was
the fortuneteller, that had foretold her disappointment at the masquerade. In
this conjecture, she was right; for this fellow had watched her motion from her
first arrival in Spain, and had got information of every step she had taken,
determined that she should be disappointed; it was not very surprising that he
was quite a skillful astrologer. Her sickness had at that time prevented his
execution of a plan, of which he was a diabolical agent, to a no less
diabilocal superior.

In these reflections, the day was spent; and night coming on, a full moon
showed her a vast extent of woods and plains, while she seemed to be traveling
above them; indeed the carriage had ascended a long ridge of hills, and went
over a very rough road, with astonishing velocity. It was after midnight, they
descended into a level plain, and soon after stopped at a lofty mansion, that
seemed to have bid defiance to the hand of time. It was large, spacious and
magnificent. But its brown walls, and lofty turretts informed the traveller,
that it had been built in times of old; they entered by a large gate, that
opened upon a court that was occupied by a variety of buildings, and that stood
at the back of the chatteau. She was then taken from the carriage, and a large
bell that hung at the portal of the door, was rung, to give notice of their
arrival.

It was some time before any one came, and she had full time to survey the
moon, which in full orbed majesty, now shone from its meridian height; she
sighed, when she thought of various regions it overlooked, and asked her heart
if one more wretched then herself, now gazed upon it. Perhaps at that very
time, COLWORT was looking upon that chaste planet; perhaps too, his thoughts
were as ardently fixed upon her, as hers were upon wretchedness. Oh could he
but know, (said she,) how quick, he would fly to my relief! Her meditations
were disturbed by the appearance of two women, and a man servant, who were not
half dressed. Well, said the man, you are come at last; we have been looking
for you, this three days. And a good look out you have kept, said one of her
conductors; here you are all asleep, while you ought to have been upon the
watch. Come get us some supper, cried another; we are sharp set, and will eat
all you have in the house. The devil a bit have I tasted, since five o'clock
last night; and you SUSAN, do you look to this young woman, and see that she
has ^very thing, that is comfortable.

JULIA followed the woman across a large hall, and up a winding staircase; she
then crossed two old fashioned, but magnificent chambers, and after passing two
or three small entries, stopped at a chamber, where the woman set down the
light. This she found was the end of her journey; fatigued with riding eighteen
or twenty hours, she would gladly have rested, but a dreadful fear prevented
her setting down; she knew this must be the Count DE LAUNA's Chateau; she had
heard much of it, and what she had seen, answered the description; besides she
saw hid beneath the horsmen's coat, the DE LAUNA livery upon several of the
men. She now turned to one of the women and asked if her lord was at home. No
Mademoiselle, he is in Paris; how long has he been absent, (asked JULIA, taking
courage at her answer,) it is six month's since he was here; and then only for
a few days, with some friends. And when is he expected, demanded JULIA! In a
fortnight, (replied the girl,) his father the Marquis, has been sick, but is
now getting better. But (cried the other, mistaking the cause of her
enquiries,) you shall be as well treated, as though he was here, and want for
nothing, Mademoiselle; to this odd rejoinder, JULIA did not reply. You look
sadly fatigued, Mademoiselle, (said one of the women;) you had better take some
refreshment, and go to bed. Disappointed, distressed, chagrined, and fatigued
as JULIA was, she had not learned to doubt the veracity of any one; and
mistrust, was not added to the catalogue of evils, she now endured. What the
girl had told her was strictly true, but one more acquainted with deceit, would
have doubted her word. Thus, conscious innocence, though not its own protector,
is a shield against suspicion, and a comforter in distress.

She was so delighted to find the Count was absent, that almost half her woes
were lost in that joy. She accepted the proposed refreshment, and went to bed,
committing herself to the care of that power, whose eye pervades the abode of
darkness, and haunts of misery; and enjoyed several hours of interrupted repose.

CHAPTER. XVI.
WHERE Memory are thy blessings? do they slow,
On the black current of preceding woe?
Or on the Halcion sea, allure the sight,
In distant, floating bubbles of delight?
Small consolation from past ills we gain;
And comforts vanished, leave the sharpest pain.
MERRY'S PAINS OF MEMORY.
WHEN she awoke, the horrors of her situation rushed upon her mind; she had not
as formerly, ANNET, as a companion; that faithful girl, who was a comforter to
her in her prison; a nurse in her sickness, and a friend in her exile; who had
shared all her joys, and all her sorrows, was now with the Countess; and JULIA
a prisoner alone, and wretched, friendless and forlorn; far from the soothings
of friendship, and distant from the cheerful voice of those she loved; in the
power of a man, who possessed wealth and honor, and who was unprincipled, and
wicked to the last degree of vice.

She arose and surveyed her chamber. It was large, and furnished with crimson
velvet, fringed with gold; but so old, that it was black and tarnished; the
chairs and toilet were the same, as the bed. An high old fashioned japaned
bureau stood in one corner; and the floor was covered with India mattress; the
room was hung with tapestry, and had once been rich, and beautiful, but its
beauty was lost, to memory; and its value gone forever. The windows were of
painted glass, and emitted so little light, as rather to increase, than lessen
the gloom; she looked from them, and found the prospect extensive, and
delightful; hills, vales, and meadows, crowned with lofty trees, and spread
with verdant foliage, interspersed with rivers; the streams of which, were in
several places crossed by bridges, formed at once, a view, grand, noble and
majestic; and in the contemplation of the beauties of nature, her heart assumed
something of its usual tranquillity, and became more assured, as she looked
upon the various flocks that bleated in the meadows; alas! said she, I am as
innocent as they are; why am I not so happy? Her reason replied, they have not
the same reflective qualities, they are insensible to the charms of innocence;
and to the blackness of vice, say, who would barter the sensibilities that
refined reason possesses, for the mean sensual pleasures they enjoy; fed, but
to be fitted for the knife of the butcher, or rendered delicious, for the table
of the voluptuary; they catch the transient joy of the moment, nor dream that
tomorrow, they shall be served up as a feast for the hungry, or the glutton,
while I, said JULIA, though oppressed and unhappy, look forward to futurity with
hope, and blissful certainty.

The woman, now entered with her breakfast, and she eat but little, and
endeavored to enter into conversation with her; it was neither of those she
had seen the night before; age had rendered her respectable; her hair was
white, and time with his relentless finger had impressed her forehead with his
wrinkles; she was dressed decently, and very neat, but not the least appearance
of finery. She sat down the salver which she had brought, but did not look
JULIA in the face; nor did she speak. JULIA viewed her with attention, and the
examination of her features filled her with a pleasing hope; how long, good
woman, said she, have you lived at the chatteau? It is above nineteen years,
she replied. I should suppose then (said JULIA, with a sigh) you are much
attached to the Count? I am attached to my duty, and that leads me to regard
the interest of my employer. Was you ever in the service of any one else, asked
JULIA? I served the good old Marquis, his grandfather, and the present worthy
Marquis, his father, (replied she,) and there love and duty went together. You
know the Marquis, then said JULIA? I know him and love him too. But he could
not love what was not good, cried the old woman. At that moment she looked in
JULIA's face, you look good, she added, but we are often deceived. Do you
suppose me vicious, asked JULIA? I have no right to suppose you so, she
replied, but if you are, as it is said, a kept mistress of the Count, you
cannot be much the reverse. Good heaven, said JULIA, does any one ssuppose me
so; I am innocent, I detest the Count, he has basely forced me from my friends;
the Countess DE LAUNA is my benefactress; he has artfully brought me here. Oh
do believe, that I love virtue, and hate vice. I do believe you, said the old
woman, for you have not the look of one of those bad women; but I was told you
were a mistress he had long kept, and that you were eloping with another man.
It is false, said JULIA, indeed, it is false; I never was the mistress of any
one, and hope I never shall be. She then told the honest and faithful PHILADA
enough of her story, to interest and convince her; the kind creature whose
heart was attuned to the soft sensation of pity, assured JULIA, that she should
have every liberty it was in her power to give her, and that she would try to
assist her escape; but that she feared would be impossible: She persuaded her
to eat; to be cheerful, and told her, that she might range at pleasure, around
all the apartments, upon that floor; when JULIA with tears thanked her: She
looked up in her face; you interest me Mademoiselle, said she, for you look so
much like my good lady, the Marchioness, that I cannot help loving you; she
then went down, leaving the chamber door unlocked, that she might visit the
others, when her inclination led her.

It was not long before JULIA, profited by this liberty, for though curiosity
was not her prevailing passion; though she knew how to suppress it, yet she had
her share.

The first room she entered, was furnished with yellow satin, and was fresh and
handsome; the second with gilt leather, but neither had any thing to interest
the heart, or call up any of its better feelings; but the third was wholly
furnished with books and pictures; the windowcurtains were of a dark scarlet
damask, with silver fringe; a writing table that had long been unused, stood in
the middle; a large pier glass hung between the windows, and the books were
arranged upon shelves, from the floor to the ceiling; while the pictures
occupied the opposite pannels. At the first glance, she knew the Countess and
the Marquis, and her affectionate heart did homage, even to their resemblance,
sketched upon the senseless canvass; but her attention was much engrosed by one
of uncommon beauty, that hung beside the Marquis. This picture reminded JULIA,
of some painting, or person that she had seen before. The drapery was at the
same time, a combination of simplicity and elegance; the charming countenance
was lovely, and expressive, and her soft blue eyes, seemed fixed upon those that
were viewing them: She held upon her fingers a bird, and the benevolence that
was expressed in her looks; told the most cursory observer, that the little
flutterer was happy. JULIA contemplated this picture for some time, she left
it, walked to the other side of the room, but returned to it in a moment; she
was drawn, by a power, that she did not fully understand; but it was
irresistible; while she still gazed upon it, PHILADA entered. I have brought
you some books, Mademoiselle, said she, that will I believe, please you better
than those in the library. Have you looked at this picture, Mademoiselle? JULIA
replied, she had; and that she was charmed with it; and it was a very lovely
picture. Is the original alive? Oh no, cried PHILADA, with a deep sigh; she has
been dead for many years; that picture was taken for the Marchioness, before
she left Italy, and sent by the Marquis to his son. It is the very image of
her, said she; just such a sweet smile; she always wore just such a soft look;
how often have I seen the tears in her mild eyes, when she saw any body
unhappy. That picture at the right hand is the Marquis; he seems to be looking
back upon the other, that was his first wife, the Count's mother: She was a
pretty creature, but a mere baby, and not to be compared to the other. There
Mademoiselle, is the Count, and Countess DE LAUNA, they were a noble couple,
and looked as grand and good, as you see them there. And who is this, said
JULIA, that hangs behind the Countess? It is a young English Lord, (replied
PHILADA,) that loved her, and Madam was sadly in love, with him; they were
privately married; but the friends contrived to break it off; if has cost
Madam, many a tear. JULIA now examined this picture with a scrutiny, that was
occasioned by hearing the Countess remark, the resemblance, between her lover,
and COLWORT; she saw indeed, a likeness, but not the striking one, that she
expected; she turned to the portrait, that adorned the other side, and enquired
who they were? These on the left, said her kind informer, are the old Count and
Countess; these on the right, the old Marquis, and his lady. Do Mademoiselle,
look in the glass, (added she, as she wiped off the dust that had gathered upon
it, with an handkerchief,) do look in the glass, and then look upon this
picture, of the young Marchioness; and tell me if you do not see a likeness. I
think I do, replied JULIA, after she had for a moment done as she was
requested; but it is perhaps owing to my vanity. Oh Mademoiselle, said PHILADA,
if you are as much like my lady in action, as you are in looks, you are good
indeed; but I hope you will be more s^tunate. Why, said JULIA, I thought ^he
Marchioness, very happy. Did not she love the Marquis? Yes, and he loved; and
if they had been let alone, they would have been happy until now together. Why
said JULIA, astonished, what happened to them, and who interfered to prevent
their happiness? Why, Mademoiselle, the Count hated her; but he fell sick, and
pretended to repent, and so the Marquis brought her, to see him; would to
heaven she had never come. I attended my lady; she had another woman with her,
who loved her as well as I did; She had come from Italy, with her lady, and was
always near her; but what could we do? But Mademoiselle, I am telling you
things, that does not concern you, and doing very wrong too, I fear. I think
not, said JULIA, I beg you would proceed; depend upon it, I will never betray
you. I do not know how it is, said PHILADA, but I cannot find it, in my heart,
to deny you any thing. Well, as I was saying, we came to this chatteau, and the
Count got well, but slowly; and the Marquis was distressed, for fear he was
going into a consumption; and loath to leave him alone a persuaded the
Marchioness to lay in here, for the Marquis was obliged to go to Spain; and
after he was gone, the Count fell in love with his mother in law; the
Marchioness was frighted and distressed, and cried night and day; and wrote to
the Marquis, and would never let us be absent from her for a moment. Well,
Mademoiselle, the Count was enraged at her refusal, and vowed he would be
revenged, and my lady was scared to death, and took to her bed, and at last was
brought to bed of a little daughter; and that very day, the Count was closeted
with a physician, for several hours, who left him and went immediately into my
lady's apartment, and persuaded her to take an Elixer, as he called it. She was
always submissive, to other people's will, and did as he desired her; but she
grew worse, and remembered how the Count had threatened her, and she thought
she was dying; she called me to her bed side, with ISABELLA. PHILADA said she,
tell the Marquess I ever loved him, tell him that I fell a sacrifice to that
love; take care of my child; I wish the Countess DE LAUNA could bring her up;
but I charge you both to deliver her to my Lord; she said much more, but I am a
weak creature, and went into fits, but my poor lady died that night, and her
little daughter died too, and the maid was carried off, for I have never seen
her since; but I believe the Count had her conveyed away, and knew what was
become of her. GOD forgive him; I fear I never shall. And you think, said
JULIA, who had listened, with emotion to the artless tale of PHILADA; you think
the cordial proved fatal to the poor Marchioness; why did not you inform
against the physician? Oh yes, said PHILADA, it proved fatal; but what could a
poor servant do, against a rich and powerful Lord? the Marquis grew distracted,
the Count DE LAUNA was killed in a duel; and Madam left the world for
retirement; so that the matter was hushed up, but I believe the Count suffers
sometimes in his own mind, though he does not believe in GOD, or the bible; I
know he is afraid of spirits, and I believe he is haunted; with a troubled
conscience, said JULIA; but the pure spirit of the amiable Marchioness, will
never leave the realms of bliss, to disturb him; would to heaven I was with
her, for I shudder to think that I am in the power of a murderer, an atheist,
an unnatural man; who fears not GOD and believes not in a future state. Do aid
me PHILADA; do assist me to escape; and you shall never come to any harm by
your kindness. I will try, Mademoiselle, I will do all in my power; but this
house is strongly secured and guarded, and I am watched, and am afraid I shall
not be able to assist you. Why Mademoiselle, there has been in the prison,
under the chatteau, persons confined for years and years together, and I do not
know if they are men or women; but three nights ago, they brought another, that
was a man; but I do not know who it is. Where are they confined, said JULIA?
She answered in the prison, beneath this part of the chatteau; but it is very
deep, and a great way off.

Just then, PHILADA was summoned to the kitchen, and JULIA was left for the
remainder of the day, to indulge the most painful apprehensions, for the
information she had received, had rendered every idea gloomy, and every thought
sad; how often do we pay this heavy tax, for the indulgence of our curiosity.

That, and the following day, she did not see PHILADA, but on the third
morning, that venerable domestic, brought her breakfast; she apologized for not
having come before, as she had been busy in preparing the spring feast, for the
vassals of the Count; and to day Mademoiselle, said she, I shall be fully
employed in getting matters to rights, so that I shall not be able to attend
upon you myself, until tomorrow; but you look sad and gloomy, would not a walk
do you good; if it is agreeable to you, you can walk upon the terrace that
surrounds the upper part of this building. Alas! said JULIA, I cannot be
diverted from my melancholy reflections; for I have so faint a hope of being
freed from the machinations of this dreadful man, that I cannot but be unhappy.
But you are very good, PHILADA; formerly I should have enjoyed the prospect
that I am sure the terrace affords, and I will go now, as you so kindly propose
it.

PHILADA looked upon her with pity, as she led the way across the chamber, and
up two narrow staircases; she then opened a door, and they were immediately
upon the terrace. It would be impossible to describe the beauties of the
extensive view, that were presented, and JULIA lost her present woes and
anticipated evils, in delight and astonishment; she tarried here for several
hours, and only returned to her chamber at the time PHILADA had requested she
would receive her dinner; as she was cautious that no one of the servants
should know, of the liberty she allowed her.

Her mind had experienced some tranquillity, while enjoying the fresh air, and
cheering prospect; but when she returned to her own apartment, the illusion
fled; the bubble was dissolved, and in spite of fancy, she was wretched. After
tasting of her solitary meal, she opened a volume that lay on the table, and
endeavored to read; but the charm that once gave her pleasure in perusing the
works of genius, was fled; the beauties of poetry, ceased to delight; the
historic page, to instruct; and the fiction of romance, to amuse; "hope, to
borrow the words of an enchanting writer; had ceased to illumine the horizon of
her prospects, and dark clouds, and gloomy despair, occupied its place."

In this despondent situation, she spent several hours; but her chamber was
warm, and she again sought the fresh air of the terrace. The sun which was near
sitting, just emerged from a cloud, and its yellow rays, darted with refulgent
beauty across the horizon, and surrounding hills; the soft rain that had just
fell, had refreshed the meadows; and a gentle fragrance arose, like smoking
incense to heaven. At a small distance, she beheld some fishermen, that had
drawn their nets to the shore; one, had hung the finny fair upon a pole, and
thrown it across his shoulders; he walked toward his cottage; three children
ran out to meet him; his wife stood in the door, and by her gesture seemed to
invite his haste, to partake of the repast, she had prepared. JULIA's fancy
followed him in; she saw him seated; the coarse, but clean table-cloth; the
frugal meal; heard the laugh of the children; and the accents of love and
welcome from the wife; and formed so delightful a picture, that her
imaginations loved to dwell upon it.

But the bleating of the flocks, awakened her from the delusion, and she beheld
in reality the fresh and ruddy milk maid, bending beneath her full pail; while
the lowing herd, and fleecy flocks, seemed prepared to take that repose, which
indulgent nature, allows to weary man; to all, but me, said JULIA, all can
repose; but alas! for me, far from those I love; the sweets of slumber are
denied me, and I have not one vision, that can lull me to repose, not a thought
that can comfort me waking, or one idea, that can suggest an agreeable dream.

While she leaned against one of the battlements, she indulged these desponding
suggestions; but before she had pursued them long; her attention was aroused by
the opening of a door; looking around, she saw a female that had just entered
the terrace; her form was majestic; her motion slow, but graceful; and her
dress was of the finest muslin, which floated in the wind; her back was toward
JULIA; she observed that her steps were weak, and trembling; and that as she
walked she held by the banisters; she walked away, and JULIA longed to see her
face; felt all the force of curiosity, mingled with surprise; she would have
followed her, but feared such a conduct, might be impertinent, and obtrusive;
it was not five minutes before she returned; and looking at JULIA, clasped her
hands, and raised her eyes, as astonished and affrighted.

Oh Heaven! exclaimed she, it is my sister; my blessed, beautiful sister; come
from the company of angels; from the society of saints, from worlds of purity
and joy. Oh, tell me, tell thy miserable LEONORA; when shall I be freed from
these fetters? when freed from a sense of guilt? when will my crimes be blotted
out? when shall I be at peace? Alas! said JULIA, I am a mortal, and a poor
unhappy creature. Unhappy, replied she; have you broke your vows? are you
guilty? No, said JULIA, I am innocent of any great crime; yet I am miserable.
Misery is reserved for the guilty, replied she wildly; the innocent have no
claim to it. If indeed you have broken no vows, if your conscience is free from
stain; and you do not look back with horror, upon some black transgression, you
are happy. The wildness of her fine eyes; the paleness of her face; her cheeks
faded; her forehead dense; and her once beautiful nose pinched by the hand of
sickness; showed indeed the sad, the sorrowful picture of beauty in ruins; and
those ruins brought on, by the stings of a wounded conscience; and an heart
corroded by guilt. JULIA gazed on her with astonishment, and with pity; she was
silent, and JULIA replied; but I have been forced from the friends I loved,
deprived of my liberty; a prisoner within these hated walls; and in the power
of a base, unprincipled man; do you wonder that I am unhappy? I, said the
stranger, have no friends; no fortune; I have lost my health; my title to the
esteem of the worthy; to the prayers of the virtuous; fled from my country;
forsaken by the man I dared to love; who was the occasion of all my woes; I
have broken my vows; vows too the most solemn; the most sacred, which any one
but an impious wretch, would have respected, and lost inevitably lost my peace
of mind. Good heaven, said JULIA, what a catalogue of evils; let me sympathise
with you, and I will forget my own sorrows, to mitigate yours. "Will that
restore my honor; my fame? will that stand between me, and divine justice? will
that compensate for the evils I have done to society? Oh no; I am not to be
trifled with; if indeed you are my sister, tell me so; and say, die LEONORA!
and be at rest." Oh, said JULIA, I have no sister; I never knew such happiness.
"Well then, (replied the stranger,) while a heavy sigh seemed to rend her
heart! but I shall die; and shortly be laid beneath the clods of the valley; or
confined within the dark and narrow limits of the tomb." As she spoke, she
faultered; a slight convulsion crossed her countenance; and but for JULIA, she
must have fallen.

At that moment an attendant entered. Good heaven! SIGNORA, said she, we have
been distressed for you, but you are ill, and weak. Let me assist you to your
chamber; she then called up another female servant, and with great tenderness
and respect, persuaded her to return. Lift me up, said she, I would once more
look toward England. JULIA assisted the women to raise her, she looked to that
part of the horizon, that pointed to the British shores, and for a moment
seemed lost in thought. Alas! (she cried, with a mournful accent,) alas! he
dies there, the victim of his own perfidy, and falsehood; but the sacrifice is
not completely made; but one victim has fallen; another remains, and that soon
will complete it; but GOD forgive him; I will go pray for his repose. She then
leaned upon her domestics, and left the terrace.

CHAPTER, XVII.
OUR feet with willing steps to ruin move,
Our own mad passions, our destruction prove,
But the most fatal is forbidden love.
MRS. ROW.
JULIA's pity and wonder prevented her following so sad a spectacle, and by
dividing her concern, lessened it. She found herself innocent, and in full
possession of her reason, and she bent with humble gratitude to heaven, for
both these blessings. She prayed for their continuance; she prayed too, for the
poor unfortunate, she had seen; she asked the protection of that power, who is
the guardian of the (...); and let it not deduct from her sensibility, when we
say she was calmer, and slept better than she had for several nights.

She awoke with the earliest rays of the morning, and was not entirely dressed,
when PHILADA entered, with one of the young women she had seen the day before
upon the terrace. "I am sorry, Mademoiselle, (said PHILADA,) that you met the
SIGNORA yesterday evening, she has been sadly affrighted all night; and tells
her attendants, she has seen her sister's apparition; IRESILLA, who waits upon
her, has come to request you will visit her in her own apartment, as she is too
low to leave her bed." JULIA replied, she would go most willingly. Will you,
Mademoiselle, be so good as to promise me, not to mention the Count, if you
should, it will bring me into great trouble? Certainly (said JULIA,) I will
never say any thing, that can injure you.

They then conducted JULIA across several apartments; till they opened a door
that led to the south wing of the building; two chambers in this suite were
furnished in quite a modern style; and were much larger than any she had seen;
the third was the bed chamber of the unfortunate LEONORA. Upon a bed of yellow
silk was laid this woman once so lovely; always so unfortunate; her emaciated
arm, was out side the counterpane, while one hand was under her pale and faded
cheek; the young lady you wished so much to see, is here (said IRESILLA.) JULIA
approached the bed, and in gentle accents expressed her sorrow for the state
she saw her in. Forgive me, this trouble, lady, said the dying penitent; my
imagination misled me; I thought you were my sister; my faithful attendants
were sorry to see me so mistaken; and you have kindly condescended to undeceive
me; set down, and if you can bear a sick chamber, and spare me a few moments
your company, I think it will sooth me. JULIA, seated herself; she assured her,
it would give her pleasure to spend some hours with her; and PHILADA withdrew,
saying she would return by noon; she then inquired of JULIA, if she was of that
country? I am a native of France, Madam, (said JULIA.) You are young and
lovely, returned the sick lady; but I fear you are not happy. "Indeed, replied
JULIA, I am very far from being happy. I do not ask the source of your
misfortunes, rejoined the lady; for I am too ill to converse or attend; I must
advise you to keep a quiet conscience; do not, for a temporary pleasure,
however flattering, involve yourself in guilt; do not for one moment suffer
yourself to think of happiness, unattended by innocence; be assured that it
never was attained; be assured likewise, that you cannot long be miserable,
while you preserve a consciousness of having done your duty; of having acted
upright; and preserving your honor; if afflictions crowd around you; if you are
tempted to despond by their weight, and numbers; put your trust in him who has
the peculiar care of innocence; be assured the clouds will disperse, and he
will appear for your relief; for me, I have forfeited his love; but I have a
strong hold upon his mercy; and though I have lived seventeen years, despairing
and miserable, yet I die calm, satisfied, and composed. For your instruction, I
will present you with a manuscript; it is a sad, but faithful narrative of my
transgression, and its attendant woes; while you read it, you will condemn me;
it is your duty to do so; but recollect the state, to which you have seen me
reduced, and shed a tear of sympathy, for my failings, and my misfortunes."

"She then bid IRESILLA hand a casket, and unlock it; here, (said she) is the
manuscript; and with it, I beg you will accept of this picture; it is the
miniature of my sister, whom you so much resemble; keep it for my sake, and
possess the virtue, she inherited, and you will be good indeed."

JULIA had been too much affected to answer; she could now only press the cold
hand of LEONORA, to her lips, she placed the picture in her bosom; and after
some time, thanked her for her bequest, which she assured her should have an
happy effect. If ever you are tempted to swerve from the paths of virtue, (said
LEONORA) read that paper, and while you read it; remember you have seen the
wretched writer, deprived of those charms which rendered her an object of
affection, upon the bed of death; deprived too, by the man who loved her, of
that which alone could render her an object of esteem* to this sad, this
deplorable condition we all must come; but it lays in the bosom of all, to
render the hour of death, happy or miserable. Had I endured all the austerities
of a convent; nobly combatted an illegal passion; and kept my faith unbroken;
my temptations would now be a cause of triumph to me; and in joy, I should now
leave a world, whose vanity had failed to allure me; whose vices had tempted me
in vain; and in whose wickedness I had never shared. But now I shrink from the
conflict; I am fearful of offended justice; and rest only upon forgiving mercy.
As she pronounced the last words, she sunk back upon the pillow, faint and
exhausted. JULIA wiped the cold damps from her face; she endeavored to assure
her faith, with the promises of mercy, and forgiveness; of divine love and
consolation; and with one of her cold hands in here is, set by the bed, while she
slept.

To have beheld an object the most indifferent approaching its exit; struggling
with the last symptoms of a slow disease; combatting with the grim tyrant
without a friend; without strength; without spirits; her heart would have
melted with sympathy, and she would have felt the sensations of pity; but when
she beheld a woman, sensible, interesting, and lovely; reduced by misfortune,
and acknowledged guilt; Pale, faded, wan, and afflicted; without a friend or
relation to soothe; attended by servants; struggling to suppress her last sigh;
while she heard her in a soft, trembling, and pathetic voice, exhorting her to
persevere in the paths she herself had forsaken; while the last breath was
hovering upon her lips, inculcating the lessons of truth, and virtue; with an
energy that exhausted her, and a pathos that almost wore her out; She gave a
loose to her feelings, and her tears flowed without control.

It was near noon, when LEONORA awoke; but so very weak, that she could not
speak; except in a whisper; after taking a cordial, she seemed inclined again
to sleep, and PHILADA entering, requested JULIA, to return to her chamber; she
kissed the cheek of the dying* LEONORA; promised to visit her the next day, and
left her. As soon as she got to her chamber and had dismissed PHILADA, she
opened the paper, and read the following story of that unfortunate woman.

"It is unnecessary to say, I am of a noble family, since the late beautiful
and amiable Marchioness of Alvada was my sister; born in Italy, and educated in
a convent; the darling of a fond mother who loved her children so well, as to
spend most of her time with us; my heart never swerved from the rules of
virtue; and honor was to me dearer than life. It was my bitterest misfortune in
early youth, to lose this best of mothers. After her death, I spent some time
with my father; and there became acquainted with an old nobleman, who wished to
marry me; my father flattered with the proposed connection, pressed my
acceptance; but I refused; he then offered me the choice of a nunnery for life,
or marriage with the Duke. I had no alternative, and I did not hesitate; I
embraced the latter; and with a holy zeal, immediately took the veil; and with
all the enthusiasm of misplaced piety, performed all the duty of my station;
and became an example to my sister nuns, and gained the love and admiration of
the superiors. For several years I was happy; but I lost my father; my sister
married, and left Italy; my attachments to the world were lessened; my love to
it abated; and I was superstitiously attached to my convent, and my religion. I
shed but few tears when my sister died, though she was the dearest object of my
earthly affection; and deserved the love of all; but alas! my sorrows were then
near commencing; and it was time for me to bid adieu, to all tranquillity.

It was at a procession, at which, the duties of my station obliged me to make
a public appearance; I saw and was seen by an English nobleman; the moment his
eyes met mine, I imbibed that fatal passion, that has since proved the
destruction of my happiness: whenever he passed me, his looks declared that our
sensations were mutual; and I retired to my cell, confused, aggitated and
wretched: I could not read; I could not pray; my mind burst the walls of my
convent; and my imagination conveyed me to the man who had caused such anxiety;
three days after I received a letter from him; it was filled with professions
of tenderness, and love; a correspondence ensued, for I had no power to resist
his arts; and fell into the delusion, that shut my eyes upon truth and its
dictates. I shall not pretend to recount the various methods he used; nor the
gradations, by which I lost a sense of duty: I vainly thought that I could
reconcile a breach of my most solemn vows; pledged upon the sacred altar to the
most high, with honor and with love; and at last was so infatuated, as to
consent to escape from my convent, and go to England, upon his promise that he
would send some one, in whom he could confide, to meet me at Brussels, and
conduct me to London; where I should be introduced to him in the presence of
his mother and family, and that the holy priest should be in waiting, and the
day of my arrival should make me his wife.

His word once pledged, I dreamt not that he could break it; nor did I once
think, I had set him an example, that he would follow: I was infatuated by a
blind passion, that triumphed over truth, and religion; that ^et death, and
danger at defiance; for I risqued my life, by breaking my vows; and ran vast
hazard and danger by making my escape.

But I surmounted every difficulty, and got the better of every fear; and with
two faithful domestics, left my convent; and arrived at London; hitherto his
promises had been punctually fulfilled. I had been met as he had appointed; and
attended with the utmost respect; but the moment I arrived, he supposed me in
his power, and though he did not throw aside the mask entirely: I found myself
disappointed; instead of being conducted to his mother, and met by his
relations, I was informed his venerable parent was so ill, as to preclude the
possibility of my being introduced to her; and that of consequence, my nuptials
must be delayed.

I entertained no suspicion; but my regard to my honor, bid me absolutely
refuse to see my lover, until I could be acknowledged as his wife, before all
his connections; and though I made as great a sacrifice to reputation, as ever
was made, I obeyed the dictates of honor; in the interval, which I was
persuaded to believe would be short, I endeavored to perfect myself in the
English language; my wishes, my ardent wishes to please the man I considered as
my husband, were such a stimulus to my exertion, that I became a proficient,
and in a very short time I was able to converse in the language that I loved,
in preference to any other, merely because it was the language of the man I
loved.

I wished to prove myself worthy his choice; to gain the esteem of his friends;
particularly of his mother, who I found was considered as the best of women;
and I was ardent in the pursuit of every praiseworthy accomplishment.

The person whom he employed, as my instructor, was not a common teacher, but a
gentleman and an intimate friend of Lord B --. I was pleased with his society,
separately from the benefit I derived from his lessons; for he talked of my
lover; extolled his virtues; and painted him as free from even the frailties of
mortality; he accompanied me to public places; gave me all the information I
thought necessary; and introduced me to many persons, whom he said were the
friends of Lord B --, but though the scenes I now frequented, were gay,
festive, and new; calculated to fascinate the heart, inflate the imagination,
and mislead the understanding; yet I at last saw through the veil that hid the
truth from my eyes; my suspicions were first aroused, by observing all the
lessons that my instructor gave me, were calculated to inflame the passions, to
set vice in a fair point of view; to throw a shade upon virtue, honor, and
religion; at last he became so bold, as to declare a preference to illicit
love, rather than an honorable attachment and holy marriage.

My temper, naturally warm, was raised; I forbid him my presence; and wrote my
lover, to require an explanation of his conduct; and a direct avowal of his
designs; before I received his answer, I was informed that I had been
considered as an infamous woman; as a kept mistress of his lordship; that the
persons to whom I had been introduced were of suspicious characters.

Good GOD, what were my sensations, at this information; I even now shudder to
reflect upon the horror of my mind; I was every thing but distracted.

When I received Lord B -- 's letter, my eyes were entirely opened, and he
stood confessed the villain, he had the audacity to avow his designs and with
the most specious arguments, he woed me to vice and folly; but why should I
enlarge upon so degrading a proposal; my passions were exhausted by their own
violence; and I became so calm as to write him; I did not upbraid him, but I
bid him adieu forever; I likewise wrote his mother, his venerable mother; I
enclosed all the letters that had passed between her son and myself; I gave her
a minute detail of my family, and likewise of the arts that had been used to
seduce me from my country; I stayed not for an answer; but by the assistance of
a countryman, who had been my friend from my first arrival, I set out for
Italy, and left my unhappy followers in his care; for had they returned, their
lives were forfeited by law for having aided a nun, to escape from her convent.

But for the humanity of this gentleman, I should have gone directly back to my
convent, and received the punishment that I deserved, a severe punishment; a
lingering and cruel death; but his persuasions prevailed, and I was admitted
into another nunnery, as a pensioner; the little property that I had been able
to take with me, I had divided between my servants; what I left behind, became
the property of the convent; so that I was entirely destitute, and but for this
generous man, must have been indebted to strangers; and while he lived, he paid
my board; but in five years, this worthy friend paid the great debt of nature,
and fell a sacrifice to the king of terrors, and I was again destitute.

But I was resigned to my fate, and performed some of the meanest offices of
the nunnery, for my support.

The Marquis ALVADA, heard of my situation, and offered me an asylum at this
place; I accepted his generous offer, and found every thing prepared for my
reception, that could render life bearable: But alas! how vain for a guilty
mind, to seek for peace, how vain the care of friendship! the pomp of wealth!
the ease of affluence! or the assiduity of the worthy!

Until now, I had only suffered the pangs of disappointed love; I had almost
forgot my own crimes and the crimes of Lord B --, and when I heard he had put a
period to his life; for he could not live without the woman he had so injured;
I lamented him with tears of anguish! I accused my sat of cruelty; I spurned
against the Divine decrees, and murmured at the will of Heaven; my days were
passed in sorrow, and my nights in lamentation; but now that I had no
employment, that every thing was provided for me; that no tongue accused me;
that no voice condemned; now that I became the object of sympathy, I had
leisure to look into my heart; I accused and condemned myself; my conscience
bore witness against me; my guilt stared me in the face; my broken vows arose
in judgment against me; I endeavored in vain to forget my trangressions; I
changed my name; I charged my attendants, never to mention it, or ought that
could suggest one distressing idea.

But my endeavors were fruitless; my reason and my misery could not exist
together; as there was no remedy for the latter, the former fell a sacrifice;
and for several years, I was a confirmed maniac; at length I grew better; my
reason was in some measure restored; and my recollection, my painful
recollection returned; but my health has gradually decayed, and I am now in the
last stages of a consumption; and so grievous are my self-reflections; so acute
the accusations of my own conscience; that at some periods I am not myself, but
a poor distracted creature.

I have until late only contemplated, and that with fear and trembling, the
justice of the Almighty; I have dreaded his vengeance, and deprecated his
anger; but within a few weeks, the cloud seems to dissipate, and I look forward
to divine mercy, with a hope, that I would not barter for worlds; while that
agreeable vision floats upon my imagination; I am calm and satisfied; but
sometimes despair with all its black attendants haunts me; then my shattered
reason is too weak for the conflict, and flies before it; but I bless GOD, that
these dreadful fits are less frequent, as I approach my end; and I look forward
to the tomb as the only refuge for the miserable; as the safe and certain
portal to everlasting bliss. If this manuscript should fall into the hands of
any one, who should think my sad story worth reading, let them take warning by
my fate, avoid my guilt, pity my weakness, and forgive my errors.

LEONORA."

CHAPTER XVIII.
I give thee joy! thou have escaped from woe;
And all the cares of guilt, and pain below.

JULIA wept over the above narrative, and found it to be the very story that
ROUSSEAU with his pen of fire translated from the original language, and gave
to the world as his last production; the letters of an Italian nun and an
English nobleman; she remembered that the Countess DE LAUNA had told her, the
correspondence was original, and that the facts had come within her own
knowledge.

Her reflections were such as may be imagined; she saw more to pity than blame;
she sighed at the frailty of human nature; and endeavored to forget her errors,
in the contemplation of her sufferings, and the recollection of her virtues.

The next morning she renewed her visit, and found this unfortunate woman just
breathing her last; as she could not whisper consolation to her departing
spirit, for she lay senseless, she quitted the room in a state of mind, easier
to be conceived, than described; in less than an hour PHILADA came up, and
informed her the last sigh was over, and that the soul was freed from its
clayey tenement, and emancipated from sin and guilt. She likewise informed
JULIA that as many persons would be naturally about the house, for some days,
that her walks upon the terrace, and in the adjoining rooms, must be abridged,
as she might become the object of suspicion.

JULIA was grieved at this prohibition, but submitted to it in silence; two
gloomy days were passed in sad reflection upon the fate of LEONORA, intermixed
with anxiety for her own; she saw no one, but PHILADA, who told her that the
Marquis and Count had expected to hear of the death of LEONORA for several
weeks, and had several days previous to that event, sent down their directions,
by a confidential servant of the Count's, as a spy, she supposed upon her,
which had obliged her to abridge her liberty.

JULIA now learned that the funeral of LEONORA, was to be the following day,
and that her remains were to be interred in the tomb, that she could see from
her window, and was but a few paces from the Chatteau; she was not sorry, that
she could have an opportunity of seeing the last respect that was paid her, and
when she beheld the funeral procession begin to move; beheld the coffin
supported by six men, and followed by all the servants and dependants of this
domain; as she looked upon it and reflected, that in that small and narrow
compass, were contained every thing, that remained of LEONORA; whose enlarged
soul and generous heart, enlightened by love, and dictated by a noble
confidence, had found a convent too small to contain her; who had with hurried
steps and a throbbing heart, traveled from one kingdom, to another, was now
going peaceably, and privately, insensible to that domain, whose doors would
soon close upon her forever.

When she saw her followed by a train of ignorant peasantry, without friend or
relation, she could not help looking back to the hours when she and her
sisters, were nursed by the affection of her fond parents, in the very bosom of
elegance, ease and affluence; when their wishes were prevented by fruition;
when every attention was paid to their education; she thought of the hope then
entertained; and sighed to reflect upon their disappointed hopes, unhappy life,
and untimely end: Oh! Said she, could they have looked forward, and seen them
thus blasted, how wretched it would have made their lives; how would it have
added stings, even to the pangs of death. What a moral may be drawn from the
fate of these lovely, unfortunate women; how little does the fond parent know,
while triumphing in the ripening beauties of a smiling infant offspring; for
what they are preserved; Oh added she, recurring to her own sad, desolate
state; could mine, though poor and humble, have known to what a situation their
JULIA would be left, and to what dangers exposed, they would have wished
themselves childless.

As she pursued these melancholy reflections, the procession arrived at the
place of its destination; the coffin was carried in; the bearers returned from
the tomb; and its ponderous jaws, were closed upon the remains of LEONORA.

JULIA had a strange curiosity, to visit the tomb; she had never seen one; a
pre-sentiment told her she should rest in that; and she had this strange wish
so much at heart, that when PHILADA, brought up her supper, she mentioned it to
her; I have a great curiosity, PHILADA, said she, could not you contrive to
gratify it. -- LORD bless you Mademoiselle, what a strange request, you make; I
would not go into it for the world. Well, said JULIA, let me go in alone, and
do you keep watch without. Ah, Mademoiselle, if once I did that, you would
never return to the Chatteau, and I and mine should be undone forever. No
PHILADA, cried JULIA, I should scorn a conduct like that; I wish to leave this
place, indeed; but I would rather run every risque of threatened danger, and at
last die in it; than involve any one in ruin, or do a thing, that would bring
any bad consequences upon you; only let me visit that tomb, and I promise you
upon my honor that I will return. I should be glad to oblige you, said PHILADA,
but I could not open it, to save both our lives; my son has the key, and could
not go in the day time; and LORD have mercy upon us; who would go to visit the
dead at night? That would be the very time, I should like to go; your son has
the key; I am sure he will go with us. Here PHILADA, give your son this guinea,
and ask him to go with us to night. No, I thank you, Mademoiselle, LORD bless
you, what go into a sepulcher, the very night after a dead body was put into
it; why I should think, I saw the Seignora's ghost all the time. Indeed
PHILADA, said JULIA, there is no such thing as a ghost. -- But i^ you are
reluctant to night, let it be tomorrow night; speak of it to your son; consult
with him respecting it; he will go with me, if you are unwilling. Well,
Mademoiselle, I will think of it; but I do not think it will ever do. JULIA,
thus encouraged; made her take the money, and the most disagreeable visions
floated upon her fancy till morning.

It was early when PHILADA came to her chamber; well PHILADA, said JULIA, the
moment she saw her, what does your son say to the request I made you? Have you
seen him? I have, returned PHILADA, and he is ready to obey you; but I am
afraid to venture. Of what can you be afraid? dismiss it, I beg of you, and
this once oblige me. Why Mademoiselle, said PHILADA, the good Marchioness, that
I loved so well, lays there; the last time I was inside that tomb, was to see
her placed there, and my heart trembles within me, when I think of going again,
but you are so much like her, and so urgent, that I will go with you; only you
shall promise not to attempt to escape from me. I do promise, said JULIA, I
will not leave you; even if an opportunity should offer; I will return back, to
my chamber.

PHILADA then agreed to call upon her at eleven, and that her son should be
waiting for them, at the garden gate.

All day Julia spent in anticipating the visit of the night, and though some
chilling reflections came over her, yet her heart did not misgive her; when she
thought of entering the receptacle of the dead; and when it began to grow dark,
she waited with extreme impatience, though indeed it was mingled with fear, for
the striking of the clock. It had but just announced the hour, when PHILADA,
faithful to her promise, knocked at the door, she entered with, it is so stormy
Mademoiselle, that I was thinking you had better not go, to night. Julia
assured her that she did not value the storm, and observed they should be less
likely to be seen.

When Philada found her determined, she desired her to follow her; we must said
she, go through the Seignora's apartments; her attendants have left the
Chatteau, to day, and we shall run less risque of a discovery; PHILADA led the
way, and Julia followed; they passed through the chamber, in which she had
visited the late inhabitant, when dying; as she went by the bed, she shuddered,
and PHILADA trembled so, that she could scarcely stand; she took hold of
Julia's arm involuntarily, and went on; when arrived at the bottom of the
staircase, she left the candle and took a small lantern, that was already
lighted; I think, Mademoiselle, said she, in a whisper, you had better take the
candle; this gives but a dim light; and if the candle is put out, by the wind,
we can light it again, for it is very dark, where we are going. Julia did as
she was requested, and immediately the great door, that led into the court
yard, was opened; as she had not felt the fresh air for a week, though the
howling of a thunder storm struck her ears, yet it was not wholly unpleasant to
her; the walls were high, and almost surrounded by different buildings, so that
in crossing the court, she felt no inconvenience from it, and indeed she paid
no attention to it. But when they came to a little gate, at the further end, it
blew full in their faces, and in a moment extinguished the candle she carried
in her hand; the lantern of Philada only gave light enough to render the
darkness visible; it could hardly be called a guide; she now gave it to Jaques,
and by the advice of Julia took hold of his arm. I thought as how, said Jaques,
that you were not coming. Philada replied, she had done all she could to
persuade Julia out of the notion of it, but finding her so bent upon it, she
had come with her; just at that instant a violent clap of thunder, seemed to
shake the firmament; Philada exclaimed, and Julia endeavored to assuage her
fears; a violent flash of lightning followed, and the hail and rain were driven
by the wind full upon them. LORD have mercy, said Philada, if I ever get back
to the Chatteau alive again, you will never catch me outside the doors at
night. Certainly, said Julia, we are as safe here, as in the Chatteau, not
quite so comfortable perhaps; but it will be but a few minutes, and I do not
mind it at all. Nor I, said Jaques; I wish mother was not quite so fraid. I
cannot help it, said Philada; Oh mercy, what a clap was there! Dear PHIlada,
cried Julia, do not be so alarmed, we are as perfectly safe here, as we could
be in our chambers; every flash is commissioned by the Almighty, and it cannot
harm us, except by his express command. But, replied Philada, we have no
business here, searching tombs in the night; and I am sure no good can come of
it. The young woman has paid me well, mother, said Jaques; and I will search
the tombs every night, for the next year, for a good English guinea; it is my
business, and I am no more afraid, than I should be at home in my bed. By this
time, directed by the faint light, and white pailing, they arrived at the tomb,
Jaques applied the key to the door, and with an harsh grating sound it opened.
-- When Julia looked into this mansion of death, a kind of chilling horror,
seemed to pervade her whole frame, and congeal her blood; but for shame, she
would have turned back; but she ventured in, and Philada holding by the arm of
her son, followed. Jaques was quite undaunted, and Julia with a trembling hand,
lit the candle, it was large, and wax, and the bright light of that added to
the glare of the lantern, which was now open, illuminated the tomb so that
every object was discernable.

Julia looked in with a mixture of fear, awe, and satisfaction; and as she cast
her eyes upon a row of coffins that were placed upon a shelf of black marble,
heaved one sigh, for what they contained. Philada was so much affected, that
she sat down upon a marble that was low, and unoccupied, she held the candle in
one hand, and resting her head upon the other; Jaques offered to tell Julia to
whom they all belonged; for though they have been put there before I came to
the Chatteau; yet I know them all; for I was employed to keep them all clean
and in repair. I will accept your offer, said Julia, and pay you for your
trouble; Jaques assured her he was already paid, and taking the candle, began
to give her the information she wished; those two rich coffins so covered with
gold, and silver, are the old Count and Countess de Launa; they are long since
turned to ashes; nothing but bones remain; yet see how clean and bright they
are. Julia viewed them, she read upon the plates that adorned the lids, their
names titles, fortunes and virtues. Alas, said Julia, of how little real value
is their titles, and estates; possessed by one who disgraces the one, and
dishonors the other; and their virtues are only owned by distant branches of
their family; no trace is to be found in their immediate successor, of one
virtue; to this we must all come, and she turned again to Jaques. This,
Mademoiselle, was the Count De Launa; their son, from what I have heard of him,
he was good, for he was greatly beloved. This then, said Julia, contains what
was once the husband of my benefactress; the man whose worth she still reveres;
whose memory she loves, and whose loss she laments. Her thoughts glanced upon
ORMOND, and she turned to another. This was the mother of my Lord, said Jaques,
and these little coffins contain some children, that belonged to the family;
and here is the Seignora that was interred yesterday, I would not open it
Mademoiselle, (for she put her hand upon it,) for I am sure, it is offensive.
Julia withdrew her hand, poor Seignora, sighed she, at last you are at peace;
for "here the wicked cease from troubling, and here the weary are at rest." The
last tears are wiped from your eyes, you have breathed your last sigh, reason
no more deserts you; a consciousness of frailty no more afflicts you, your
transgressions are all forgiven, and your wounded bosom healed by the hand of a
pitying Redeemer. She turned from this to a coffin that stood a little apart
from the rest, it was still covered by a velvet pall, fringed with gold, that
said Jaques was the lady that my poor mother laments so much; that was the last
Marchioness; (Julia went close to it), I can open it, Mademoiselle, if you wish
it. If, cried Julia, the gratification of my curiosity, would not too much
affect your mother, I should like to see what remains of her. I will see her
too, said Philada, for I always loved her, and am not afraid of her. JULIA was
pleased at PHILADA's resolution, and offered her arm to assist her; and JAQUES
opened the lid and turned down the rich white satin, with which the face was
covered, and PHILADA exclaimed, Oh, Mademoiselle, what a dreadful thing is
death, and who would have supposed this to be my dear lady, and yet, said
JULIA, I am surprised, to find it so entire: I thought indeed that laying
twenty years, in this damp place, would have destroyed every vestige of a face,
and yet ever feature remains, only the tincture of the complexion is changed. I
have heard, said JAQUES, that its preservation is owing, to the rich spices and
aromatics, that the Count DE LAUNA, had put in the coffin; JULIA now examined
it with a kind of interested curiosity; look PHILADA, said she, the crimping is
not out of the linen. That very linen, said PHILADA, I did up, and crimped for
her; I mended too a little rend I had made in that rich lace, when I carried it
to her; I little thought it would be her burial clothes, I shall never forget
her manner. PHILADA, said she, you take too much pains; you will wear yourself
out, with your cares; and then she took some nice lawn from her drawer; here,
PHILADA, said she, (in a kind gentle voice just like your own Mademoiselle,)
have that made up for a holiday suit; dear lady, it was the last present she
ever made me; and it is as good as new now. That ribbon too that is about the
cap was brought down to ornament her baby linen; I tied up that bow myself, it
was a true lover's knot, Mademoiselle, see the coronet is worked in gold upon
the ends of it. I have heard, said JULIA, that hair grows after people are
dead, I think it must be the case, for surely such a quantity would not have
been left to shade the face; O, said Philada, my lady had a great deal to be
sure, but it has grown; I wish, added she, in a trembling voice; I wish I had a
lo^k of it. Your wish can easily be gratified, for surely it arises from
affection, and must be innocent, (said JULIA,) and it cannot be criminal in
JULIA, to take off a lock with my scissors. Philada wept as irresolute; what a
dreadful thing, is death said she! I shudder at it! and I, said JULIA, regard
it as a blessing, far from considering it a dreadful thing; I look upon it as
the only solace for affliction, and wish that my own aching heart, were forever
enclosed within this peaceful mansion; she sighed deeply, as she spoke, and
JULIA, proposed to return to the Chatteau, as they had been absent near an
hour. JULIA produced her scissors, but JAQUES could not use them; and anxious
to gratify Philada, assumed courage to do it herself; Jaques took the candle,
and Philada held the lanthorn; and JULIA stooped to cut off the lock of hair,
she looked around the tomb, she asked her heart if it was sacrilege, if she was
doing wrong? but conscience answered in the negative, and she was proceeding;
she had just touched the hair, when the stillness that pervaded the gloomy
mansion was interrupted by a deep sigh; and JULIA started, touched the face, to
her horror it sunk into ashes, and mouldered into dust; not a feature remained;
it was all an horrid chasm, for the affrighted imagination to fill up. Julia
was petrified; don't be scared, Mademoiselle, said Julia, it is only the
pressure of the air, effected it. Philada turned almost fainting from the
coffin; and JULIA's trembling and paleness, declared her emotion; Jaques pulled
up the satin covering, but before he could close the lid, she cast a fearful
glance around the tomb, and at a distant part of it, thought she discovered a
man; Philada saw it at the same time, and the lantern dropped from her hand,
she fell almost senseless to the ground; the sight JULIA, had witnessed
deprived her of the power of looking, and almost of breathing; she stooped, but
could give no succor to Philada; who in a low and grieved tone of voice,
declared she had seen a ghost; Jaques helped his mother up, and though very
courageous, was doubtful as to the nature of what he had seen; and aided her
out of the tomb; but the instant the air met the candle, it was extinguished,
the light in the lantern was put out by the fall, and they were now in entire
darkness, except the frequent and awful flashes of vivid lightning; the thunder
too rolled over their heads, the winds howled as answering, and the rain beat
with amazing violence. This war of elements however in some measure recalled
the scattered senses of Philada, and she exerted herself to walk between
Jaques, and JULIA; who was more terrified than she had ever been before, yet
she endeavored to inspire Philada, with a presence of mind, that she herself
wanted. It was with some difficulty they reached the Chatteau, and Jaques
helped them to JULIA's room; a candle was burning upon her table, and the
moment they entered, Philada sunk into a chair; and JULIA out of breath with
her exertions, and terrified beyond her power of expression, set down and found
herself unable to move. Jaques went to his mother's chamber and returned with a
bottle and glass, and JULIA readily consented to drink some wine; after Philada
had taken a glass; they were so much refreshed, that Jaques left them, and in a
few minutes Philada declared herself unable to get to her own room, and said,
for the world she would not lay alone. JULIA readily offered part of her bed,
which was accepted with gratitude; but notwithstanding their clothes were cold,
and wet, it was some time before they could undress. Philada, said JULIA, did
you suppose that any one, but ourselves was in the tomb. Dear Mademoiselle,
there was not any other person there, it was an apparition, I saw it as well as
you, and knew who it was; I have heard the Chatteau was haunted before; but
never was sure of it until now. Who did you suppose it to be, said JULIA. I
cannot think, but it was some person who followed us into the tomb. Oh, no, no,
said Philada, it was no living person, it was the Lord HENRY ORMOND, he died
ten years ago; that killed the Count DE LAUNA; I am sure it was he, for I have
seen him, an hundred times when he was at the Marquis'; he used to visit at the
Count's, and I knew him at the first sight of him; why, I looked upon him a
minute, before I had strength to fall down. I was shocked, said JULIA, at the
dreadful change in the Marchioness; but I do not think what we saw, was any
thing supernatural; it might be the shade of something we had not noticed
before; and our imaginations were so much affected, that we supposed it more
terrible, than it really was.

They now went to bed, and notwithstanding her terrors, Philada got to sleep,
long before JULIA; for a very painful idea, was suggested to her mind, that her
fortitude could not overcome, and that she did not choose to mention. She
thought upon recollection, that the figure she had seen resembled COLWORT; the
observation Philada had made of it is being young ORMOND, confirmed her in the
thought; for the Countess had often remarked, that COLWORT, bore a striking
likeness to her first lover. This was the time he was expected in France. She
now fancied him dead, and that what she had seen was his apparition. Thus
superstition, with all its train of evils, entered a mind, that had hitherto
been freed from its influence: but her natural good sense, aided by the books
she had read, and the remarks of the which she now recollected, soon in some
measure overcome it, and the cheering light of the sun, which now arose in
brightest majesty, helped to dispel the fears of the night; yet when she
reflected upon the gloomy scene, and upon the sudden change of the Marchioness;
she again experienced her former terrors; and did not wonder that her
imagination had become impregnated by superstition; she endeavored to combat
her fears, by hopes that COLWORT was still living; and that the Countess would
discover, and rescue him from the machinations of the Count.

CHAPTER, XIX.
OUR every breath omnipotence proclaims,
A GOD omnific varied nature names;
The breeze is his -- the uprooting whirlwind r^ar,
The gentle rill -- the waves of every shore;
It Is GOD directs the day -- and GOD the night,
As erst he spoke, and nature sprang to light.
CONSTANTIA.
THE courage of Jaques, his good sense and honest open countenance, suggested
to her an idea, that he could aid her escape; hope began again to flatter her,
and she was impatient, until she could put her plan into execution. She desired
Philada, as soon as she awoke from a disturbed sleep, to request Jaques to come
to her; I want to ask him some questions, and have besides a favor to ask him.
Philada promised to send him, but my dear Mademoiselle, said she, you must
promise me never more to ask me, to go into a tomb again; so do not ask it; for
I never will go. I never will, said JULIA, I paid too dear for the
gratification of my curiosity last night, ever to repeat it. When left alone,
her mind again recurred to the transaction of the preceding evening; and she
endeavored to think, some persons had watched their motions, and perhaps were
hid in the tomb, for the purpose of robbing the dead, of some of the valuable
articles about them; but this thought was so much to the dishonor of her
species, and so repugnant to her heart, that she could not give it a moment's
continuance. When Philada returned with her breakfast, she was sorry to hear
that Jaques, was gone to a village, near three leagues distant, and would not
return until the following night, as he went upon business of the stewards,
which would detain him until that time.

She felt disappointed at this intelligence, and the idea of spending this day
alone in her chamber, was so irksome to her, that she requested Philada, to
indulge her, with walking upon the terrace, and the adjoining rooms; this
request was granted, and she immediately ascended the former place, to enjoy
the free air, and charming prospect. She tarried several hours, and upon her
return, visited the chambers of LEONORA; every thing remained as she had seen
them, but upon opening a small closet, she was gratified to find a small
writing desk, with every material for writing; she did not scruple, to take
some paper, pens, ink and wafers; with these, she left these melancholy
apartments, and returned to her own room.

She now sat down, and wrote a letter to the Countess; as she did not doubt,
she should prevail on Jaques, to carry it; this seemed to amuse and employ some
of her time, and when evening was come, hopes of its success had shed so
pleasing an influence upon her mind, that notwithstanding her disagreeable
situation, she slept soundly, and awoke refreshed.

She found upon enquiries, that Jaques would not be back until night, and
Philada promised she would bring him up to her, as soon as he had delivered his
messages to the steward; she now took a book, and once more ascended the
terrace; but she had not been there long, when lifting up her eyes to behold
the beautiful appearance of the surrounding hills, she saw several carriages,
and men on horseback; at first she thought they were going by; and how ardently
did she wish she was flying with them, from her hated prison; but they turned a
sudden angle in the road, and came directly to the Chatteau; in a moment she
conceived it was the Count, and his associates, and her trembling limbs could
scarce support her; she left the terrace, and shut herself in her chamber, as
if she was more secure; or that a single bolt could avail any thing against her
oppressor; she went immediately to the window, and there observed the carriages
enter the Count's yard, and wheel round to the other part of the Chatteau,
followed by the Chevaliers on horseback. She could see no more of them; though
the noise they made at their entrance, she distinctly heard.

When she recollected her own weak defenseless state, and the power and
strength of the Count; her confidence forsook her, and her tears flowed apace,
until reflection told her, to trust in him, who is the protector and friend of
the orphan, and those who confide in him. She prayed with that genuine piety,
which exists in the bosom of innocence; and her confidence increased; her
courage returned; and her calmness once more resumed.

It was late when Philada entered: Ah! Mademoiselle, said she, I was afraid you
would think I had forgot you; but we have had so much to do; my Lord is come,
with a world of followers; and has ordered such a dinner for tomorrow, that I
shall have to set up half the night, to prepare it. Did he mention me, said
JULIA? Philada replied in the negative; he has brought a lady, with her woman,
and has ordered the Seignora's apartment to be prepared for them, and the
adjoining chamber for himself. Perhaps he is married, said JULIA, and if so,
how happy shall I be? No, said Philada, I inquired, and found she was a kept
mistress; she is very handsome, but she looks very far from happy. Well, said
JULIA, if she only learns him to forget me, I shall wish her happy; I am sure,
I have had no opportunity to speak to my Lord, nor to come to you; but just now
before they set down to supper, the Count had me called to the hall, and told
me he wished to speak to me before he went to bed; and bid me wait in his
chamber; so I thought I would bring up something first for you; and then
return. Do, said JULIA, let me know, what he says to you; I have no inclination
to eat, and beg you will carry it down again. Dear Mademoiselle, you will be
sick, cried Philada, you have eat nothing for two days; if you will take the
refreshment I have brought you, I will come up after the Count has dismissed
me, and bring up Jaques who got home an hour ago, and is now with the steward;
but if you will not, I will go to my own room, and not see you until the
morning. The promise and threat prevailed; JULIA assuren her, she would try,
and animated with the hope, that Jaques would set off with her letter that
night; she drank a little wine, and eat some of PHILADA's delicacies.

It was more than an hour before the honest creature returned; she then entered
with Jaques. Oh, said JULIA, I am glad to see you, but tell me, I beg of you,
Philada, what did the Count say of me? Why Mademoiselle, I waited in his
chamber for some time; at last he come. Well, Philada, says he, I am glad to
see you; and want to know what you have done with the young woman I sent to
you. I told him what chamber you were in, and that you took on sadly, and would
not be comforted; he said you were a fool, for that, he did not mean you any
harm, and bid me tell you so; and that he should visit you tomorrow; he bid me
not to mention you to the servants that came with him; or his guests, and to
caution the domestics in the family not too; he then bid me good night, and I
called Jaques, and came directly to you. -- JULIA, thanked her for her
information, and then addressed herself to Jaques; she offered him her purse,
and all its contents, if he would carry that letter to the Countess DE LAUNA;
she assured him of the protection of that lady, and represented to him her sad,
defenseless state, in such moving terms, that Jaques at length consented, but
he refused her money. If the Countess will take me into her service, said he, I
shall be amply rewarded; if not, I shall be ruined; but the thoughts of having
served you, Mademoiselle, will reward me; the money will do but little good.
JULIA forced upon him as much as would defray his expenses; and with a thousand
charges gave him the letter; the honest fellow left her with an assurance that
he would (...) that very hour.

It was now near two o'clock, the ill she presaged from the Counts visit; the
hopes she conceived from Jaque's honesty, and expedition, filled her mind, with
such a variety of sensations, that she felt no wish to sleep; she did not go to
bed, but sat down at the window, and lifting up the sash, explored the expanded
firmament; the blue expanse and myriads of stars that sparkled with softened
luster; a light vapor had arose from the valleys beneath; and seemed to skim
along the surface of the plain; and hang on the sides of the hills; a gentle
zephyr whispered through the trembling foliage, and just moved the tops of the
trees, and when toward day, the moon which was in its wane, arose in the east,
attended by the morning star, she lost her griefs in the contemplation of the
weather; such an enchanting picture of the grandeur of the works of GOD; and of
still life was presented, as calmed the tumults of her mind, and disposed her
to confidence and resignation; she beheld the approach of morning, with
pleasure; when with a faint light, the eastern horizon was tinged; until at
length the suffusion of yellow and crimson was displayed, and the sun emerging
from its slumbers arose, and threw such a blaze of glory, over all nature, as
almost to dazzle the senses; her reflections were so soothing, so cheering, and
agreeable, that recommending herself to him who formed the world, who taught
the sun, moon and stars, their different stations, and all their various, but
regular evolutions; she sunk into a quiet sleep, that lasted until Philada made
her appearance.

The kind creature only came with her breakfast; for the increasing cares, and
business of the family claimed her whole time, and attention, and she could
only tarry a few minutes.

Scarcely had she left her, when the footsteps of a man were heard, approaching
her door; and in a moment the Count made his appearance; JULIA arose, as he
entered, and retired involuntarily to the remote part of the chamber. He
approached her with respect; good morning, Mademoiselle, said he, pray take
your seat, for I have something to say, in vindication of my own conduct, that
requires your attention. I am sorry, my Lord, (said JULIA, with spirit) that
your conduct to me has been of such a nature, as to exclude the possibility of
a vindication; but you can command my attention, for I am your prisoner. You
are no longer so (he replied) than you prefer confinement; give me your hand
and you are from this moment free, the mistress of my house, my heart, my
fortune, the sharer of my titles, my honor; I will present you as a daughter
to my father; as a niece to my aunt; I saw you, and I loved you; unused to
control, I could not bear to give you up quietly, and see you in possession of
another; I have been successful in bringing you here, and it now depends upon
yourself, whether you return my affection and become my wife; or obstinately
bent upon your own destruction, you refuse, and are forced to bestow these
favors, which I had rather receive as the voluntary offerings of your heart.
With my heart, said JULIA, you can have no connection; for before I knew your
Lordship, I had bestowed that upon another; but least you should mistake, and
suppose I wish to withdraw it, I own to your Lordship I never could have loved,
or esteemed a man, that could act the part you have done; and there is no evil
I could encounter so great, as a connection with one, whose conduct I so much
and so seriously abhor, as I do yours. She paused, but as if amazed at her
spirit, he did not reply. She proceeded, there is but one way, my Lord, to
regain my esteem, to make me wish you well or happy; restore me to your aunt;
give me my liberty. And do you think (he interrupted) do you think me such an
idiot, after the pains I have taken; attached to you as I am, to act so
inconsistent a part; no, I am not such a fool. He was proceeding, when she
interrupted him: Suffer me, my Lord, to ask you one question, (said she,) how
can you answer your conduct to me; to your conscience; how can you answer to
him, who created you; and who can instantly bid the vital spark that now
animates your frame to cease! who with a thought, can deprive you of life, and
every thing that renders life dear to you? think my Lord what account you could
give, if called upon to give it within a few hours, at that great tribunal, to
which you, as well as I, my Lord, must appear. You are romantic, cried the
Count, and talk of impossibilities; you are holding up a mere chimera which has
no existence, and cannot affright the truly enlightened mind; it is high time
these bugbears, the mere tricks of cunning, and artful priestcraft, were erased
from your understanding: your mind is enlarged; it is capacious; it is superior
to these notions that you have imbibed from a low and confined education: where
is the tribunal you speak of? it exists only in the inflated imagination of the
wild enthusiast; the very being you adore is imaginary; the future state you
threaten, a vision of the heated brain; or the fiction of religion, to keep the
world in awe: I am to myself a God, and to my myself accountable; I pursue my
own pleasure; if any one stands in my way, I put him out of it, with as little
concern as I would kick a dog; or crush a spider; created as much by chance, as
the animals he treads upon; man has only a higher relish for pleasure, and
different views in pursuit, the world is filled with enjoyment, but it is hid
from all, except a few, who have become enlightened, and now no longer afraid;
seize with avidity the offered blessing; while the vulgar herd are still the
slaves to superstition, and prejudice; move on in the same dull round, fearful
to catch the transient pleasure, lest future punishment should ensue. Are these
your sentiments, my Lord, (said JULIA,) I shudder at their wickedness and
falsity; I no longer wonder at a conduct that has hitherto astonished me, and
for the honor of human nature I hope and believe you are alone. Your hopes
deceive you then, (he replied,) more than twenty thousand enlightened minds,
have already imbibed these opinions, and a few years will discover them to the
astonishment of all Europe, and the wonder of the world; the temples that are
now used as the ha^itations of a blind Deity, will soon be levelled with the
earth; his worship will be abolished, and nature, the God we adore; will alone
be acknowledged. The first characters in literature, the first in philosophy,
have joined themselves to our society; men of all ranks, and all ages, have
embraced our sentiments; and become bound by our lives; some fair and beautiful
women too, whose minds are too capacious, to be bound within the narrow, and
confined limits that the sex have been obliged to walk by; have thrown off the
fetters of prejudice, and advanced within the circle of the illuminated; these
are persons, whose births and fortunes are inferior to none; but disdaining the
ideas of birth and fortune, if you will permit me, I will present you to them,
a convert, a lovely ornament, and a brilliant superior; for you will partake of
my dignity, and your own shining qualities, will fit you for their superior.
Never, my Lord, (said JULIA) never; my soul shrinks from such a connection; it
rises infinitely above them; the idea will be sufficiently humiliating, that
you have even made the proposal; I would sooner become the companion of an
honest rustic, whose soul was dignified with the idea of immortality; whose
mind was exalted with the acknowledgement of a GOD, and claimed affinity with
angels, than stoop to the first character in the universe, cursed with such
degrading sentiments. What is it that distinguishes man from the brute
creation? It is neither power, wealth or honor, for they are all imaginary; the
meanest insect or the filthiest reptile, has, when GOD permits, power to
inflict death, and tortures; the ant and be, possess wealth equal to all the
coffers of the miser, or the treasuries of the great; and the lion of the
forest boasts an honor, superior to every irreligious man in creation; it is,
my Lord, that little spark of immortality; that celestial flame that GOD has
breathed into him, that makes him discriminate between good and evil; that fits
him to bear the misfortunes of this life with dignity and cheerfulness, that
renders him in another, a companion for angels, that will exist to endless
ages, through time and through eternity; when the fashion of this world passes
away; and all its pageantry, and gorgeous palaces, and empty greatness are
crushed to atoms. Not one word more, my Lord, said she, (for he was
interrupting her;) I can attend to you no longer; for though your tenets are to
me not dangerous; they are horrid; they shock me, and I shudder that I ever
conversed upon them, and beg I may never be forced to listen to them again. At
present said the Count, you are at my disposal, and must when I please attend
to me; you are so obstinate, that I shall not attempt to argue with you; I pity
your infatuation; and will give you two days, to consider of my proposal; in
that time either conclude to become my wife, by laws that custom has rendered
respectable; and that you consider as holy; or else be mine upon terms less
honorable; I can be trifled with no longer; I love you, and perhaps I respect
even your errors; but I will not be made the dupe of your talents, or your
charms; in two days, I shall expect an answer; weigh well, before it is too
late, the consequences of your decision; -- he bowed, and left her.

CHAPTER, XX.
WHEN crimes despotic in the bosom reign,
The tears of weeping beauty slow in vain.
CONSTANTIA.
AS soon as JULIA was left alone, she began to reflect upon the consequences of
irritating such a man; a man who had wealth and power on his side; and who
feared neither GOD nor man; who acknowledged no being superior to himself; and
who impiously defied the Divine vengeance, by doubting his existence. Her anger
was weak and imbecile; she had no friend, no protector, except that Being whom
the Count had derided, and in whom she had hitherto placed a confidence, in
every evil; she felt not her confidence weakened; but she thought it best, if
possible to gain time. She remembered, that the youthful and beardless
shepherd, had overcome the lofty, and proud Goliath; and she trusted that she
should not be sacrificed, weak, and humble as she was, to this haughty defier
of GOD and all that was sacred; but she determined to behave with prudence,
that even those who trust in worldly prudence might not blame her; in three
days, she could reasonably expect, the Countess warned of her danger, would be
on the way to relieve her; and in four she hoped to see her. She resolved to
write a line before the time the Count had proscribed her, was expired,
requiring three more days; if that request was granted, she thought herself
safe; if not, her whole reliance, was upon Providence, and as she felt the need
of that reliance, ^he found it increased.

One source of satisfaction was now denied her, that she had before enjoyed;
she could no longer walk upon the terrace, but confined to a gloomy chamber,
with no company, but her own reflections; the day seemed long and irksome; and
when the evening arrived, Philada could only spend a few moments with her. By
her she learned that the company was increased; that the Chatteau was as full
as possible, and that they would the next day celebrate a great festival. How
wicked (said she, as Philada locked the door) must the associates of this man
be? how wretched a prospect have they before them? I will not envy them their
liberty, their mirth, or their gaiety, for I should rather, infinitely rather,
spend a long life, shut up, in this dreary, chamber, with the hopes I entertain
of futurity, and the firm belief of a GOD, than like them enjoy every thing
here, and have no hope that is substantial, to brighten the prospects of a
future state.

In these reflections, she spent that, and the following night; and beheld the
next approach with a trembling anxiety; two days were expired, and she had not
altered her resolution respecting the Count; yet the more she reflected, the
more she dreaded enraging him. She therefore wrote him a short note, requesting
three days more, to consider of his proposal, and promising a final answer when
that time was clapsed. In less than half an hour Philada returned, and
presenting her with a strip of paper, she read the following words:

Subject in all respects to the will of the amiaable JULIA, the Count DE LAUNA,
would grant her request, but he expects to leave the Chatteau in four days, and
cannot bear the idea of being deprived of her company, for three of them. -- He
intended to have waited upon her to night, but to show his condescension, will
defer his visit until tomorrow evening, when he depends upon receiving a
favorable answer.

DE LAUNA.


This note dashed her hopes entirely, for the Countess could not grant her any
relief so soon; as it was impossible, for Jaques to have delivered his message,
and returned by that time; she sat down on the bed, and giving way to despair,
almost expected he would come this night: She detained Philada with her for
some time, and endeavored to prevail on her to aid her escape; but the terrors
of her weak mind placed so many difficulties in the way, that JULIA could not
succeed; and she saw her close the door upon her, with a presage that she never
felt before.

She sat with her head, rested upon the casement, and in a state of mind that
defied the music of the spheres to soothe, or calm; and thoug^ her eyes were
fixed upon the stars, her imagination soared far beyond these shining
luminaries and she wished she could lay down a being, tha^ subjected her to
miseries, doubts and insult, an commence one free from these various evil* Just
then as the clock struck one, and all belo^ was still as death, she thought she
heard a rustling near her, and in a moment her own nam^ was distinctly
pronounced by a voice, that vibrated upon her ear, as Colwort's. The
recollection of what she had seen in the tomb, now rushed upon her mind, and
combining his appearance, with the voice; she no longer doubted but he was
dead; and that his apparition had now come to give her warning of her
approaching fate; unable to sustain such shocking sensations, she fainted and
sunk upon the floor, it was some time before she recovered her recollection;
and when she did, such horrid images rushed upon her mind, that she had nearly
relapsed into the same state again. After several exertions, she got to the
bed, and there tears came to her relief; for some time she indulged them, until
at length nature wearied out with exertions, she fell into a disturbed sleep;
which lasted however, but a short time. She awoke with the first crowing of the
cock, and again revolving in her mind the most horrid images, she recollected
that the crisis of her fate approached, and that fortitude would be necessary,
to support her; she endeavored at resignation, and prayed for that support she
needed. As the morning advanced, she became calmer, and when Philada entered
with her breakfast, she had resolution enough to eat something.

The day, however, was long and tiresome, and when at length the dreaded night
come, and no news from the Countess, no release from the Count, not one glimmer
of hope entered her gloomy abode to cheer it from without; all her resources
were from within. The hours passed on without interruption until eleven, when
the door opened, and the Count entered; he started at her pale face and languid
looks, enquired for her health, and seated himself beside her. After hesitating
for a moment, he asked her with apparent agitation, if she was ready, to give
him an answer. She replied firmly, that she had no answer to give him; that he
knew her mind, and that it had not for one moment hesitated with respect to her
decision. I know I have nothing to expect from your justice (said she) let me
claim something from your pity! it is your mercy, that I now implore to protect
me against yourself; I am defenseless and wretched, I throw myself upon your
protection! Oh save me from the worst of evils, and restore me to my friends;
or if that is displeasing, immure me in a nunnery; confine me to a convent, but
do not force me to a connection that my soul abhors!

She was upon her knees before him, and he endeavored in vain to raise her. No,
never will I rise, said, she until you have assured me of my safety! In my arms
(he cried) you will be safe; they shall be your prison, and I will be your
guard, obstinate and ungrateful as you are; I will make you happy, for I love
you; and that love shall plead my excuse. He threw his arms around her and
attempted to embrace her, but she shrunk, as from the touch of a torpedo, and
hardly knowing what she did, called loudly for assistance. At that instant a
violent push against the door forced it open, and some one exclaimed, turn
villain, and defend yourself; the Count turned upon his opponent, and snatched
his sword from the table; several thrusts passed upon both sides, until at
length the sword of the stranger entered the right arm of the Count; his foot
got entangled in the carpet, and he fell with his head against the post of the
bedsted, and fetching a deep groan, became senseless.

JULIA had raised herself an anxious witness, and when her deliverer approached
her, she discovered Colwort; her joy and astonishment deprived her of the power
of speech, and to his entreaty, she could only answer by holding out both her
hands. He pressed those hands to his lips, until at length her spirits became
restored, and she begged him to tell her from whence he came; this is no time
for enquiries, cried he, do my love exert yourself, that we may leave this
dreadful scene; and though he does not deserve it, call some one to assist this
bad man, for I would not leave him thus; and this mansion is full of his
emmissaries. He is gone, (said JULIA,) as she stooped down; he is gone with all
his vices, with all his load of crimes upon his head to appear before an angry
GOD.

Colwort thought the same; but fears for her safety prompted a deceit; he
assured her that the Count was only stunned by the fall, that he would send
help the moment he had got her out of doors; thus assured, she assumed
fortitude to leave the chamber, and though she trembled with fear and
apprehension, yet his presence encouraged her, and with hasty steps, they
gained the staircase, when they began to descend, they heard the groans of the
Count; this added to their speed, and they were in a moment upon the first
landing, when a light burst from a room below, and they beheld a lady ascending
by the same stairs; it was impossible to avoid her; or to retreat; they must
meet, and upon her turning a winding, the candle threw its rays full upon her
face, and in the midst of her fears and confusion, JULIA discovered Donna
Olivia. She entreated to go back, but Colwort almost forced her forward, and in
another moment they found themselves discovered! Donna Olivia looked upon them
astonished; Colwort attempted to push by her, but she besought him to stop, and
desired to know where they were going. Colwort enraged at this delay, refused
an answer; and JULIA entreated Olivia to let them pass unmolested. Is it you,
Mademoiselle, (said she,) I wish not to detain you? I have but just discovered
you were here, and with the old housekeeper have been laying a plan for your
escape. In the Court yard you will find a horse, and servant, who will attend
you, to a place of safety; unless this young gentleman chooses to have that
pleasure; read this paper, and after that deliver it, as directed, and when you
think of the vicious Olivia, think of her with symphathy. It was no time for
thanks, Colwort informed her of the situation of the Count, and with an hasty
and agitated step, she left them, to go to him.

COLWORT and JULIA descended the staircase, crossed the hall, and went into the
court where they found horses, and a servant who assisted to set her on
horseback, and Colwort having mounted, they rode off with as much expedition as
possible; with a speed, that newly acquired spirits, renovated hope, and
liberty just recovered, lent them.

So quickly had the incidents of the last half hour succeeded each other, that
JULIA thought it almost the work of enchantment, and that her deliverance was
the business of fancy, or an airy dream. The fresh air, the cloudless sky, a
thousand twinkling stars, restored her tranquillity, almost before her lover
could assure her of her safety; and enter into a conversation consistent or
regular. She then requested him to inform her, how he got information of her
confinement, or what had brought him to her rescue. I will, replied he, be as
concise, as possible, for if the Count should recover his recollection, his
Chatteau is filled with his associates, and we may be pursued. It is now three
weeks since I arrived in France; directed by the letters of the Countess, I set
off for Paris, attended only by a faithful servant, that had accompanied me to
America; we were within half a days journey of the capital when we were joined
by two persons, who had the appearance of gentlemen; they soon found, that my
visit was intended to the Countess DE LAUNA, they were acquainted with her, and
you, and informed me that you had both set out for the Villa three days since;
that the health of Madam DE LAUNA, was so poor, that you had left Paris, the
day after your return from Spain. The story was feasible, and I became the
dupe; I had until then traveled in a public stage, but at the first Inn, I
ordered horses, for myself and servant, and set out for the Villa; the next day
in the afternoon, we were surrounded, by ten men on horseback, well armed and a
carriage attending; we defended ourselves, for some time, but were at last
seized, bound, and put into the carriage. In two days I arrived here with my
guards, and was immediately led to a prison; here I continued, near a
fortnight, when in exploring the recesses of my dungeon, for such it might be
called, I found a passage that led to a tomb; I immediately laid a plan to
escape, for I knew not my tyrant nor the reason of this confinement. One night,
last week, I saw a light in this receptacle of death; I opened the door, that
led to it with caution, and to my astonishment, beheld two women, and a man
intently examining a coffin; I immediately formed the design of passing them,
which I could with ease, and safety, have done, but curiosity prompted me to
examine the faces of the persons so employed; when I came a little more to the
light, I thought in one, I discovered the features and countenance of my JULIA;
before I could enough divest myself of surprise, to be assured of the truth of
my conjecture, I was discovered. One of the women fainted, and the light was
extinguished; the first impulse of my soul, was to assist you, for it was
indeed yourself. But a sentiment that I could not define, withheld me; the tomb
was left open, and I left my prison; I repaired to a neighboring cottage,
where I gained much information respecting the Chatteau, and its inhabitants; I
found too, that a lady was confined there. The next day the Count arrived with
his friends; I disguised myself like one of the attendants; and got admittance;
as such I had no fears of being discovered, I had been brought in the night,
and since my arrival had seen no one, except the man who brought me my food;
and him only by night; my dress was different, and my disguise complete. Last
night I found your chamber door, and called to you by name, but you were asleep
or did not hear me. A noise below obliged me to leave my station; but to day I
procured horses, to be in waiting, and was determined to rescue you, or perish
in the attempt. It was surely Heaven that sent me, at that period, when I was
so much wanted; and yet, we should not have effected our escape, but for the
lady, who is, I suppose, the Count's mistress.

He ended his narrative, with expressions of gratitude, to that power, who had
thus far protected them, and professions of a passion as tender and faithful,
as it was sincere; and JULIA gave him an account, of every thing, that had
happened to her since he left the Villa. This conversation lasted until
morning, and with a heart filled with grateful sensations, JULIA beheld the sun
arise. How different were her emotions now; and the last time she saw it, she
remarked this difference to Colwort; who could now view her beautiful, and
interesting face, with rapture; and they enjoyed the most sublime pleasures,
those of mingled gratitude, love and friendship.

As the morning advanced, they entered a little town, and Colwort left his
horses at the first Inn they came to, and hired a chaise, for that day's
journey, and JULIA purchased some things, that were necessary, the fear of
being overtaken prevented their taking any repose, and after a slight
refreshment, they sat forward to the Villa. When Colwort looked at JULIA and
saw her countenance animated, though her face was pale, and though her eyes
expressed joy and hope, they were sunk and languid; he thought he had never
seen any thing so beautiful before; he held her hand in his; he pressed it to
his lips, and in the softest and most energetic language expressed his love,
his delight, his hopes, and anticipated joys, of days and years, spent in her
dear society.

They made long stages, and at night JULIA found herself, so much fatigued, as
to be unable to pursue her journey without repose; besides the carriage, was
only hired for one day, and was now dismissed, when they stopped at a public
house, and JULIA preferred passing the night, at a convent, that was in the
neighborhood; Colwort immediately conducted her, and she was agreeably
surprised, to find when she arrived, it was the same convent, she had once been
entertained at, with the Countess DE LAUNA; the Abbess and several of the nuns
recognized her, and received her with pleasure for the night; Colwort was
invited to stay to supper, with the superior, and upon his taking leave,
desired to breakfast with them the next morning; as he left the parlour, JULIA
followed him, with her eyes, and sighed as the door shut him from her view; she
was ashamed of the pre-sentiment, she was then sensible of, and endeavored to
shake it off; after a short conversation, the Abbess conducted her to her
chamber; and a bed and repose were never more welcome to the weary traveller,
than they now were to the fatigued and exhausted girl. But though she wooed
with the most pleasing sensations, the drowsy god, it was late, and the convent
clock had struck twelve, before he deigned to close her eyelids; when she
awoke, the sun had risen to a considerable height, and fearful that she had
trespassed upon the rules of the house, or made Colwort wait, she dressed
herself in haste, and descended to the parlour.

CHAPTER XXI.
"Anguish after rapture, how severe!" YOUNG.
AFTER the compliments of the morning, the Abbess expressed her surprise, that
Colwort did not make his appearance; she waited half an hour and then sent a
servant to the Inn to enquire for him; he was absent but a few minutes, when he
returned with the dreadful account, that the young gentleman had been seized by
the officers of justice, for the murder of the Count DE LAUNA, and carried to
Paris at midnight.

When JULIA heard this news, a death-like stupor pervaded her senses; she sat
like a statue, no tears, no sigh, declared her distress; her eyes fixed in
despair upon the floor; her hands lifted up, and her whole frame in the
attitude of anguish, too severe to be expressed; the Abbess moved and alarmed
at her situation endeavored to provoke her tears. After some time she
succeeded, and when her full heart was in some measure relieved, she informed
this benevolent woman, of all that had happened to her, and asked her what she
would advise her to do? I would advise you, my dear, said that good lady, to
proceed immediately to the Villa, inform the Countess of every circumstance,
and you will insure her interest in favor of Mr. Colwort.

JULIA arose with spirit, and prepared to act, agreeably to the advice, she had
received, which indeed agreed with her own sentiments; but upon sending out, no
chaise or carriage of any kind was to be procured, for that day; and a
gentleman who lived in the neighborhood of the Countess, and was a friend of
the Abbess, heard of what had happened, and as he had business, a few miles,
beyond the Villa, proposed to carry JULIA to the Countess, the next morning, if
she would put herself under his protection.

Though she felt extreme reluctance, to tarry another night, from the Villa,
and she thought it her duty to take every step, in her power, to release her
lover immediately, yet she was obliged to submit to this delay.

This day was perhaps the longest of her life, and the most painful. Very early
the next morning, the gentleman called at the convent; she had been ready a
long while, and after taking an affectionate leave, of the worthy Abbess, and
friendly nuns, she seated herself by the side of Monsieur Duboit, and began her
journey to the, Villa; though this gentleman was sensible, and kind, yet he had
not those qualities, which could shorten the distance, to a mind so distressed
as here is was; the unfortunate girl after a few attempts at conversation, became
silent, and retiring within herself, found a vast horde of misery for her
contemplation.

The sun had gained his meridian summit, and she was awoke from her reverie by
her companion, who pointed out to her the buildings of the Villa; at this
cheering sight, hope which had almost deserted, returned; her bosom became
animated, and she anticipated the embraces of the Countess; her exertions in
favor of Colwort, and his restoration to liberty; they were now within half a
mile of the end of her journey, when they were overtaken by a servant, who came
to inform Monsieur Duboit, that his eldest son had met with a most distressing
accident, and that his immediate presence was required. The gentleman became
distressed, and JULIA desired he would let her alight, as she could with ease,
and pleasure walk the little distance, in a short time. She expressed her
sorrow for his affliction; thanked him for his attention; and he permitted her
to get out of the chaise.

She proceeded with alacrity, until she came to the gate, but was surprised, to
find it locked; a circumstance that persuaded her, that the Countess, had not
returned, as it was always left open, when she was at home; she rang the bell,
and in a few moments saw the porter coming across the Park. -- Oh Pedro, (said
she,) I am glad to see you; where is your lady, and how do you all do? We are
all well, Mademoiselle (he replied,) my lady is still at Paris. I am sorry
(cried JULIA,) for that, (and she wondered that he did not open the gate,) when
do you expect her? We do not know when; but we heard from her yesterday (he
said in a sulkey tone,) and she sent down word, (he added,) and an order, that
you should not be admitted at the Villa; not admitted (said JULIA,) then I am
undone! I cannot help that (cried he with great indifference,) you will not enter
here, and you had best leave the gate. Good Heaven, (said JULIA,) where can I
go? And what will become of Colwort? That is your look out, (said the brutal
fellow,) but I advise you to leave the gate immediately.

It would be impossible to describe the state of JULIA'S mind at this instant,
but amidst her own destitute and forlorn situation, the fate of her lover, was
uppermost. The brutality of this man, added ingratitude to his baseness, and
occasioned a pang, she had never felt before; a few days before, she had left
the Villa, this fellow had been dismissed, for some high misdemeanor; but at
the entreaties of JULIA, he had been received and forgiven; he professed the
utmost gratitude for her intercession; and such was her opinion of the human
heart, that she imagined, he would have died to serve her; his conduct opened
her eyes, and the hasty retrospect she now took of her short and unfortunate
life, she found many instances that led her to suspect those merits, she had
been tenacious in supposing inhabited every bosom, were but the visionary
phantoms of her own imagination, or the garb that veil from mortal ken, the
vices or follies of mankind.

She did not however wait for another order to quit the gate, but with a
bursting heart she turned down the country road; she knew not where to go, nor
which way to proceed, but walked with hurried steps, until she came to another
avenue, that led to the house, she had loved so well; a little seat had been
raised out side the walk, it was now covered with jasmine, and woodbine; and
she remembered how often she had been seated upon it, with the Countess; she
recollected too, for memory now became a cruel and faithful intruder, that the
very day before she left that charming retirement, she had read Milton, in
English to the Marquis; she recollected that upon that very seat, the Countess
had expressed her pity for the first offender, "and yet (said she,) she drives
me from her presence, and sends me out an helpless wanderer, to a world that I
do not know, and to which I am a stranger; I shall never more enter this walk
again; never again taste the pleasure of being beloved by this best of women,
or hearing her instructions; deserted by the only friend I ever knew; lost to
my wretched lover; an helpless, friendless orphan; what will become of me?" As
she indulged these thoughts, a thousand tender recollections rushed upon her
mind, and almost overpowered her senses: She sunk on her knees before the seat
and would have prayed, but the hurricane in her bosom, prevented her connecting
her ideas. In this situation, wishing for death as her only friend, she
continued for a short time; until she was aroused from this stupor, by a person
who in a sweet, persuasive, but manly voice, begged to know what had reduced
her to such distress; she just looked up and waved her hand for him to leave
her. -- "What, leave you, (said he) in this situation? No, Heaven forbid. Put
it in my power, to serve you; let me see you composed, for I cannot leave you."
Oh, (said JULIA) I am wretched and undone; you cannot help me; leave me to that
fate that follows me. "No, (replied he) lady, I will not leave you; if you are
undone by the frailty of human nature, for who is exempt from frailty, I will
pour into your wounded heart the balm and oil of symphathy, I will assist your
steps to regain the paths of virtue; if you are unhappy by the baseness or
ingratitude of another, I will symphathize with you in all your sorrows, and be
a companion in all your griefs; if you have lost your friends, I and mine will
supply their place; if you are poor, my fortune is at your command; but desire
me not to leave you." Thank GOD, (said JULIA,) I have no great error to accuse
myself of; but, I am deserted by my friends; I have, no relations, no fortune;
no house; no home; and know not where to lay my head. "The Savior of mankind,
the King of all the earth, (cried the stranger,) knew not where to lay his
head; I profess myself his follower; an humble follower; but a sincere believer
in him, who died for sinners; my religion bids me to assist those who are
distressed; confide in that religion then; and let me be your protector; until
we can find one, who better deserves that name." JULIA looked at him, and in
his interesting countenance, and intelligent, though plain features, read such
a collection of virtues as almost silenced every doubt; he spoke with all the
energy of an honest, though enthusiastic heart. She observed he had a chaise in
waiting; his dialect, though he spoke good French, convinced her he was a
foreigner, his tall and manly person almost awed her anxiety to peace. Alas,
(said she,) what shall I do? "Let me convey you lady, to a place of ease, and
safety, (he replied,) a few miles from hence lives a country woman of mine; she
is the daughter of sorrow and has drank all the cup of affliction; misfortune
has become familiar to her; but still she preserves every virtue, and cherishes
every charity. I will carry you to her, and if a doubt still remains, let this
remove it. I love and am beloved by one, of the best of her sex; in a few weeks
I shall receive her hand at the altar, as a pledge of lasting happiness; if she
is what I think her, she would not receive me with a transport of ardent
welcome, were I capable either of betraying one, who confided in me, or leaving
one in distress; but if you will not be prevailed upon to go with me, tell me
to what asylum I shall convey you, for see the sun is now verging to his
repose, and I will not leave you."

This last argument prevailed, and she suffered herself to be put into the
chaise, and the servant drove off.

This young gentleman was one of those few, who at the early age of twenty four
was possessed of every virtue; his name was Roswell, he was the eldest son of a
worthy man, who cultivated a large unincumbered estate of his own, in the North
of England; he had received all the advantages of a good education; his person
was good; his mind improved; his heart open; his temper frank, and his
disposition benevolent; early in life, he became attached to religion, and
wished at his quitting college, to take orders immediately; but his father who
in the last three years had lost all his children, thought this the scheme of
monkish superstition, and to divert him from it, had insisted upon it, that he
should spend four years in France and Italy previous to this step. This was a
great self denial, to the young man, who knew that the profession he wished to
embrace, did not exclude the social charities, innocent pleasures, or real
gratifications; he knew that it embraced them all in a most extensive point of
view; for he was sure that a conscientious Clergyman was the father of his
people, the friend of the poor, and the protector of all the children of
sorrow; besides he had with extreme avidity from his childhood cultivated an
acquaintance with a lovely little orphan, who was left under the protection of
his father; in mind and sentiment alike, they loved their own virtues in each
other; early accustomed to love each other, separation was to them the greatest
afflicton, and to meet, the greatest joy they were capable of tasting, they
both discovered, while very young, that their happiness would consist in living
for each other, and when Roswell acknowledged his attachment, the blushing
Lucretia, owned a similar affection.

His father had long known the virtues of this charming girl, he approved his
son's choice, and engaged that in four years, Lucretia should be his; Lucretia
had prided herself upon her penetration for she had at a very early age
discovered those qualities, that now began to mature; and she not only loved
but reverenced them; painful was the idea of four years' absence, yet when
Roswell knew, that Lucretia was to be the sure, and ample reward of his
obedience, he entered upon it with as much avidity, as the patriarch did, when
he began his seven years servitude for the beauteous Rachel. And this
attachment was perhaps necessary to preserve a youth of his fire and energy,
from the vices and follies with which he was surrounded. Half the term of
probation was elapsed, when he was summoned home upon a melancholy errand; to
close the eyes of his father, and comfort a widowed mother, was the office that
was assigned him; and he undertook it with resigned alacrity. But when he
arrived in England, the lamp of life was not so far extinguished in the father,
but that he beheld his son's improvements with pleasure, and fondly anticipated
that period when the talents and genius of Roswell, expanded by the hand of
time, would astonish as well as better mankind; this idea pursued him in his
dying moments, and ambitious for every improvement, he conjured his son to
continue his travels, for two years longer before he settled in life.

Young Roswell would, to sooth and comfort a dying parent, have promised any
thing, within the verge of possibility, and a few weeks after his decease, left
his native country, and returned to France; there with an heart full of his
mother, and his Lucretia, he pursued every study that was either useful, or
ornamental, and practiced every virtue that can do honor to human nature. His
term of probation was nearly expired, and he meant to spend the last six weeks
in France, with an old lady, that he reverenced and supported; this was the
time of his meeting JULIA.

For some time after they had commenced their little journey; lost in grief,
wonder and fear, unaccompanied by hope, she rode several miles without
speaking, and Mr. Roswell was too well acquainted with the human heart to
interrupt this silence; he knew by experience, that comfort comes in vain, that
comes too soon; and he forbore one word either of sympathy, or remark;
satisfied that he was performing a benevolent action; he was laying plans to be
still more useful, and anticipating a pleasing reward he should meet with in
his Lucretia's augmented love; more than half their little ride was performed,
when he began a conversation by some remarks upon the twilight, that were so
much like what she had heard drop from the lips of Colwort, that they
occasioned a deep sigh, and after a few moments silence, she asked him his
country; when informed that he was an Englishman, she felt something like the
revival of those hopes, that had been so cruelly blasted at the Villa; Do you
know a young gentleman of your country, by the name of Francis COLWORT, she
inquired? "Only by report (he returned;) pray what of him?" Oh, (said JULIA) he
is miserable, and I am the wretched cause; when I found you were his
countryman, I did not know, I was so foolish as to admit hope. "Hope, (said he)
entertain it still; it is a delightful visitor; make it so welcome that it
become a constant inhabitant of your bosom." Alas! said JULIA, my fate has been
so wayward, that it almost totally excludes the charming visitant. "When you
can without renewed pain, young lady, favor me with a recital of your sorrows,
you will oblige me, and perhaps, put it in my power to serve you; but unless
that can be done without the sacrifice of a moment's quiet, I will not ask the
pleasure."

JULIA in a frank, and concise manner, informed him of the events of her life,
and her real situation, and in the course of her little narrative, discovered
so much good sense, and so much real merit, as insured her the admiration, as
well as esteem of Roswell. He assured her, that he would the very next day,
take active measures in behalf of COLWORT, and see the Countess, as soon as
possible, as he was sure, she had been imposed upon; in the mean time, he
begged her to be easy* and again assured her of the comfort and honor of the
place she was going to.

Few Englishmen were better qualified, than Mr. Roswell, for this undertaking;
he had been in France so long, that he was well acquainted with its laws,
customs, and manners; but his temper was so sanguine, that he always looked
upon the bright side of every picture, and he doubted not of his success in
spite of the Bastile, which fancy had conjured up to torture him; but he
carefully avoided to mention his fears, and only spoke of hope; his
conversation, was such a combination of good sense, genius, and solid piety,
that every word he spoke was full of consolation; it calmed the tumults of her
troubled mind, and soothed her into peace.

It was near ten o'clock, at right, when they arrived at a little, neat
mansion, that stood in the suburbs of a village, he lifted her from the
carriage, and with every expression of comfort, led her into the house; here
they were met by a venerable woman, who had counted more than seventy years.
"My good Madam, (cried Roswell,) how do you do? Here I have brought you (...)
charming companion: she is unhappy, you must teach her to be otherways." I
think (said the old lady,) she must be good, as you recommend her; I will
endeavor to render her cheerful, at least." She conducted them into a little
parlour, and though she was pleased with the person and manners of JULIA, yet she
was grieved at the evident marks of illness, that sickness had impressed upon
her face. Indeed the tumults of her mind, the fatigues of her person, and want
of rest, affected her so much, that she found herself sinking beneath them;
after a slight repast, her kind hostess conducted her to her chamber, where she
helped undress, and put her to bed.

With a deep and heavy sigh, JULIA laid her aching head upon the pillow, and
endeavored to compose herself. But how different was her situation, to what it
was a few days before, accompanied by her lover on her way to her benefactress,
a thousand gay visions fluttered before her eyes, and dazzled her in prospect.
She was now deprived of that lover who would in all probability suffer an
ignominious death; discarded by that benefactress; in the care of strangers; at
a distance from any place she had ever seen. These reflections did not serve to
close her eyes, nor sooth the tumultuous agitations of her heart; but she lay
apparently resigned, and patient, until near day, when a transient slumber shut
out the past, and to come, from her view, and she did not awake until morning,
dressed in all its splendour, appeared to drive the drowsy god, from scenes so
light and charming.

"How are you my dear, (said Madam de Shong) who stood by her bed side? JULIA
gave her hand, which was dry and hot, and replied she was better than she had
been the night before, and would rise directly. Do not rise my love, (said the
kind woman,) you are too ill; she left the room and returned in a moment with a
medicine; she then bathed her throbbing temples, and in a short time she became
composed, and after a few hours rest, became refreshed and better.

She did not see Roswell until near night, when he came in, he found her in
conversation with the old lady, who had engaged her friendship and esteem, by
her mildness and benevolence; Roswell assured her that if she had been well
enough to have given him particular directions, he should have set off that
morning, in pursuit of Mr. Colwort; "but (said he) I will go tomorrow, and only
leave this injunction upon you, that you will be as easy as possible until my
return; hope for every thing that you wish; but remember if those wishes are
not gratified, that he who denies them has not only infinite power, and
infinite wisdom, but infinite mercy." JULIA promised obedience to his
directions, and after again expressing her sense of the obligation, she was
under to him, retired to her apartment to write to COLWORT, and when she had
finished her letter to him, wrote a few lines to the Countess DE LAUNA, in
which she expressed her gratitude for past favors; her sorrow for having
offended her; and her prayers and wishes for her happiness; she set the affair
between the COUNT and COLWORT, in a true light, and implored her mercy and
interference in behalf of that unfortunate young man. In this letter she did
not mention the place of her abode, nor drop one hint which would lead to a
discovery of her real situation. The exertion that was necessary to the writing
these letters, exhausted her so much, that as soon as they were finished, she
went to bed, as she could there indulge her feelings, with more freedom, than
in any other place. She arose early, and sound Roswell ready to set out upon
his benevolent journey; the fire of genius that was expressed upon his
countenance, was so softened by the expression of humanity, so mildly mixed
with benevolence, that JULIA could not help thinking him one of the most
interesting men she had ever seen. He attended to all her directions; received
her letters, and promised to do all within the power of a mortal, to restore
her lover, and happiness; he bade them adieu, and was followed by their prayers
and good wishes.

CHAPTER, XXII.
THE fortitude to mould the mind,
Bends smiling forward on herself reclined;
To meet the ills of life, her soul she forms,
Accommodation in her cause the arms;
While fashioned thus, we mark the varied scene,
And firmly stand amid the storms serene.
CONSTANTIA.
WHEN he was gone, she determined not to sink into unavailing melancholy, and
to avoid it, sought for employment; Madam De Shong complied with her request,
and as she employed all her moments to some useful purpose, presented her with
some linen that she had taken to make; JULIA pleased that she could be of
service, worked with niceness and alacrity, and gave her worthy landlady
pleasure and satisfaction.

The third day after her arrival, they were at work in a little parlour; JULIA
could not help making an observation, that had often occured to her that the
manners of her entertainer were so polished, that she must have moved in a
situation different from her present sphere. Your remark is just, my dear, she
replied, and as my misfortunes I think will convince you, that you are not the
most unhappy person in the world, I will, if my loquacious egotism will not
tire you, I will tell you my story. JULIA assured her, that nothing could
oblige her more, and she began as follows:

"My father was a wealthy and respectable Baronet of the County of Kent, in the
kingdom of Great Britain; of five children, I alone survived my infancy; and of
consequence became the darling of my parents; the whole attention of my
excellent mother was bestowed upon my education, and my father was never so
happy as when procuring something to ornament or please his daughter; in my
education my mother determined that the useful, should be mingled with the
ornamental; and I was taught every kind of family employment; I have often
thought that a kind of pre-sentiment of the misfortunes, that were to attend my
life, induced this; as I then thought unnecessary care. I sometimes spoke of
this, to my mother, who always replied, that a woman ought to be acquainted
with every kind of family business, before she commenced housekeeper; that a
knowledge in domestic affairs was oftentimes absolutely necessary, and could
not be an encumbrance in any situation, as it would not interfere with any
polite or elegant accomplishment. I loved and respected my parents too much to
dispute their commands, and endeavored to make myself mistress of all those
acquirements, that could endear me to them; as I was the undisputed heiress of
a large fortune, it cannot be doubted, but I had a number of nominal lovers;
and my heart soon gave the preference to a young gentleman, who was noble and
wealthy, and had besides such accomplishments as left these futile merits far
behind them; my parents approved my choice; the day was affixed for my
nuptials, but alas! it was overclouded with woe, for my lover was seized with a
violent fever, that terminated his existence on the evening of that very day,
to which I had for several months looked forward as the completion of my
felicity; I do not pretend to describe my feelings, at this beginning of my
sorrow; I thought then as you do now, that no misery could equal mine; I knew
not that sad experience, would convince me, that the afflictions that were to
follow me through life, were began, but lightly by this. For many months I
became a prey, to the most corroding grief, I thought it virtuous, to be
wretched; I indulged my afflictions; I even nursed them; but one sorrow was
driven off by another; by an heavier evil; my beloved mother fell into a
decline, and died in my arms; I saw my father sinking beneath a weight of woe;
I felt this severe chastisement; but I became a proof of the power of assumed
fortitude; to relieve him, I concealed my own grief; and soon became what I had
only pretended, cheerful; my excellent mother had had a sister married in
France; she had long been dead; her husband too had paid the debt of nature,
some years before the period I am speaking of; they had left one child, a son,
he now came over to England, to visit us. In the society of this polished,
sensible, amiable young man, I forgot my sorrows, and lost a foolish prejudice,
the error of young minds, that leads us to imagine the virtuous heart can never
feel but one attachment. I had not allowed myself to reflect that similar
virtues, and similar abilities, would create similar attachments; it was the
fate of this young man to undeceive me, and to learn my heart a tender
affection a second time; indeed, so agreeable were its emotions, that I
willingly indulged them, and received with avidity, impressions so pleasing; my
father beheld this change with pleasure, he approved my choice, and in a few
months, I became the happy wife of the Chevalier Deshong, in less than a year,
I was blessed with a fine son, a circumstance that gave us peculiar pleasure,
and was highly gratifying to my poor father. A large estate in Kent, was
settled by entail upon the eldest grandson that my father should have, but in
case of the death of that child, without heirs, it was to go to a very distant
branch of the family; this was a valuable possession, and my father did not
look with philosophy upon the probability of its going out of his family, and
was quite transported with a child, whose healthy, promising appearance
flattered him with the idea of long life.

"We were all happy for several years, and my felicity at that time was more,
than I had any reason to expect, and more than could continue; in the course of
this time, I had two sons, and two lovely daughters; our board was covered with
plenty; we were surrounded with elegance; and health spread its blooming tints
upon every face; the first interruption to this seven years bliss, was the
death of my excellent, and lamented parent; he had been in a languishment, for
some months, and met death with calmness and fortitude.

"For several weeks after this event, I felt lost to the world, and my family,
but a dreadful accident recalled me to renewed misery; my eldest son, a lovely
boy of eight years old was drowned in bathing; you are not a mother, and can
but faintly conceive my agony; I shall pass over my feelings, nor attempt to
describe them.

"My husband proposed that we should go to France; I had buried all that
rendered England dear to me, and consented. But previous to this step the young
gentleman to whom our Kentish estate devolved, upon the death of my dear boy,
had taken possession of it, though he and his guardian had requested us to
occupy it until he was of age; but every apartment recalled some scene of
pleasure, and every tree was the shadow of departed blessings; and I wished not
to stay, where I thought I could never regain my peace, or tranquillity. My
husband turned the remainder of our property into money, and placed it to the
amount of forty thousand pounds in a principal banking house in London.

"We arrived in France, in safety, the care of my family by degrees diverted my
attention, and before a year had elapsed, I became, not only calm, but
cheerful; I now began to observe something uncommon in my daughter, an infant
that was born three months after I lost my son; but I hoped as she grew older,
it would wear off, and that she might become like other children, but alas! I
was mistaken.

"We had not lived in France more than five years, and indulged in all the
pleasures of benevolence, and affluent beyond our wishes, when we heard that
the house, in which our property was vested, had failed; my husband was alarmed
at this intelligence; went over to England; he found the report true, and as
much fraud was suspected, commenced a law suit that became tiresome and
expensive; for thirteen months, he continued in my native country; and spent a
large sum of money, after what was already gone; he returned disappointed, and
discouraged; but we were so imprudent as to continue our equipage and splendid
way of living; until our house and property was attached; this was the final
stroke to my unfortunate husband, and he could not survive it; in three months
he fell a victim to disease, brought on by sorrow, and died of a broken heart.
There are some events that occasion such agonizing sensations, that it is
dangerous to look back upon them; this is of that number, and I must pass it
over in silence.

"My children still tied me to the world, and life was still dear to me; two
hundred louis dours, the produce of my jewels, and some furniture, was all I
preserved, from the wreck of our once noble fortune; some friends of my
husband's, now exerted themselves in my behalf; they procured my sons
admittance to the military school, where all their necessary expenses were
defrayed, and were besides extremely kind to me; but I could not brook
dependence; I was still too proud; my spirit was not subdued, and I set up a
boarding house, for Englishmen; in this I was successful, and now found the
benefit of my mother's instruction; I educated my daughters myself; with a
house maid, and one man servant, I performed the business of my family. My
table was so well supplied, my cookery so good, and so neat, that my house was
filled with respectable boarders; but though when in company with my family, I
appeared cheerful, when I retired to my unfortunate Louisa, my heart was
bursting; of all the woes to which human nature is subjected, there is none can
equal the distress of a fond mother, when she finds that Providence has given
her an idiotical child; this was my sad sat, my daughter was very pretty, but
not one ray of reason, animated her fine features, or sparkled in her beautiful
eyes; no sentiment, but rage was ever expressed upon her countenance; her
passions were violent in the extreme, and she required all the attention of one
person, to keep her comfortable; her sisters by turns attended her, and if any
thing could have made amends for the wretchedness she occasioned, it would have
been their good sense, good humor, and amiableness; but there is no evil, to
which we do not by long habit, and acquaintance become so familiarized, as to
loose part of its deformity; in time I was really comfortable, and began again
to enjoy life. My sons completed their education; commissions were given them
of a rank superior to what they had a right to expect; and they left France, to
join the regiment abroad; followed by the good wishes of all that knew them;
and for young men covered with glory; my heart sunk when they left me; I was
not enough of the Roman, to see them go unmoved, and all the mother was in my
bosom.

"Directly after their departure, the young gentleman who inherited the estate
of my son's, come over to Paris, to visit me; I was charmed with his person, as
I had before been by his character; and when he asked the hand of my eldest
daughter Maria, I gave my consent with pleasure; my dear girl did not hesitate
to acknowledge a reciprocal attachment, and they were married within six
months, of his arrival in France.

"They tarried with me six months longer, and their virtues not only endeared
them, but the the world to me; at length it became necessary for my son in law,
to return to England, and every persuasion was made use of, to prevail upon me
to accompany him, but I could not leave France, yet I consented that Sophia
should accompany them; and I promised to join them the ensuing Autumn; I parted
from these beloved children with tears, but the prospect of happiness that
awaited them, sweetened the parting pangs, and six weeks after I received a
letter informing me of the sad fate of both vessel and crew, the packet was
overset by a gale of wind, and every soul except the captain perished! I now
thought my woes could not increase, but I was mistaken; the very next post
brought intelligence that my eldest son had fallen in battle; when I look back
upon these events, that have been passed more than twenty years, I wonder that
I retained my reason. But he who wounds the heart, can heal it, and he who
afflicts can relieve.

"My heart was indeed almost broken, "woes came in clusters around me," and
when I beheld my poor unfortunate daughter, I exclaimed how inscrutable are the
ways of Providence, thus to remove the useful, the lovely, and the amiable
ornaments of society; and leave her who is a wretched burden. But I bowed
submissive, and was resigned; this wretched girl lived ten years after her
sister, and then died of a malignant fever that raged in Paris.

"After her death I dismissed my lodgers, and with a sum of money, sufficient
for my own support, retired to this village, where I lived contented with my
little; a boarder in a cheap, but good family; until it pleased GOD to take my
only earthly comfort; my son died abroad, and with his last breath bequeathed
me this little girl; he had married in Flanders, and lost his wife, at the
birth of her child; I received her with about fifty pistol^s. A short time
after the poor little thing became wholly an orphan; my health was poor, I
could do but little, she added to my expenses, though her society gave me
pleasure; and my small fund was exhausted, when accident brought me acquainted
with Mr. Roswell; he found out my circumstances (and as my pride was now gone;
as I no longer considered dependence, when it is not the fruits of vice, folly,
or indolence, a disgrace,) he removed all my difficulties; he purchased this
little mansion, furnished it, hired me a servant, and settled an annuity upon
me, sufficient to render me comfortable; I shall not need it long, and he will
find a rich reward for all his goodness; for he is benevolence itself. If I can
soften your troubles, I shall be doubly happy; as I am sure nothing can be more
grateful to him. I look back with agony, it is true, but without regret; and my
greatest misfortune, gives me some comfort; for if I have lost the dearest,
best of children, I shall leave none to tread the wayward paths that I have;
none to encounter the bitter misfortunes, that have been my attendants, through
life; or to drink the dregs of sorrow, that has been so copiously poured out to
me. I look to the grave with joy and satisfaction, where I shall meet all I
have loved here, and spend an eternity of joy, without the fear of separation."

Here she ended; and JULIA with a look of mingled admiration and sympathy,
thanked her for a narrative so full of instruction, and promised to profit by
her example, and to acquiesce with a cheerful resignation with the will of
Providence.

CHAPTER, XXIII.
VICE is a monster of such hideous mien,
As to be hated, needs but to be seen;
But grown familiar with her horrid face,
We first endure, then pity, then embrace.
POPE.
A FEW days after Madam De Shong had made the above communications of her life
and sorrows, to JULIA, the latter took from her pocket book, the paper that
Olivia had given her, the night she left the Chatteau; she recollected that she
had desired her to read it, and then deliver it as directed; it was directed to
the Chevalier St. Armand, of the order of the Knights of Malta; she hesitated a
moment, to whom should she send it, or who would convey it to the Chevalier;
and recollection told her that Mr. Roswell would take that care upon himself,
and she read as follows:

"The injured St. Armand will undoubtedly be surprised, that the wretched Donna
Olivia, should address herself to him, in preference to another; the man whom
she has treated the worst, is surely not the person, to be applied to in the
hour of distress; but to whom should the wretched apply, but to those, whose
solemn vows, and generous dispositions have bound to protect and assist.

"Frown not upon me, nor cast in scorn a paper by, because it comes from one
who has undone you, and herself; to you, she will make all the reparation in
her power; to herself alas! she can make none; recollect when I came from
Spain, the only daughter of a Grandee of that Kingdom, had you been the only
one, who addressed me, I had been happy, for my heart did justice to your
merit; though my head was dazzled, by the incense offered to my vanity; the
Duke of Orleans, stood foremost, and I had the folly to expect to become his
wife; it was at this time, that ambition, and vanity triumphed over love and
reason; it was at this time I refused the only man, who really loved me, and in
pursuit of a phantom, lost every claim to happiness.

"I will not pretend to describe my feelings, when I received your letter,
informing me you had taken the vows, and bid me adieu forever; the change was
so evident, that it was observed; the Duke was disgusted and left me; but I
regained my spirits again; plunged into dissipation, and lost sight of every
thing praiseworthy; years of prosperity flew by like a dream of the morning;
or like the shadows with the setting sun.

"At length my father died, and left me provided for, but in a slender manner;
I had been used to affluence, to grandeur, and to adulation, I could not live
without them, and I did not know of how little estimation they are, compared to
virtue, and honor.

"Chance threw in my way the Count de LAUNA, and from him I received those
praises, so necessary to my existence. My brother died, and all my property was
dissolved, my flatterers left me; my friends deserted me; and nothing was left
but misery and want upon one side, or disgrace and the Count on the other; I
hesitated, and his fallacious arguments proved my ruin; his sophistry blinded
me to the truth, and I fell an infatuated victim, to vice and his baseness.

"No time was left me for reflection, 'till I arrived at the Chatteau; until
then my senses had been bewildered; I had been blinded by show and
magnificence, and the adulation of the Count's friends entirely finished my
ruin; but when I commenced my journey; the scales began to fall from my eyes,
and a few days after my arrival, the veil was entirely removed, and I beheld
the enormities of this wretched, deluded, set of men, in their true colors.

"You have already heard that the Count DE LAUNA was a principal member of the
sect of Illuminati, he had so imposed upon me, as to persuade me to become one
of the order, and a promise of uncommon honor had so dazzled me, that I was
pleased, and impatient until I was invested; the day after I came to the
Chatteau, I was with a mock solemnity, made acquainted with their tenets,
tenets so abhorrent to GOD; so disgraceful to man, that I shuddered at the
recital. They do not believe in GOD, or a future state; they suppose all things
the work of chance; and all relationship is dissolved; it is lawful and
honorable in their opinion to form connections, that we should think criminal
with mothers or sisters. It is just and prudent, to take away the life of any
that offends them; it is bravery to imbrue their hands in the blood of a
brother who is suspected; and death is considered as an everlasting sleep.
These are but a small part of their destructive sentiments; it would take whole
sheets to relate the half of them. I revolted at the idea of an oath so solemn
as they proposed, and one week is given me to consider of it; but a solemn
feast was held to nature, the Goddess they adore, and I was requested to
personate that Deity; I hesitated, and asked what would be required of me?
Judge what is my surprise, when informed that disrobed of all coverings, except
a vest of silver gauze, I am to be exposed to the homage of all the society
present, upon a marble pedestal placed behind the altar, upon which sacrifices
are to be offered. Though dead to virtue, I was not entirely lost to decency,
and I refused; I blush to say that one of my attendants appeared as the
Goddess, and that her behavior charmed them all.

"This sect increases daily; they will in a few years overturn Europe and lay
France in ruins. But I am determined to leave them, and retire to a Convent; I
write to caution you and your brave companions, against their arts, and to
request you will get me admittance; I know your generosity, I know your
benevolence, and I throw myself upon it; refuse not this request; but fix upon
the order which is most severe; that I may retire to spend the remainder of my
days in prayer, and penitence. I shall be in Paris in nine days from this,
before that the Maltese fleet will arrive, and you will receive it; direct a
line to me, at the Count's house in the City, and tell me where I may fly, to
bury my shame, and guilt in obscurity, and retirement; Oh think of me, with
sympathy, pity, and forgive the lost OLIVIA."

JULIA turned with disgust from the picture Olivia drew; with pity from the
wretched writer; to look with admiration upon Madam DE SHONG; she was mild,
meek, and humble, at the same time, she was active, and always cheerful; with
that excellent woman, we will leave her, and go back to the Countess, of whom
we have heard nothing since she sent for JULIA, into Spain.

That lady expected her beloved ward, until the arrival of the carriage with
her servants; her surprise at the account they gave of her being taken away,
could only be equalled by her concern, and as she did not suspect her nephew,
she applied to him to assist the Marquis in pursuit of her; this artful man
pretended equal distress with herself, and appeared ready to take the most
active measures, to discover JULIA; all Paris and its suburbs were searched,
every Convent in the Kingdom examined; until worn out with unsuccessful
enquiries, they gave up in despair what appeared so vain and fruitless; and the
Count concluded to visit his Chatteau, making use of the death of Leonora, as
an argument for his going down at that time; he had for some time kept Donna
Olivia, and though he supported her in great magnificence, neither his father
or aunt knew of his connection; he had held up the tenets of the Illuminati to
her view; he had dazzled her understanding, and imposed upon her vanity; but
though she sacrificed to vice, her soul bowed to virtue; and when she looked in
upon herself, she was shocked at the folly of her proceedings; she accompanied
him to the Chatteau, and from her arrival, was viewed with jealousy and
suspicion; they would not confide to her half their secrets; until she had
taken the oaths, and as she hesitated, they became still more uneasy; what she
had known of them, shocked her to the soul, and she could not help viewing them
as fiends from the infernal regions; and she did not fail to remonstrate to the
Count against the iniquity of his proceedings; but though the understanding of
Olivia, was superior to many, she had by becoming a slave to a vicious
propensity, overthrown her own arguments, and she saw that he turned from her
with disgust; she found her once ardent lover, cold, and insensible; anxious to
discover the reason; she sought the cause with avidity, and found that JULIA
was confined in the house; she was no longer surprised, and her pity for the
unfortunate girl, was heightened by her admiration of those virtues which
Philada extolled so highly. She was sensible of the danger to which she was
exposed, and after laying a plan for her escape, retired, and wrote the letter
that is mentioned in this chapter, and was hastening to her apartment when she
met her descending with Colwort.

As soon as they were gone, she went to the Count, whom she found insensible,
his arm bleeding, and his temple, which he had struck in his fall, swollen to
an amazing degree; it was several hours before he recovered his recollection,
and when he did, after consulting a surgeon, who supposed him in no danger; he
enquired for JULIA and her deliverer, when informed of their escape, his rage
knew no bounds, and summoning some of his associates, they took different routs
in pursuit of the fugitives. COLWORT they overtook, and conveyed to a private
prison. JULIA escaped them, though some of them delivered an order in the name
of the Countess, that she should not be admitted at the Villa; while a party
laid wait for the unprotected girl; this part of their scheme was rendered
abortive, by the humane care of Mr. Roswell, and they retired to the Chatteau
with an account of their achievement.

In the mean time, Jaques faithful to his promise, had delivered JULIA'S letter
to the Countess; who read with amazement its contents, and hearing from Jaques
every circumstance that had occured at the Chatteau, took him into her service,
and then accompanied by the Marquis, and a retinue too numerous to fear the
Count, and his myrmidons set out for the retreat of the Count; they traveled
with all the expedition that the infirmities of the Marquis would permit; but
when within a few leagues of the end of their journey, were met by a messenger,
who informed them that the unhappy man, was at the point of death, they pushed
forward, and arrived but a few hours before the closing of a life, filled with
guilt and iniquity. The change in the Count was observed directly after the
return of those who went in pursuit of JULIA, and COLWORT; and was occasioned
by an accident, that proves the retribution of Providence. The Count had always
kept with him the doctor, who, officiated at the illness of his mother in law;
he had administered the cordial that quickened her passage from scenes of
mortality and pain, to those of joy unfading; finding it necessary to open a
vein; notwithstanding the loss of blood had been great, he applied by mistake a
lancet diped in a most deadly poison; his whole mass of blood was infected, and
symptoms of approaching death appeared; the doctor's agitation betrayed his
secret, and he applied every art of medicine, in vain; it was then that his
associates, his falsely named friends, left him; but his servants secured the
surgeon, until the Marquis should arrive. He was then left only to the
unfortunate Olivia, and his servants. The desertion of these people seemed to
convince him of his errors; he begged Olivia to write the Marquis; to entreat
he would hasten to him, for indeed he had a dreadful account to settle with
him. This unhappy woman obeyed his directions; and was surprised to find they
arrived so much sooner than they could expect.

She left the Count in a partial sleep, and met them in the parlour, the
Countess was surprised to find her there; and her distress and confusion told
them how much she felt her humiliating state; in a concise manner, she told
them the events that had shortened the life of the Count, and as soon as he
awaked, they went to his bed chamber, were they found him in his last agonies;
he stretched out his hand to his father; begged his forgiveness for all his
vices; owned they had been many, and aggravated; lamented his early departure
from virtue; his connection with her opposite, and attributed it to the example
and pernicious doctrine of the vile sect with whom he had associated; he begged
every one would leave the room, but his father, his aunt, and Philada, and when
his request was complied with, he began to remark the retribution of that
power, whose existence he had denied; who had chosen that very hand, as the
instrument of his death, that he had employed to finish the days of the amiable
Marchioness, while the Marquis heard this recital, his agony and agitation was
so great, that his unhappy son became more bewildered; he was forced to take a
cordial, and when he endeavored to proceed, he was evidently dying, his voice
was thick and difficult to be understood; but the name of the Marchioness, was
again pronounced, of a child, and of a servant; at length he found he could not
make himself intelligent, he stopped as if to recollect himself, and then
added, I am too weak to say what I wish; send to the house of Monsieur Nancrede
in Paris; there is confined a woman, whose testimony is true, believe her;
confide in her; she will unravel a scene of iniquity; she will direct you to
find a lost -- his words died upon his lips; he fell into convulsions, and died
without pronouncing another syllable.

When they saw he was really gone; the unhappy father with the Countess retired
into another apartment, and left the wretched remains to the care of his
domestics.

As soon as he was interred, which ceremony was performed without pomp or
parade; the Marquis prepared to examine the doctor, but he had escaped amidst
the general confusion; Donna Olivia now urged them to send to Paris, as she
assured them that some important secret, hung upon the release of a woman whom
the Count had since his confinement, several times mentioned; and had assured
her that she had been confined several years; at the same time she gave such an
account of the deliverer of JULIA, as convinced them it was Colwort; upon
inquiry of the keeper of the prison, not a doubt remained; and they sought to
find out the place of his confinement; determined to release and make him
happy. As for JULIA they did not hesitate to suppose she was at the Villa, and
the Countess sent off a servant, to inform her of all that had happened at the
Chatteau; but the man returned in a few days, with an account of her having
been denied admittance, and that they had heard nothing of her since; this was
distressing to the affectionate heart of the Marquis and his sister; who feared
she was betrayed again into the hands of the Illuminati; and both entertained
so dreadful an idea of this sect, that they dreaded the thoughts of her
sufferings and danger.

Within a few days the person who had been sent to Paris, returned with
intelligence from Monsieur Nancrede, that the woman who had been entrusted to
his care, had corrupted the man who attended upon her, and with him made her
escape; thus was a secret of apparent great importance, still enveloped in
clouds of mystery; this perplexed and distressed the Marquis and his sister;
the former of whom was now bending beneath the accumulated weight of sorrow and
infirmity, and the latter suffering all the pains of sincere friendship for a
beloved object.

Several weeks passed off in this manner, when one afternoon a servant informed
the Countess, that a young Englishman wished to speak to her. The servant added
a second time, he is an Englishman, Madam, and the Countess whose imagination
dwelt upon JULIA and Colwort, immediately supposed it must be him; she ordered
him to be admitted, and the moment he entered the door, she saw indeed that it
was not her young friend; she was disappointed, for though his air was elegant,
his person genteel, and his countenance expressive, and prepossessing, it bore
no resemblance of her deliverer; with a sigh of chagrin, she asked his
business; I have presumed to wait upon you, Madam, in behalf of a very lovely,
but a very unfortunate young woman; could I flatter myself my embassy, would be
successful, I should be very happy. If unfortunate in other respects, (said the
Countess,) she has been fortunate, in her ambassador, for I am convinced I
cannot deny any thing to your entreaties. I have been taught to expect every
thing from your philanthropy, Madam, and I am convinced misfortune never sued
in vain. The writer of this letter, (he said, and he laid it upon the table by
her, bowing). The eye of the Countess was caught by the direction, surely,
surely I am not deceived (said she,) it is the character of my beloved JULIA;
it is indeed, (said Roswell,) for it was himself, the character of the amiable
JULIA VALLACE, and it is upon her account, that I wait upon you. She needs no
intercession, she cried, as she opened the letter, and I thank heaven that I
have a prospect of seeing my amiable friend again; tell me sir; tell me where
she is, and where I shall find her; my arms, my heart, are open to receive her.
-- This will be a rich, a reviving cordial to her afflicted spirit, (cried
Roswell) I will hasten on the wings of impatience, to bear these tidings of
joy. Amiable young man, (said the Countess) how I venerate the warmth, the
generosity of your feelings; but I will read, what she says, I am sure you will
excuse me. In perusing this letter of JULIA'S, the tears of the Countess bore
witness of her affection. When she ended, she made a thousand enquiries of
Roswell, and though he spoke with modesty of his own services, yet he painted
her distress in true colors. Madam DE LAUNA expresed her gratitude, for his
goodness and explained the treachery that had given the appearance of cruelty
to any part of her conduct; She then asked if he had been successful, with
respect to Colwort Rosewell informed her that he should have been with her
three weeks since, but for an alarming indisposition with which he was seized
upon his journey; that he had made every possible search for his countryman,
hitherto without success; but if he was aided by her and the Marquis, he had no
doubt but his next attempts would be more effectual. The Countess assured him
of every possible assistance from herself and brother; and when the Marquis
came in, informed him of the pleasing business of Roswell, and presented him as
the deliverer of JULIA. The venerable man received him with every expression of
regard, and gratitude; and Roswell found by his manner as well as looks, how
dear JULIA was to him. They concluded to set out the next morning for the
habitation of Madam De Shong, as they both declared that they would run no
farther risque of disappointment, to themselves; or of her safety, by trusting
her in less affectionate, or less interested hands, than their own.

CHAPTER XXIV.
Why dwell forever on the gloomy side?
Say, does not GOD unerring still preside?
Why then ungratefully, presume to scan?
With impious cavil marking every plan;
Though truth and justice, both surround his throne,
And mercy gems the glory of his crown.
CONSTANTIA.
WE will now return to JULIA, whose fate seemed to draw toward a crisis,
dreadful indeed! For two of the four weeks, that Roswell had been absent, she
and her venerable friend had looked for him, with increasing impatience. When
they beheld the sun arise in the morning, they hoped, that he with them, would
greet its exit; but every evening brought a new disappointment. For every
morning found them flushed with hope.

Working and reading divided their time; and conversation supplied every
interval, with something new and interesting. After sitting up late one night,
and talking over again, every topic that they loved to dwell on; they retired
to their separate apartments, and a gentle slumber, had sealed up their senses,
when they were awoke by the cry of fire. JULIA, who was first alarmed by
finding her apartment enveloped in flames, which had caught the curtains, that
were around the bed, sprang up, and rushed immediately through the fire, into
Madam DE SHONG'S room; she had presence of mind, to pull too the door, and
though that and every other apartment was in a blaze, it had not reached the
chamber of her hostess, who was that moment aroused by the smoke, and the cries
of the people without, who were just collected.

JULIA saw she was bewildered, and besought her to get up, and endeavor to
save herself; the little Maria was running about, in great distress; and a
person entered the window, by a ladder; come Mademoiselle, (he cried,) we will
save you; trust yourself to me. Not before Madam DE SHONG, has escaped the fire
(said JULIA with firmness) save yourself, my dear children, (cried the old
lady;) my life is nearly at an end; yours is just beginning. The person
declared, this was no time for argument, and as he found JULIA would not go,
until her friend was safe, with the assistance of a young, and active man, he
lifted her from the window, and in a moment she was upon the ground; JULIA next
insisted that Maria, should descend the ladder; and though frighted, the little
girl was too active to need much assistance; a young gentleman who had before
persuaded JULIA to go down, caught her in his arms, and forced her from the
window, and in less than a minute the roof sunk in. The maid servant who laid
below stairs had awaked the first, she had attempted to ascend the stairs, to
inform those above, but found the staircase an entire body of fire; she then
alarmed the neighborhood, with her cries, and though every one was safe, not
one article of clothing, or furniture, was preserved from this most devouring
element.

The young man, who had at the risque of his own life saved that of JULIA,
still stood by her, he had wrapped her in a large cloak of his own; for she was
only habited in her night clothes, and by every soothing attention, endeavored
to keep her spirits from fainting; but her concern was wholly occupied by
Madam, and she seemed to lose every personal concern, in her anxiety for her.

The confusion had in some measure subsided, and they were carried into a
neighboring house and put to bed; but the most painful ideas, drove off every
thought of sleep; Madam reflected that perhaps some accident, had happened to
Roswell which might prevent his return, and that in this helpless, unfriended
state, she should be left to suffer all the evils attendant upon poverty, and
old age. JULIA'S reflections were not of a more pleasing nature; she
recollected that but for her, Mr. Roswell would have been with them at the time
of this dreadful accident; and that perhaps the spark that caught the house,
had fell from her candle; her purse that was by no means exhausted had fallen a
prey to the fire, and her clothes had perished with it. This last want, was
supplied the next morning by the charity of some neighbors, and for several
days their kindness was continued; but it then seemed to cease, and every hour
their impatience to hear from Roswell increased; the fifth day after their
misfortune, the young gentleman who had saved JULIA, called upon them, and
after lamenting the evil to which he had been a witness, expressed his
admiration of the young lady, and without any hesitation proposed that they
should all reside with him, at his house which was large and convenient. While
Madam and JULIA expressed their gratitude for this offer, which the latter was
about to accept, when he turned to JULIA and with an assurance unequalled,
offered to settle an annuity upon her for life, and take the care of her
friend, and the little girl upon himself, if she would consent to live with him
as a mistress.

Her astonishment at this affrontive proposal, arose to anger that she had
never felt before, and in the most spirited terms she refused him, and told him
that she should in future value her life much less than she had ever done
before, because it had been saved by a man, that she so sincerely despised; she
concluded by desiring him to leave the (...) and Madam repeated her commands,
in a void of decided authority, that was not to be trifled with.

He had but just left them, when the person to whom the house belonged,
entered, and informed them that they must quit the apartment that very night,
as they expected some friends that rendered it necessary.

Madam was really sick, and JULIA knew nothing of the neighborhood; they knew
not what to do, nor which way to turn when Callista, the girl, who had lived
with Madam, and who was much attached to her, called to see them, she resided
with her sister, who occupied only one room; and supported herself by labor;
this girl told them she believed they could get lodgings, or at least a room,
for a few days, at a tavern, about a mile from their old residence. -- It was
now afternoon, and JULIA accompanied by Callista, walked immediately there; she
tried several houses on the way, but met with no success, and when she arrived,
found herself so fatigued, as convinced her the distance must be treble what
she had been informed. She told the tavern-keeper, that they expected a friend
who would pay all their expenses, and that if any thing should prevent his
coming, Madam would send to her banker, at Paris, for her annuity, which would
become due in a month. The man made many objections, but at last her
persuasions, aided by the entreaties of Callista, prevailed; and he set out in
a chaise, for Madam, who immediately lest the house she was at, and arrived
just as it grew dark; JULIA who had not returned, had busied herself in
preparing the apartment, which was up two pair of stairs, was surprised to find
Maria was not with her, and heard with much satisfaction, that a person who
lived near, had invited the little girl to spend a week with their children,
who were about her age; this lessened their expenses, and JULIA assured Madam
of her alacrity, in supplying the want of an attendant.

For several days, they were supplied with provisions from the landlord's
table; but after that the resource failed, and JULIA who began to be
apprehensive of extreme want, proposed to Madam, that she would walk to a
Convent, and endeavor to procure some employ, for she had tried in vain, in
the neighborhood, and every person was obliged to do their own work. The walk
was long and tiresome, and when JULIA informed the Abbess of her situation,
that lady, though liberal of her advice, refused her any employment, and
suffered her to depart, without that refreshment, of which she certainly stood
in need.

She had scarcely set forward on her return, when she was overtaken by the very
man, whose insolence had so added to her affliction, and so much offended her;
she started when he joined her, and was irresolute whether to return, or go on,
but reflection told her that it was not probable he would insult her on her
way; she kept forward, and gave no answer to his inquiries, until the began to
ask her pardon, for the insult he had dared to offer her, in his late visit.
JULIA then told him, if he really wished her to think of him with less anger
than she then did, he must leave her, as she could not enter into any
conversation with a man who had treated her so ill; but he replied he was then
on his way to find her, to offer her all the reparation in his power; I have
been wretched, since I left you (said he,) that I dared to insult so much
virtue and delicacy; and as I can never love or honor any woman as I do you, I
have now come to beg you will accept my hand, and become the partaker of that
ample fortune, which Providence has bestowed upon me; he hesitated and JULIA
lost her anger, but with firmness she informed him, that her vows of tenderness
and fidelity, had long been given to another; and if they were still divided by
that fate that had been so cruel to them, she should never transfer her
affections to another; but she should always consider his proposals as an honor
that she should reflect upon with pleasure; as it convinced her, her conduct
had not been reprehensible. He then lamented his attachment, but begged, though
she could not love him, she would give him a claim upon her esteem, and oblige
him by accepting that assistance of which he was sure she stood in need; he
besought her with so much earnestness to accept at least a temporary supply,
that for a moment her wants and those of her venerable friend, made her
hesitate; but prudence got the better, and with a grateful but modest firmness,
she refused every assistance, however trifling. He appeared distressed at her
refusal, and left her, chagrined and unhappy; a consciousness of having done
her duty, now became her only support; before she arrived at her temporary
abode, the weather became tempestuous, and night came on with additional horror
and darkness. She went immediately to her friend whom she found faint for want
of nourishment, as she had not taken any for the day; this was likewise the
case with JULIA; and her walk had so exhausted her, that it was with difficulty
she could go through the unpleasing task of relating her ill success; but though
sick and faint to the heart, Madam held her hand with tenderness to her lips,
embraced her with affection, and assured her that her conduct had been exactly
consistent with female decorum.

For some time, they conversed upon their unhappy situation, and endeavored to
inspire each other, with that fortitude which was so necessary; when a girl who
attended at the Hotel came up for some chairs, for Mademoiselle (said she) we
have a power of company below; we may thank the storm for that however. JULIA
then recollected a miniature picture, that her mother had hung around her neck
when quite a child, it was richly set in gold, and surrounded by two rows of
diamonds; she looked at it for a moment, her own wants however pressing, would
never have tempted her to part with it, but when she reflected that Madam DE
SHONG was really suffering for hunger, she took it from her neck, and pressing
it to her lips, with a deep drawn sigh, she followed the girl out of the
chamber, and putting it in her hand, requested her to endeavor to dispose of it
to some of the guests below. The girl who really pitied them, and whose heart
was truly sympathetic, looked at JULIA'S pale face with tears, and delivering
her a candle which she was carrying away, assured her she would sell it to the
best advantage, and return to her immediately.

JULIA returned to the chamber, with the light, and upon the inquiries of her
friend was obliged to confess what she had done; though Madam felt the full force
of the sacrifice JULIA had made, yet she could not wish her to recall it, and
listened with a palpitating heart for the return of their messenger.

The girl went directly to the room that was appropriated to the guests, and
having set down the chairs, advanced to a lady, who sat with a gentleman by the
fire, and who was examining with critical scrutiny the face of an old gentleman
and a lady, who had just entered; a young man was busied with several
attendants, in getting refreshments, and wiping the wet from the lady's habit.
But when the girl presented the picture and begged to know if none of their
honors would please to buy it; she held out her hand, and having examined it
for a moment, and turning a spring discovered two miniatures instead of one,
and with a kind of frantic astonishment demanded to see the person, who sent
it, as she was sure it was stolen; the girl declared the innocence of the young
lady, who had, desired her to sell it, and after some time offered to conduct
her to the chamber; and the gentlemen declared they would accompany them, with
a view to succor that distress, that the girl had in simple, but pathetic
language, delineated.

It would be impossible to describe the confusion of the whole party, upon
entering the chamber, the affrighted girl whose sprightly activity left the
others far behind her, entered just time to say, that a lady with a great many
others were coming up to secure JULIA as a thief, and was sure, the picture was
stolen.

JULIA was supported by a consciousness of her innocence; but Madam already
weak, almost fainted with apprehensions; and JULIA on her knees at the bed side
begged her to be composed, and held a smelling bottle to her nose.

In this affecting situation, pale as death, and her heart throbbing with a
variety of sensations; in a mean chamber almost without furniture, her eyes
fixed upon her almost dying friend, JULIA heeded not the entrance of the
strangers, but in a moment the silver toned voice of Roswell, caught her ear.
Good Heavens, (he cried) what do I see, Madam DE SHONG, JULIA VALLACE? What has
brought you here, why have you left.... but before he proceeded, the Countess
held JULIA fast locked in her arms, and called her by all the tenderest names,
that love and friendship could dictate. Half frantic with joy, her emotions
became too powerful, and pressing the Countess to her bosom, she fainted. Madam
was nearly in the same situation, and the humane maid declared they were both
dying for want of food, as they had eat nothing for near two days. Roswell,
almost distracted, flew down stairs and returned in a moment, with some cake
and cordial from the coach; JULIA was now recovering, and the persuasions of
the Countess prevailed on her to take a bit of the cake, and drink some of the
liquor. Madam was supplied by Roswell, who with all the tenderness of a son,
whole bosom glowed with a fond and respectful affection toward an indulgent
mother, persuaded her to take the refreshment he had brought.

In less than half an hour, they became composed enough to communicate the
cause of their removal, and the Countess declared it the work of Heaven, for if
the storm had not obliged them to seek a shelter at the Inn, they should not
have stopped until they arrived at the lately destroyed dwelling, and they
should not have found them until morning, when help in all probability would
have come too late.

JULIA now began to recollect the cause of their being together, and desired to
see her accuser, and that her miniature might be returned, the lady who had
stood quite back, but who had observed all that had happened, now came forward.
Tell me, (said she,) if JULIA does not remember the woman who protected her as
a mother; who saved her infant life, and who devoted herself to her and.....
but before she could finish the sentence, JULIA exclaimed, it is my mother!
good Heavens it is my mother! and she sunk upon her knees before her; remember
you, Oh yes! and rejoice to see you; rejoice that you are restored to me. The
lady embraced her with tears and affection. I am my dear and honored young
lady, (said she) not your mother; she has long since fallen a victim to cruelty
and vice; but I can restore you to a parent that deserves so great a blessing;
here, sir, (said she) turning to the Marquis, I restore to you a daughter, the
daughter of your much loved Marchioness, who with her dying breath, bade me
preserve her for you. Surely, (said the Marquis) you deceive me; I can never be
so blessed, I never had a daughter. I do not deceive you, (said the woman,) as
sure as you stand there, this young lady is your daughter. Look at me, sir,
view me well, has twenty years so altered me, that you have forgotten that
Isabella, who followed your beloved Marchioness from Italy. -- What, (cried the
Marquis,) are you indeed that faithful Isabella, whom my wife esteemed so much;
Oh! I no longer doubt, and with gratitude and joy, I embrace the blessing that
you preserved for me; but how preserved, I cannot yet divine; my lovely
daughter, come to the arms of a fond, and affectionate parent; whose greatest
blessings are comprised in you. JULIA embraced her father with a transport that
was new to her heart, but so pleasing, so exquisite, that she would not have
exchanged it, for all the joys of the sensualist, and all the riches of the
East. It was not that she knew herself the daughter of a Nobleman of the first
wealth and respectability in the Kingdom; but that she had found a parent,
whose virtue had rendered him beloved and esteemed by all. That she could
attend to him all hours; watch his declining years, and sooth the infirmities
of old age; it was this, that gave so sincere a joy to her heart; that her
transport defied the power of expression; that she could claim as a right the
protection of those friends who loved her as such, before they knew of her
relationship; her bosom had been so unused to sensations delightful as these,
that now rushed in a full tide of prosperity upon her, that it needed the
abatement of not seeing COLWORT amongst the friends that now surrounded her; to
prevent its effects being too strong, too mighty, to be supported; but wonder
and astonishment suspended for a while, the transports of all.

The Countess was the first to ask an explanation; she did not doubt the truth,
the pleasing truth, but she wished to know by what wonderful means this
daughter, had been preserved; she recollected the countenance of Isabella, and
after embracing JLUIA, as a lovely and beloved neice, she begged that her
curiosity might be satisfied. I will with pleasure obey you, Madam, after the
tumults of this dear child's heart have subsided; I think the attendant
declares that neither she nor this venerable woman, have taken any nourishment
for twenty-four hours; until the slight one that has been presented; and though
her agitated spirits are now insensible to every thing but joy, at finding
friends so beloved; yet nature must be exhausted. After supper, which is now
preparing, I will unfold all my story, by that time, we shall all be more
composed; more fitted to receive some alloy, than we are at present.

Every one approved of her motion, and they went immediately below; Madam DE
SHONG felt the renovation of her youth, and desired to be assisted down, if
what was to be told was not a secret. The Marquis declared that he so
respected, and revered her character, that he had not a wish to conceal any
thing from her; and Roswell, with all the nervous strength of youth, and the
tenderness of an amiable heart, without difficulty, assisted her below stairs.

When seated at the supper table, JULIA looked around her, with tearful eyes,
and an happy heart, her sensations were so exquisite; pressed by her father to
partake of this or that little delicacy; that she asked if it was indeed real,
that she was so blessed! so happy!

CHAPTER, XXV.
I Could a tale unfold, whose lightest word
Would harrow up thy soul.
SHAKESPEARE.
WHEN the cloth was removed, the husband of Isabella reminded her of her
promise, and she began as follows:

"You will, sir, recollect with what reluctance, my lady parted from you, when
you were ordered to the Court of Spain; you had been gone but a few days when
the Baron dared to insult her with a declaration of love; my lady's heart was
almost broken by his impiety; she immediately wrote to you, but the letter
never reached you, and she behaved with so much spirit, that the Baron
despairing of obtaining his wishes, was affronted, his love was turned into
hate, and he vowed revenge; my poor lady, was surrounded by his domestics, and
I saw was apprehensive of her life; she could confide in none, but Philada and
me, and never suffered us both to be out of her presence, at a time; one day
being much indisposed, -- Isabella (said she,) if I should die, without seeing
the Marquis, as I think I shall, and leave a child behind me, swear to me that
you will protect that child; that you will preserve her from the malice of the
Baron; that you will never deliver her into any hands but the Marquis, or the
Countess DE LAUNA; but run no risque of her falling into the power of the
Baron; it will stand between him, and vast possessions, and he will stop at
nothing, to put the little orphan out of the way; I took the oath she required,
and she put into my care two caskets of rich jewels, with the miniature of your
lordship and herself, which you had caused to be fixed together by a spring,
when you courted her. My poor lady was a true prophetess for that very night,
she was delivered of a daughter, and died in a few hours after. Philada who
loved her with a faithful affection, was so shocked at her illness, that she
was seized with fits; no one was near her, but myself, and I was persuaded that
her death was occasioned by a cordial with some drug, that a physician of the
Baron, had prepared; of this I was convinced, by a conversation that I heard
between them; and I then discovered that the infant's life would the next
morning be sacrificed, as well as the mother's, as the doctor promised to put
it to sleep before the Count and Countess DE LAUNA could be apprised of this
event. I looked at the little creature, then asleep in my lap, and while I wept
over it, I vowed to save it if possible; I had no time to lose, the old valet
was honest, in him I could confide, and assisted by him, I that night left the
Chatteau, and conveyed my infant charge to a Cottage, a few leagues distant; we
knew that we were unsafe; we could not reach the Countess DE LAUNA, without
certain ruin; we retired to a greater distance and in a large forest, in the
hospitable Cottage of a worthy pair, we became boarders. It was several months,
before I ventured to make any inquiries; I then found that the late Count DE
LAUNA was dead; that the Countess was distracted, and that the Marquis was
still in Spain; that the Baron had taken the title of Count DE LAUNA, and that
it was reported, and believed, my infant charge had died with her mother. This
resolved me to continue where I was, which I did until JULIA was sixteen years
old; I then thought it was time to find her friends, and I left my retreat; my
inquiries for you and the Countess betrayed me; and the person, in whom I had
in some measure confided, was one that was employed by the Count; I returned as
usual to the Cottage, flushed with the news; that I heard I was indeed so
imposed upon, that I had nearly ruined myself by telling JULIA, and the person
that deceived me, the secret of her birth, and retreat; I had always passed as
her mother, and called the faithful valet my father; but I was now so impatient
to tell the dear girl, who she really was, that nothing but a consideration,
that it might eventually injure her, prevented. I left her with the assurance,
that all should be unravelled the next day, and with a charge not to leave the
Cottage. I forgot to mention that upon the death of the old people who owned
the Cottage, we sold the jewels, and purchased it, this happened when JULIA was
but two years old. Upon my arrival at the house, I had appointed to meet my
informer, I was seized by several men and threatened with death, if I did not
discover where the child was, that I had stolen in her infancy; but I bid
defiance to their threats and was proof against their persuasions; I was
carried to the Count's Chatteau, and confined there, for two years; every
artifice was used to tempt me to discover where my treasure was; wealth,
honors, and power were promised, if I gave her up; but on the contrary,
perpetual imprisonment, with famine, and filth was the miseries that should
attend me through life, if I refused. But I scorned them all, and in the end
triumphed; one thing I succeeded in, which was having an advertisement
inserted, in several of the public papers, which I had written with a view to
quiet the fears of JULIA; a crown prevailed on one of my gaolers to send it to
the printers, and he was removed from his care of me, upon its being discovered.

The education I had given JULIA, had taught her, to conquer her curiosity, to
employ all her time, to be resigned and contented, in all situations; I had
taught her to reverence the Deity, to obey his commands; to do all the good she
possibly could to her fellow creatures. I knew these principles were so
engraven upon her heart, that misfortunes could not shake them, nor bad example
erase them. I knew her temper was sweet and mild; her disposition, soft, just,
and humane. I knew that her mind was filled with noble and refined sentiments;
that she had a purity of heart; a rectitude of thought seldom to be met with;
that she had real fortitude, and not one particle of pride or vanity;
reflecting upon her virtues, so like her mother's, gave me comfort. The old
valet was as good, as honesty itself, he was old, but healthy, and I doubted
not that she would be restored to her friends and me.

At the end of two years, two painful solitary years, I was removed from the
Chatteau to Paris; this gentleman was appointed to take care of me; he pitied
my misfortunes; the transition from pity to love, is small; we soon contracted
a mutual attachment, and I promised to become his wife, if he would effect my
escape; we succeeded, and retired for a few weeks from the kingdom; but before
we left France, the holy priest joined our hands; in a very short time my
husband received a letter, informing him of the death of the Count DE LAUNA,
and of the search that the Marquis had made for me, as my motives for
concealment were at an end, and I wished for nothing more, than to inform you,
my Lord, of the circumstances that I have now related; and if possible, present
your daughter to you; we set off for France immediately, and were on our way to
the Villa, when I heard in Paris you were gone, the storm obliged us to take
shelter here, and here my pursuit is ended, for I have here found the dear
object of my hopes; and found her just what I wished her, rising superior to
misfortunes, and escaped from the snares that vice and perfidy had laid for
her, and in resigning her to you, my Lord, as a rich blessing, I fulfill the
dying commands of my beloved and respected lady."

Here Isabella finished her narrative, which had she followed the dictates of
her own heart, she would have rendered it more lengthy and affecting; but in
pity to the Marquis, she surpressed many circumstances, that she knew would
only serve to distress him. But the intelligence, excepting what related to
JULIA, was not new to him; Philada had before given her opinion, and indeed the
Count's confession, had rendered the matter certain. The Marquis could never
think of his wife's untimely end, without grief of heart, nor of his son,
without agony; yet to find a daughter, the exact resemblance of her mother, who
inherited with it all her beauties, her virtues, and her accomplishments, was a
balm, to his wounded heart, and soothed all his sorrows; he embraced her, with
tears of tender love, and assured, her he found in her, a rich reward for all
his sufferings. And then turning to the faithful woman, who had thus preserved
her; it is not in my power, (said he,) to repay the debt I owe you, for your
unceasing love, to my amiable, lamented wife; and for preserving this
inestimable treasure, my child; but I shall consider you, and your husband, as
my best friends, and will as soon as I arrive at my sisters, make such a
settlement as shall secure ease and affluence to yourselves and heirs. And you
Madam, (said he) addressing himself to Madam De Shong, may from this moment bid
adieu to every difficulty, that wealth can remove. Stop, stop, my good brother,
(said the Countess) and do not in your joy discover so engrossing a
disposition, I demand this venerable, and worthy woman, as my share of
blessings, she shall have an equal right with myself to every thing I possess;
and I request that she will leave this village with us tomorrow, to reside with
me, an honored friend, and respected companion; I shall consider myself
accountable for the education, and fortune of her granddaughter. Ah my
friends, (cried Madam) how greatly is my old age blessed, beyond my desert, or
expectations. I shall grow too fond of life; but I desire to be grateful to you
all, and grateful to Heaven who has given you wealth and hearts to render it so
beneficial to your fellow creatures. -- But (said Roswell) I find I am to be
cheated entirely, and you Madam are looking out for others to make happy, and
quite neglect your poor countryman; but I acquiesce, and rejoice in this
general joy. A joy, (replied JULIA) we should never have known but for you, and
amidst all these friends, so honored, so beloved, and to whom I am so obliged,
not one has a stronger claim on my gratitude, and esteem; for I was an outcast,
and you took me in; distressed, and you relieved me; afflicted, and you
comforted me; but though I want words to speak my gratitude of all these favors,
yet my heart feels all, and is now bursting with a sense of them.

But we must leave a conversation, that we cannot give at full length, and let
the imagination conceive the feelings that cannot be described. It was late
when they parted for the night; and when JULIA laid her head upon the pillow, a
variety of contending sensations, concurred to prevent rest. Her joy that she
had found a father, noble, rich, and worthy, whose heart was overflowing with
tenderness toward her; that she had in the Countess met a friend that had long
loved her as a child, and was happy to acknowledge her as a kinswoman, who
approved of all her conduct, and cleared her of the shadow of blame. She had
found too the woman, who had been a mother to her in her infancy, who had saved
her life, and had implanted in her bosom the love of virtue, and hatred of
vice. The wealth of her father put it in her power, to repay every favor she
had received; to assist the poor; to comfort the afflicted; and to cheer the
aching heart; but amidst all these new found blessings, she was unhappy, and
she found that in the arms of affluence, in the lap of luxury, and in the bosom
of benevolence, she could be wretched; for COLWORT was not found; he was
probably suffering a rigorous confinement, that his affections for her had
occasioned; and perhaps death would be the sad, the dreadful consequence; these
reflections prevented her enjoyment, and with a sigh, she acknowledged she
could never know quiet.

CHAPTER XXVI.
Though plunged in ills and exercised by care
Yet never let the virtuous mind despair,
For blessings always wait on virtuous deeds,
And though a late, a sure reward succeeds.
ADDISON.
EARLY the next forenoon, they left the Village, after satisfying every demand,
that could be made upon Madam De Shong; and JULIA liberally rewarded the
humanity of the girl, who had presented the picture for sale, and whose
feelings were so powerfully operated upon, by the sufferings of herself and
friend; the old maid servant, who had been much attached to her mistress, was
again taken into her service, and followed in a carriage, with the waiting
woman of the Countess. They called and took up the little Maria; and though Mr.
ROSWELL longed to be on his way to England, yet he accompanied them to the
Villa, as he was anxious to see Madam De Shong settled in her new habitation,
and JULIA was so earnest in her persuasion to see him there; the rewards were
so ample to all that had been kind to the late suffering, now wealthy Madam De
Shong and JULIA, that the mean and little minded, regretted that they had been
wanting in generosity.

Before evening they arrived safely at the Villa, and were greeted by all its
inhabitants with acclamations of joy. Annet hung round JULIA, with a joy that
her little heart had never known before. The porter had before this been
ashamed of his brutality to JULIA; the reflection and taunts of his fellow
servants had punished him; but before her arrival the message from the
Countess, had convinced him how unacceptable his conduct would be to that lady;
he now asked her pardon, with a servility that always proves the little mind,
and JULIA who never felt anger for an hour together, assured him it was
forgotten.

One of her first cares was to enquire for the Chevalier St. Armond, but the
letter from Olivia had been burnt with her clothes, though she recollected the
contents; but her father removed her difficulties, and thought it not necessary
to apply to the Chevalier; he presented Donna Olivia, with an estate that
supplied her with every wish of her heart. By this time Convents in France were
nearly annihilated, and in a few months she disposed of that estate, and
returned to England, where the remainder of her days are passing in ease and
retirement.

The Marquis put Isabella and her husband in possession of a sum that rendered
their lives easy, affluent, and free from anxiety. Madam De Shong chose, with
her little girl, to be a dependant upon the bounty of the Countess, and that
lady and JULIA, continued to pay her every attention that her merits and her
misfortunes entitled her to. The Marquis, at the request of his daughter, sent
for Philada, that she who so well loved his wife, might spend her old age, in
the same house with her daughter, freed from the cares and business that she
had so faithfully performed, and Jaques became what he so much wished to be, a
footman to JULIA, who took care that his wages should be so large, as to enable
him to save a moiety every year; his services were easy, and he was treated
rather as an humble friend, than a domestic; while his mother was happy in
being always near the child of her beloved Marchioness.

Roswell, spent only a few days with them, impatient to embrace his mother and
his Lucretia; he left the friends he loved and esteemed, (and of whose
happiness he had been so instrumental,) with regret, and established a
correspondence with them, which they agreed, should last forever.

Blessed in the society of a parent and aunt, that esteemed her their choicest
blessing; the pride and ornament of them both, with full power to gratify the
benevolent feelings of her heart; secured of ease and affluence, in the full
enjoyment of friendship, and the possession of every virtue, JULIA wondered,
she was not happy, but whenever her thoughts turned toward COLWORT, which they
did continually, she was conscious of the most agonizing feelings. Every search
had been made for him, without effect; letters from England informed them, he
had not been heard of, and every enquiry proved equally fruitless. One whole
year, had passed off in this state of uncertainty, and in that time, JULIA's
hand was sought by some of the first men in the kingdom. Her beauty, goodness,
and talents were of a nature so alluring, so charming, that it was impossible
not to love and admire her; but considered as the only child, of the Marquis,
heiress of the vast possessions of him, and the Countess; she was an object of
such importance, as to draw the wealthy and the noble from the remotest parts
of France; but she did not hesitate to confess herself engaged, and in her
refusal of their love, possessed herself of their esteem.

It would have been pleasing to the Marquis and her aunt, if she could have
made an election from her numerous admirers; they did not press her to do a
thing that could for a moment add to the pangs she evidently suffered, though
she strove to conceal them.

Just a year had expired, when the Countess received a letter from the daughter
of Madam Gyron, informing her that lady was rapidly declining, and the
physicians had ceased to flatter her with the hopes of recovery, and one of her
last wishes was, to see Madam DE LAUNA, before her death, whom she now besought
to visit her at Paris. Though the Countess had no wish to leave her charming
retreat, she could not refuse a request, that was evidently the fruits of
affection. The Marquis chose not to leave the Villa at so warm a season of the
year, yet he insisted, that his daughter, should accompany his sister, and
leave him, in the care of Madam de Shong, and Maria; though JULIA felt
unwilling to quit a parent, she so revered, yet she obeyed his wishes, and set
out with the Countess.

They arrived at Paris, but three days before the death of Madam Gyron, who was
consoled to have an opportunity, to see, and take leave of her friends, and
directly after her interment, they left Paris and set out for the Villa.

At the close of the second day, they put up at an inn upon the road; the
evening was uncommonly charming; a bright and lovely moon, had arisen, just as
the sun had withdrawn its rays; the day had been remarkably warm, but a soft
and delicious coolness entered at two large windows, and refreshed the air. In
a frame of mind rather formed for pensive sadness, than conversation, the
Countess had ordered the candles to be taken away, that they might enjoy the
moon, and in a few moments they were so occupied by their own reflections, as
not to heed the entrance of some persons, who came in to an adjoining apartment
which was only separated from that in which they sat, by a callico curtain,
that hung suspended from the ceiling. After a short time however, their
attention was forcibly drawn by the following conversation.

My friend, (said one of the strangers,) is now enjoying a sweet, and profound
sleep; the first he has been blessed with for some days; while that is the case,
do satisfy my curiosity and tell me, what has brought you to France in these
times of trouble, and confusion; to satisfy a dying friend, (replied the
other,) I have left London, and to satisfy you, I will give you an account of
the cause of my journey. It is now near thirty years since the Earl of Ormond,
sent his eldest son, to spend some time in France; an ancient friendship had
subsisted between the family of Ormond, and Maravalda; the young gentleman was
recommended to the Marquis, and treated with the utmost hospitality at his
Chatteau, where the family then resided, and which he was desired to consider
as his home, while he continued on the Continent; the Marquis had an only
daughter, a very lovely girl, of about fifteen; a mutual attachment, was the
consequence of a constant intercourse, and the young people got married,
without consulting friends, on either side; shortly after these private
nuptials, the young Lord was recalled, and when he informed his father of the
connection, he had formed, he found him absolutely averse to his proceedings,
upon the account of the young lady's being educated in the Roman Catholic
Religion, and as he found his endeavors, to alter his son's mind but vain, he
imposed upon him with an account of her death. Lord William, the second son,
went to France himself, and in concent with the young lady's mother, who was
equally averse to the match, as she had been by her parents engaged to the
Count DE LAUNA, she was likewise deceived, and led to believe that Lord Henry
had died, soon after his arrival in England; but the lady was pregnant, and the
fruits of this imprudent attachment, was put into Lord William's hands, that he
might be educated in England. In the course of the voyage, the idea was
suggested to him, to bring up the little boy, a stranger to his birth, and
conceal, if possible, the whole affair; he was well acquainted with his
brother's strong attachment, and he thought it probable, that he would never
marry, and by concealing the child, he secured to himself, without dispute, his
brother's fortune, as well as title. The boy, was delivered to a wealthy
merchant, who was entrusted with the secret, and who brought him up as the son
of a deceased brother; thus he has grown up in ignorance of himself; but
deceits are seldom prospered; Lord William, by the death of his father and
brother, without heirs, came into quiet, and undisturbed possession of the
fortune, and honors of his family; though he has been twice married; he has never
had a child. He is now in a very alarming state of health, his conscience, has
become a troublesome monitor, and I am sent over to visit the Countess DE
LAUNA, for she is the mother of the young man, and to ask her pardon for the
deception that has been practiced upon her.

It was with the utmost difficulty, that the Countess restrained herself, but
her agitation was so great as to betray her, for her impatience was
incontroulable; with hands clasped together, she arose, and exclaimed, where is
my son, tell me if I have a child; Oh tell me. She could walk but a few steps,
and sunk into a chair, while her quick, and convulsive sobs, declared the
agitated state of her mind; JULIA with trembling hands was rubbing her temples,
and in a faint voice begging her to be calm. The servant entered with lights,
and the gentleman who had heard the exclamation, came into the room; it was
some time before she appeared to take any notice of those around her, and JULIA
dreading the entire loss of her reason; informed the persons, who she was, and
begged them to give her an account, as favorable as possible, when she
recovered her recollection. Indeed, she had struggled so long with contending
passions, it was no wonder that a variety of painful emotions bursting at once
upon her, reduced her to an alarming situation; by degrees she came entirely to
herself, and for some time seemed to be endeavoring to recollect herself. How
are you my dear Madam, (said JULIA?) Why, well my child. Has any thing been the
matter, (cried the Countess in a weak voice?) Oh, now I remember; where are
those persons, JULIA, that were in the next room, for surely, I have not
dreamed? No, (my dear Madam,) you have not, and when you are composed, those
gentlemen will inform you of every thing you can wish to know. I am calm, I am
composed my dear; Oh tell me, if indeed I am so blessed as to have a son. After
some hesitation, the gentleman informed her, his errand was entirely to her,
and begged to know if she could forgive the Earl. If my son is living, (said
she) from my soul, I can forgive that cruel family all the evils I have
received at their hands. He was living a few months since, said the gentleman,
his nominal uncle, received a letter from him; then he is not dead she
interrupted? I hope not, Madam, (he replied,) he left England some time ago, to
visit this country; I have promised his uncle, if possible to find him, and
present him to you, one of the most amiable young men, and one of the most
accomplished in the world. A thousand blessings on you, for this kind,
benevolent intention, (cried the Countess;) but tell me, some clue by which I
may find him, what name does he bear? by what title shall I address him, except
by that of my son? His uncle, Madam, (said the stranger,) called him Francis
Colwort. Gracious Heaven, exclaimed the Countess, it was my son! Oh, my dear
Madam, reiterated JULIA, Mr. COLWORT was your son. COLWORT (interrupted the
other gentleman,) COLWORT, did you say, Frank. I did; Oh, I have known him,
(cried the distracted mother;) known him to be the best, and worthiest of men;
Heaven sent him to save his mother's life, and even then my heart acknowledged
him, as mine, but gracious Heaven, I have lost him forever. Do not thus
mistrust the goodness of Providence, (said the stranger,) how long since you
have seen him? It is now two years since he left the Villa; a year ago he was
living, but I have too much reason to form the most dreadful fears. Take
courage, Madam, it is not one fortnight since he was living; and the Countess
DE LAUNA, and a Mademoiselle Vallace where the constant themes of his hopes and
fears. Then he is still alive, (cried JULIA, smiling through her tears,) and we
shall yet be happy. Put an end to my suspense, (said the Countess) for I can
bear it no longer; tell me where he is. The gentleman then begged her to be
calm, and with great caution informed her that about two months since, he had
found COLWORT, who was his most dear and intimate friend, a close prisoner in
the carmagnole, that he had found his way to him, and by the power of gold, and
a little flattery to the keeper; he had effected his escape; that they were on
their way to the Villa when he was taken sick, and had not yet recovered. Where
is he, (interrupted the Countess,) tell me where he is, that I may fly to
attend him, for who is so fit as a mother, to be about the sick bed of her son?
Not to night, Madam, he is too weak, such a meeting would overcome him, and
undo all that my care has effected; he is in this very house, in the care of
people whose duty, and business it is to attend upon him; but great caution
must be used to introduce you to his chamber. When the Countess heard that her
son was in the same house with her, she would have gone directly to him, but
for the prudence of his friend; and after a few moments reflection, she
consented to be guided by him.

But nothing could prevent her from spending the night in an apartment next to
his chamber, with JULIA; when the door was opened she could hear him turn upon
his bed, distinguish his breath, and his faint voice when he asked for the
medicine. It was near day when he seemed to be quite awake from a refreshing
slumber; his friend who had set by him, then informed him that an Equipage with
many attendants had arrived there the night before, and the servants were
informed, it belonged to the Countess DE LAUNA; he paused, and COLWORT, with
some impatience inquired if he saw the persons who came in the carriage. His
friend told him, he had seen two ladies, and had reason to think one was the
Countess, but the other appeared young and handsome. The agitation of COLWORT,
rendered him so inquisitive, that he at length owned JULIA was with the
Countess, in the house, and that he would at their rising, request them to pay
a visit to the sick chamber; it was then that the returning pride of COLWORT,
gave his friend new hopes, he was anxious to appear well, and even handsome,
before JULIA; perhaps his illness had weakened his mind, as well as his person,
for could a man be vain; could he wish to be handsome?

When the sun arose, the gentleman left the room, and COLWORT kept his eyes
fixed on the door, and waited his return, with great impatience; in less than
ten minutes he beheld him enter with those persons so beloved, so long wished
for; he stretched out his hand to them, and the Countess and JULIA stationed
themselves at the sides of his bed, and endeavored to articulate some kind
enquiry, or some affectionate question; but their lips refused to do justice to
the feelings of their hearts, and their tears and looks could only express
their emotion. In a few moments the physician arrived, and in a modest, but
decisive manner, pronounced the patient out of danger, but declared him still
so weak as to require great care, and attention; the ladies laid an embargo
upon their lips, lest he should be injured, but sat by him the whole day, and
though the Countess longed to call him son, longed to press him to her maternal
bosom, her discretion overcame her impatience, and she waited until confirmed
health should authorize such a discovery.

The next day he was amazingly better, for to the kind attentions of
friendship, was added the soothing cares of love, and his medicines operated
more kindly when presented by JULIA, or her aunt, then when given by his
friend; he sat up some time, and enjoyed their society. In three days the
gentleman from England made his appearance, COLWORT was rejoiced, but surprised
to see him; asked a thousand questions respecting his friends at home, and as
he was particularly attached to him, related every occurrence, that had
happened to him. In answer to this information, the gentleman told him, he had
a very wonderful story to relate respecting himself, which required steady
attention, and more fortitude, than he appeared at present to possess. Thus
prefaced, he told him every circumstance, concealing only the name of the
Countess, and at the end, told him he had been so fortunate, as to discover his
mother, who was rich, and amiable, and would with joy receive him as her son,
on one condition, which, was that he consented to marry her niece, that she
tenderly loved, and who would be heiress to a noble fortune. If that is the
condition, (said COLWORT, with energy,) she will never acknowledge me; my faith
is pledged; and if this change, in my situation, has effected a change in JULIA
VALLACE, I will never marry, I would die to serve or please a parent; the name
of mother vibrates upon my ear, and is dear to my heart, but if a mother, I
have never known, can wish the only pledge of an unfortunate attachment, to
violate his most sacred engagement, I fear I could never love her as I ought.
But (said the gentleman,) if Mademoiselle should happen to be the niece, and
the Countess the mother. Ah, (said COLWORT,) am I so blessed, can I have such a
mother? Have I such a son, said the Countess? (Embracing him with tenderness.)
Yes my son, you are my child, and without one condition, I receive you to my
heart, and thank Heaven for so great a blessing; but to the reader's
imagination, the remainder of the scene must be referred.

In a few days, Mr. COLWORT, now Francis Ormond, was able to leave the inn; his
two friends at the invitation of his mother, accompanied him to the Villa,
where they found the Marquis impatient to receive his sister's son. Smiles of
real cheerfulness, and heartfelt satisfaction, once more revisited the
countenance, and animated the features of JULIA; the whole family participated
in her joy, and her nuptials were solemnized directly after her return. By this
time the troubles in France had gained such a crisis, that it was necessary for
every friend to order, for every lover of peace and religion, to leave that
ill-fated nation. The principles of the Illuminata triumphed; anarchy,
confusion, cruelty, and bloodshed succeeded; and the Marquis was, though old
and infirm, pitched upon as a victim; but being nearly related to some persons,
then in power, who had not yet lost every sense of humanity, he was so
fortunate as to leave the kingdom, and with the Countess DE LAUNA, having
disposed of their estates much under their real value, transmitted the money to
England, whither they retired with all their servants, Madam DE SHONG,
Isabella, and her husband.

The care and attention of their son, and daughter, softened the fatigues of
the voyage. -- And the philanthropy which reigned in their bosoms, rendered
them literally citizens of the world; they regarded France despoiled of all her
virtues, no longer as their country, and carrying with them, all they held
dear, London soon became agreeable.

They were received by the Earl of Ormond, with a mingled pleasure and remorse;
he now approached the confines of the grave, and gave up those possessions
without regret, which he had been guilty of deceit to obtain. The Countess was
too happy in her son's merits and accomplishments, to harbor any resentment
against his uncle, and a perfect reconciliation preceded his death, which event
took place in less than one month after their arrival; he left the whole of his
estate, and ample possessions to his nephew; his title descended to a distant
branch of the family, as the marriage of the Countess, and the father of her
son, was certainly illegal; and Ormond and JULIA preferred the claim of virtue
and benevolence, to that of rank, and the title of plain Mr. and Mrs. Ormond
was more pleasing, and vibrated with more delight upon their hearts, than Earl
and Countess, with half a dozen right honorables at the end of them. Old Mr.
COLWORT, who had acted rather as a parent, than an uncle, to his nominal
nephew, was one of the first who greeted them with a welcome in England; the
affection which he felt for him, was returned, and gratitude for reciprocal
favors had bound the ties of friendship so closely, that nothing but the last
sigh can extinguish it. His daughter whom Ormond had brought from America,
accompanied her father; anxious to see one, whom she considered as her best
friend and deliverer; and to pay her respects to that JULIA whom she had
admired and loved from his description; nor was her pre-sentiment in her favor
lessened by acquaintance; for JULIA ever fond of the unfortunate, carressed,
and cherished her with affection, that increased every hour,

As soon as ROSWELL heard of the arrival of his friends, he left his parish and
family, to bid them welcome, and certainly no one out of their own circle was
more deservedly dear. His Lucretia had crowned his happiness; his mother was
well, and both longed to see and embrace those whose virtues they estimated so
highly. He informed them, that a large estate which lay within two miles of his
neat and convenient parsonage, was now to be sold, and as the Ormond seat was
in its vicinity, he urged them so strongly to purchase it, that the prospect of
being his neighbor prevailed; and the Marquis immediately concluded the
purchase; they then retired, and the two houses became alternately the
residence of the family; the husband of Isabella, as he was the friend of the
family, now became their joint stewart; Madam DE SHONG was insured all the
conveniences of life, and all its elegancies; and the constant intercourse
that was kept up between ROSWELL, and his amiable wife, as it increased all
their pleasures, sweetened the remaining days of that excellent woman.

Not long after their settlement JULIA was surprised to receive a visit from
CARLOS; she found that young man, as good as ever, delighted with her
happiness, and cured of a passion, that he had (...) found hopeless. The
daughter of Mr. COLWORT was at that time on a visit at the grove; she had
recovered her beauty and her spirits, and the generous Spaniard felt the force
of her charms, he frankly confessed that he had once loved JULIA, and now
offered a heart that had been sensible of the power of a tender attachment; as
this had been the case with the lady, she could make no reasonable objection;
and urged by her father, by ORMOND and JULIA, persuaded by the Countess, and
her brother, she consented that Mr. ROSWEL should perform the ceremony of
marriage at the grove; a ceremony that rendered the succeeding days of both, as
happy as is consistent with a state subjected to the changes of mortality.

Just at the time of this wedding, Mr. Ormond was summoned up to London, to
visit a convict that had received sentence of death for a murder; when he was
introduced to the unhappy man, he found a person he had never seen before; but
the mystery was soon unravelled; the wretch confessed he was the physician who
had presented a poisoned cup to the Marchioness, and who by mistake had been
the cause of the Count's death. He declared himself innocent of the crime for
which he was about to suffer, but thought the vengeance of heaven had overtaken
him, for his former iniquities. The confession he made respecting the
Illuminata and their horrid designs upon the Marquis; set their characters and
principles, in a light too shocking to be delineated. ORMOND justly struck with
their enormities, thanked heaven, that he had escaped with those he loved, from
a country, that had become the nursery of this horde of vipers. He assured the
unhappy man of his, and the family's forgiveness, and left him to suffer the
sentence of the law. Once more fixed at Ormond-grove, we will leave him, and
his JULIA, delighting to do good, and to spread around them the blessings they
enjoy; to render happy the unfortunate; to soften the sorrows of the afflicted;
to clothe the naked; to feed the hungry, and to diffuse cheerfulness and
plenty, is the business of their lives.

The Marquis and his sister are happy in the society of the most affectionate,
and most dutiful of children, and already have the pleasure to see the blooming
and amiab^le JUIA the mother of two ^ine children, and while ORMOND thinks he
sees the beauty of his wife in her lovely little girl, she fondly perceives the
manly graces of her husband, in her sprightly boy.

FINIS
Copy-Right secured agreeably to Act of CONGRESS.

ERRATUM.
In the running title or top line to most of the pages, for Julia, OR the
Illuminated Baron, read Julia AND the Illuminated Baron.


