A SERMON, OCCASIONED BY THE DEATH OF Genesis George Washington, COMMANDER IN
CHIEF OF THE ARMIES OF THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA. Who departed this life, on
Saturday the 14th December, 1799, after an illness of about 24 hours. PREACHED
DECEMBER 29, 1799. BY THE REV. HEZEKIAH N. WOODRUFF. A M. Pastor of the first
Church of Christ in Stonington.

-- TO WHICH IS ADDED, -- AN APPENDIX, Giving a particular account of the
behavior of Genesis WASHINGTON, during his distressing illness, also, of the
nature of the complaint of which he died. BY Doctors JAMES CRAIK and ELISHA C.
DICK, (...) Physicians.

STONINGTON PORT. PRINTED BY SAMUEL TRUMBULL, For Messrs. EDWARD and NATHAN
SMITH. January, 1800.

STONINGTON, JAN. 4, 1800. DEAR SIR,
"A NUMBER of Gentlemen of this town, have expressed a wish that the Discourse
delivered by you the last Lord's day, might be printed. These, as they make
known their desires, are also to request you to favor them with a copy that it
may be printed.

With every sentiment of esteem, I am, Sir, Your sincere friend and humble
servant, S. TRUMBULL.

Rev. HEZEKIAH N. WOODRUFF.
GENTLEMEN,
THE following discourse was prepared on short notice, and delivered from the
heads only, but now collected as nearly as my memory will serve, which I hope
will be a sufficient apology for any small difference which may appear in the
copy. To comply with your request, and to transmit to posterity a testimony of
my esteem for the character of a great and good man, are motives, in submitting
it to the public, which influence

Your Friend, and (...) Servant, THE AUTHOR.

A SERMON, etc.
DEUTERONOMY, CHAP. xxxiv. and part of the ^th, 8th, and 10th VERSES. SO Moses
the servant of the Lord died there in the land of Moab -- And the children of
Israel wept for Moses in the plains of Moab thirty days -- And there arose not
a prophet since in Israel like unto Moses.


IT is well known to those of my hearers, who have accustomed themselves to
attend the public administration^ of the Sanctuary, that it has not been my
custom; nor do I approve of the practice of introducing political subjects in
the house of God, on the Lord's Day: when subjects of supreme and divine
importance may be furnished, for greater edification to the immortal mind. Nor
do I design to introduce them upon this occasion, farther than their connection,
with the character of a great and good man, may require.

SHOULD I be entirely silent at this time, I might, and perhaps justly, be
considered insensible of the obligations, which we owe one to another, wanting
in respect to a great and illustrious character, and ungrateful to the Governor
of the Universe, who alone raises up saviors and deliverers for his people.

THEN let me drop a tear, grateful to the memory of the man, who was favored of
his God, and honorable in the sight of all the people; tho it be lost among the
tears of thousands, whose hearts may be touched, with more pungent sorrow.

THE world, my Brethren, has in every age, produced characters celebrated by
fame: Conquerors, Tyrants, Philosophers or Lawgivers. But how rarely have the
characters of the humane conqueror, a humble lawgiver, a submissive citizen,
and a meek and humble christian been united in one man. When Tyrants fall, they
are to be pityed, when wise Legislators, they are to be regretted: But when men
of this excellent combination of character, we, like the children of Israel,
should weep, or like the devout men who carried Stephen to his burial, make
great lamentation over him.

THE character now described, and the duty to be practiced, at the departure of
such a man, if not fully expressed in the passage under consideration, may be
farther illustrated under the following particulars.

I. THE character of Moses as hereafter expressed, "And there arose not a
prophet since in Israel like unto Moses."

II. THAT human greatness and excellency afford no exemption from Death.

III. THE duty of a people when characters eminently useful are removed.

IN pursuance of this plan we are in the

1st place, To consider the Character of Moses. Here we may observe, many
important circumstances coincided to render it truly illustrious. Possessed
naturally of a sound penetrating mind, the foundation, and just prelude of his
future greatness. Brought up in an empire, where the arts and sciences, then
known, flourished to a great degree of perfection; and indulged with all the
privileges and advantages, which, such a high state of national improvement,
could afford. And, whatever might be the system or principles, by which, the
nation was governed, Moses must have been acquainted with them all. To which
may be added, an opportunity of acquiring all the embellishments of the
Egyptian Court.

THIS high state of refinement, in addition to his meek and placid temper, was,
but truly, calculated to teach his heart to feel another's woe. To animate his
soul with strong desires to be the deliverer of his brethren, from the Egyptian
yoke.

NOW suffer me, for a moment, to lead your minds to consider the state of God's
covenant people. -- From the days of Joseph, God's people Israel, gradually,
sunk into a state of slavery. -- Having preserved themselves a distinct people,
living within the jurisdiction of the Egyptian Court, and, under the blessing
of divine providence, becoming very numerous; the jealousy of an imperious
haughty nation was easily excited. -- Pride, the foster parent of luxury and
extravagance, desires unlawful means for its gratifications, and often leads to
cruelty and oppression. The most suitable means, now to be devised, for its
gratification, and the subjection of this infant nation, were, to lay them
under contribution. And to augment that tribute from time to time, till they
should become complete slaves and vassals. -- But, however this might enrich
her coffers, as it proved insufficient to check the progress of their growing
numbers, recourse must be had to murder and destruction. -- Thus reduced to the
greatest distress and poverty, the situation of the house of Israel was truly
helpless, defenseless and forlorn.

AT this critical moment, God raised up a deliverer for his people.

HERE let us admire the power and wisdom of that God, under the superintendency
of whose providence all things subsist; who alike feeds the oppressor and the
oppressed: Yet assuredly, sees the affliction of his people, hears the cries of
the oppressed, and comes down to deliver them from their enemies with a mighty
hand and with a stretched out arm. -- Nor are the instruments which he raises
up and uses for affecting the great purpose of his providental Government, less
worthy, honorable or deserving, for having received their power and commission
from God.

THOUGH the miraculous power of God wonderfully interposed, yet the firmness and
intrepidity of Moses was highly expressed in his conduct at the Egyptian Court.
The imperiousness and power of the Egyptians, the poverty, fears and prejudices
of the Israelites, were circumstances, contributing equally to evince his
valor and wisdom. -- I need not particularize the instances of his wisdom and
valor, at the Red sea, at the conquest of Amelek, at Sinai, at Taberah, at Zin
and Median.

NOR was his character less conspicuous as a legislator, than a leader of the
host. No sooner had he brought the people through the red sea, and placed them
in some degree of safety, than he became intent upon the administration of
justice. By the advice of Jethro his father in-law, he established a civil
government, that justice might be more perfectly administered, long and
deservedly held in high esteem. The method apparently met the divine
approbation. Very soon, the Governor of the Universe called Moses to the top of
Sinai, and committed to him that perfect code of moral precepts, which he
afterward delivered to the children of Israel. These, the great pole Star of
Legislation, are of equal importance to direct the due execution of just and
equitable laws, by proper constituted authorities. Moses was the head of
Legislative and Executive authorities, and from this period was indulged with
the most sensible and most frequent communications from the Divine presence.
Whom, according to the sacred historian, the LORD knew face to face.

WHILE Legislative and Military talents made him famous, meekness and the
Christian graces rendered him amiable. However, in these and many others, he
might be a type of the great CAPTAIN of our salvation, yet his character as a
man was truly deserving.

THOUGH God raised up Joshuas to lead his hosts, and Samuels to judge his
people, yet in no character have these talents been so agreeably united, for
there arose not a prophet since in Israel like unto Moses.

AND notwithstanding such a combination of the most excellent talents, as
rarely center in one man, yet they afford him no shield from calumny, nor
shelter from the reproaches of an ungrateful rebellious people. That people
often sinned against God, in murmuring against Moses, at the red sea, in the
wilderness, at Sinai and the water of Meribah.

NOR are such talents a sufficient security against sin. Even Moses, after he
had carried the children of Israel through the wilderness, with much patience
and tribulation, sinned against God at the waters of Meribah kadesh. But the
Lord forgave him his sin. Notwithstanding he said, thou shall see with thine
eye, but shall not pass over this Jordan, into the good land, whether the
children of Isarel go to possess it. Therefore get thee up into this mountain
Abarim, into mount Nebo; and die in the mount whether thou go up, and be
gathered to thy people. Which leads us to consider in the

2nd. place, THAT human greatness and excellency afford no exemption from death.

IF a single testimony could establish a truth, this had been sufficient. But
we are not reduced to the necessity of relying on a single testimony. Our
Fathers where are they, and the Prophets do they live forever? Death has
passed upon all men, -- for death has reigned from Adam until Moses -- and
from Moses until now. -- Death stalks, alike unconcerned, over the Prince upon
the throne, and the peasant in the cottage. Oh! thou relentless tyrant, will thou never be satisfied? Can no ties of nature or affection move you? Shall not
the love, nay, I had almost said the adoration of millions make thee relent? --
Will thou pay no respect to the highest talents -- to the greatest achievments
-- to the most essential services rendered to the world, nor to those christian
graces which advance men near to the perfection of Angels? No! -- no! -- But
rather like the envious fair, who eagerly descries, and crops the finest
flower! --

Will there never be an end? -- O yes! my heart exults! That holy one, who led
captivity captive, and received gifts for men, shall disarm thee of all thy
terrors, and dispoil thee of all thy powers, for the last enemy which shall be
conquered is Death. But in the mean time there is a suitable and proper temper
to be exercised by the people of God. Which will lead me in the

3d place, To consider the duty of a people when characters eminently useful
are removed. --

THIS is expressed in the second paragraph in the text. "And the children of
Israel wept for Moses in the plain of Moab, thirty days."

MANY and various methods have been adopted to express sorrow. By external
deportment, sadness of the countenance, forms of dress, mournful sounds, and
bitter lamentations. But none appear to be so natural, rational or sincere as
that of weaping. It is not certain, that every heart which is sincerely
affected can express its sorrow by a flowing tear. The heart may be so swelled
with sorrow, as entirely to forbid the tear to flow. When, to give aloof to
tears, would afford great relief to a burdened soul. But men can rarely weep,
except the heart is sensibly impressed. Hence it is considered as carrying with
it the highest evidence of sincere sorrow. That the grief of the children of
Israel, at the removal of so great and amiable a character as Moses, was
sincere, is hardly to be doubted. And we have still farther evidence of its
sincerity, by its universality. It was not a few of the Elders of Israel, of
the family connexions, or more intimate acquaintance and relations, who were
affected by this dispensation, but the whole house and family of Israel. This
was farther expressed by the long period which they devoted to sorrow and woe.
However many instances may be recorded in the Jewish History of long periods of
sorrow and weeping, yet few, if any, have exceeded the present account; and few
which have exhibited greater evidence of its propriety and sincerity.

DEATH, as the consequence of sin, has given just occasion of great sorrow.
That sorrow, upon such occasions, is a dictate of nature, is founded on
experience. That it is a duty is made plain, by a train of divine approbation
and precepts. And that it is consistent with the most lively oracles of our
holy religion, appears, from the illustrious comment which it received, from
Jesus Christ, at the Grave of Lazarus. Still my Brethren, this sorrow should
bear some proportion to the magnitude of its existing cause. When Individuals
die, friends, relatives and neighbors may weep. But when great and illustrious
Characters fall, the fathers of the people, it becomes a whole nation to put on
garbs of the deepest humiliation.

I TRUST by this time, my hearers have formed some just idea of the
improvement, I design to make of the present subject --

INDEED my Brethren, in many respects, our situation is not dissimilar from the
children of Israel. They bewailed a Moses, we a WASHINGTON. A character, than
whose, none can be more deservedly esteemed, nor any ought, more sincerely to
be loved. Since the days of Moses, there has not a character arisen, to grace
the page of History, more unsullied, or, who has a juster claim to honor and
renown. A second Moses raised up of God, to be a deliverer of this American
Israel.

MANY of you, on painful recollection, can remember, when your liberties were
in danger. When you were oppressed by a great and powerful nation. A nation
skilled in arts and wars: Who sat Mistress of the seas, and governed nations
with a nod. A nation, whom successes had rendered lofty and imperious, and whom
pride and haughtiness had made as listless to your entreaties, as the Egyptians
to the miracles of Moses.

NOR can you fail to recollect the state of this infant nation. How weak, how
defenseless? How unskilled in warlike atchievments? How helpless in the sight
of the nations? Without were fightings, within were fears. This was our
situation, when the Lord raised up a Captain for the host, added strength to
his Courage, wisdom to his strength, and prowress to his wisdom. Made him a
deliverer of his people. Repeated successes, and innumerable praises which
would have elated the heart of any other man, seemed only calculated to teach
him humility, and dependence on God. Such was the humanity and benevolence of
this conqueror, as to put to silence the tongue of malice and envy.

NO sooner, under the providence of God, was the peace and Independence of this
nation secured, than the eyes of all the people were upon him. By their united
voice, he entered the Cabinet, with as much dignity, as he retired from the
field. There for years he held the reins of rising empire. Although, there he
displayed talents which have astonished the world, yet it could not be
expected, but some, who were prejudiced in favor of the leeks and Onions of
Egypt, or strongly attached to the idolatries of Canaan, would instigate a
rebellion against him.

HOWEVER God may raise up in his successors, Joshuas to lead the host and
Judges to rule the people; Yet they never can, under existing circumstances,
nor ought they ever to expect, to arrive, at that degree of unsullied universal
fame with their predecessor.

EVEN here, I know not whether most to admire, that train of shining talents
expressed in the cabinet and field, or the dignity with which he retired from
rising empire to private life. In this, he leaves on long record, an example
without precedent for the great. The eastern world may boast of an Alexander,
Ceazar, Pompey, Solon or Lycurgus, but where is the man, in the meredian of
life, on the summit of human greatness, at the head of empire; who freely did
resign the reins of state, and retire with pleasure to the humble station of a
private citizen. In submitting himself to those laws, whose signature had
rendered valid, he exhibited the most unquestionable evidence of his own
integrity. He manifested himself a faithful imitator of his Lord and Master; in
being willing to be governed by those laws which he had framed for his people.

FAIR Virtue shone -- in this blessed retreat -- to crown his name -- But here
alas! the joyful theme must end.

DISEASE was short, and his flight was rapid, lest the united prayer of
Millions had prevailed, e're his fleeting spirit had reached the world of
bliss. Methinks he sound all heaven in joy, but left the world in tears.

NOW boast thou Tyrant of thy superior conquest, for thou have no more
WASHINGTONS to conquer. Or rather say, his trust in God, disarmed thee of thy
terrors, and resignation to the King of Saints, deprived thee of a conquest.

IT IS all the same to us, we mourn him dead. How happy when our duty and
inclination coincide. Your solemn garbs bespeak a heart of sorrow. The House of
God was dressed in deep mourning. Most of the inhabitants as they approached,
joined and walked in solemn procession to the sanctuary, and generally wore
some external badge of mourning.
While your external show is lost amidst the pomp of cities, and parade of
thousands, let not the sincerity of your sorrows be called in question. Nor let
the tear of sorrow be disguised, before the eye of him who tries the heart. Nor
should your sighs be unattended by your prayers. These pious breathings, under
God, a like affect the ruler and the subject. These are the best Armada for a
defenseless Country. These inspire our hosts with fortitude and courage, for
the most daring enterprises: and fill our enemies with terror and dismay. These
change the counsel of Ahithophel into foolishness. These, under the plentiful
effusions of the spirit of God, as have been poured out upon many of his
churches, if continued, will render Zion a praise in the whole earth. Will make
our Senators wisdom and our exactors righteousness. Will still tumults, settle
divisions, heal animosities, and make us an humble obedient and happy people.

MAY he, who is the chosen head of this people, while he stands gazing at the
ascent of his predecessor, catch the falling mantle, and be disposed to rule
this people in obedience to him, by whom Kings reign and princes decree justice.

MAY he also, who is raised up to be the Joshua of our hosts, who has
accompanied our Moses through the trials of the wilderness, have the presence of
that God, before whom the walls of Jericho were laid prostrate, and the waters
of Jordan were drawn backward. And may that God, who has hitherto compassed us
with favor as with a shield, again fill our hearts with joy and gladness,
through him that has loved us and given himself to die for us.

AMEN.
AN APPENDIX, Giving a particular account of the behavior of Genesis WASHINGTON,
during his distressing illness, etc. by two of his Physicians.
ALEXANDRIA, (VIRGINIA,) DEC. 30.
SOME time in the night of Friday the 13th inst. having been exposed to a rain
on the preceding day, General WASHINGTON was attacked with an inflammatory
affection of the upper part of the windpipe, called in the technical language
Cynache Trachealis. The disease commenced with a violent ague, accompanied with
some pain in the upper and fore part of the throat, a sense of stricture in the
same part, a cough, and a difficult, rather than a painful deglutition, which
were soon succeeded by a fever, and a quick and laborious respiration. The
necessity of bloodletting suggesting itself to the General, he procured a
bleeder in the neighborhood, who took from his arm in the night 12 or 14
ounces of blood. He could not by any means be prevailed on by the family to
send for the attending physician till the following morning, who arrived at
Mount-Vernon at about 11 o'clock on Saturday. Discovering the case to be highly
alarming, and foreseeing the fatal tendency of the disease, two consulting
physicions were immediately sent for, who arrived, one at half after three, and
the other at four o'clock in the afternoon: in the mean time were employed two
pretty copious bleedings, a blister was applied to the part affected, two
moderate doses of calomel were given, and an injection was administered, which
operated on the lower intestines, but all without any perceptible advantage,
the respiration becoming still more difficult and distressing. Upon the arrival
of the first of the consulting physicians, it was agreed, as there were yet no
signs of accumulation in the bronchial vessels of the lungs, to try the result
of another bleeding, when about 32 ounces of blood were drawn, without the
smallest apparent alleviation of the disease. Vapors of vinegar and water were
frequently inhaled, ten grains of calomel were given, succeeded by repeated
doses of emetic tartar, amounting in all to 5 or 6 grains, with no other effect
than a copious discharge from the bowels. The power of life seemed now
manifestly yielding to the force of the disorder; blisters were applied to the
extremities, together with a (...) of bran and vinegar to the throat. Speaking,
which was painful from the beginning, now became almost impracticable;
respiration grew more and more contracted and imperfect, till at half after
eleven on Saturday night, retaining the full possession of his intellects --
when he expired without a struggle.

HE was fully impressed at the beginning of his complaint, as well as through
every succeeding stage of it, that its conclusion would be mortal; submitting
to the several exertions made for his recovery, rather as a duty, than from any
expectations of their efficacy. He considered the operations of death upon his
system as coeval with the disease; and several hours his before death, after
repeated efforts to be understood, succeeded in expressing a desire that he
might be permitted to die without further interruption.

DURING the short period of his illness, he oeconomised his time, in the
arrangement of such few concerns as required his attention, with the utmost
serenity; and anticipated his approaching dissolution with every demonstration
of that equanimity for which his whole life has been so uniformly and
singularly conspicuous.

JAMES CRAIK, Attending Physician, ELISHA C. DICK, Consulting Physician.

P. S. THE signature of Dr. Gustavus Brown, of (...) Tobacco, who attended as
consulting Physician, on account of the remoteness of his residence from this
place, has not been procured to the foregoing statement.



FINIS.

