AN ORATION DELIVERED IN RICHMOND ON THE FOURTH OF JULY, 1800; THE ANNIVERSARY
OF AMERICAN INDEPENDENCE.

BY WILLIAM WIRT.

RICHMOND: PRINTED BY MERIWETHER JONES, MDCCC.

AN ORATION etc.
THE presence of an assembly so numerous and so respectable -- the grandeur of
the event which we have met to celebrate -- the expectation displayed in every
face, and which I feel that I am just about to disappoint, are considerations
which cover me with embarrassment and confusion. I regret that my
fellow-citizens have called me to this task; or that being called, I was unable
to resist their invitation. The mind which has been narrowed by pursuits merely
professional, is but poorly calculated to do justice to this day. The very
sound of the 4th of July, gives rise to a train of thought and feeling so
interesting to mankind -- opens a survey so vast, so diversified, so august as
might strike into silent astonishment the most sublime genius which the world
ever knew. The subject affects not America only, but the Universe. Nor does it
merely embrace the present posture of human affairs, it points the mind back to
an immense retrospect covered with darkness and horror; and presents in
perspective, unless our hopes deceive us, an elysian prospect crowned with
eternal light and beauty and joy. Lost in the contemplation of a theme so
unbounded I sink with conscious weakness under it -- but let me not despair;
although I am feeble the day itself is eloquent. It speaks to the heart in
strains heavenly and enchanting. The feelings which belong to it shall supply
my defects. And when I barely mention the anniversary of American independence,
every bosom here will throb with emotions as strong as if my lips were touched
with the hallowed fire of eloquence.

The sentiment is correct that the happiness of man is known only by contrast.
In order therefore to have a just relish for our present felicity; in order to
give to this festival all the advantages which belong to it, we should recall
the situation of our country prior to the revolution. There is a kind of
mournful pleasure in the recollection of distresses from which we have escaped.
The peaceful shade of his vine becomes sweeter to the husbandman, when he
remembers the arm of war which lately desolated his fields and fired his
cottage; and if a consciousness of our mortal existence shall follow us into
futurity, the extacy of the saint in the bosom of his God, will receive a fresh
impulse when he looks back upon the storm of life from which he is delivered.

It is impossible to take this retrospective view of the American history
without being struck by the meekness, the patience and long-suffering which
mark the national character. This trait was displayed by the first emigrants
from Great Britain to North America. There was no obligation on these suffering
Christians to recognize the authority of the British monarch. The ideal compact
between the sovereign and the subject had been dissolved by the violation of it
on his part. He had refused them that protection which alone gave him the only
shadow of claim to their allegiance. He had surrendered them into the merciless
fangs of Christian bigotry. By oppression the most direful, because it was the
oppression of reason and conscience, he had permitted them to be forced from
his coasts; from their native land; their relations; their friends and all the
tender connexions which bind man to life. Innocent and unoffending as they
were, he had exposed them to a punishment which the most atrocious guilt only
could justify; to encounter the storm of winter, on seas unknown; to seek an
asylum in a strange land -- in the boundless forests of America ringing with
the terrific howl of beasts of prey, or echoing the still more frightful yell
of savage man. Yet after all their cruel sufferings, after scenes of terror and
dismay which resemble more the dreams of a distempered fancy than the actual
experience of human beings, this handful of tempest-beaten wanderers
voluntarily erect themselves into a colony, and with a fidelity, amiable even
in mistake, plant amid the wilds of North America the standard of that
government from whose scourge they were yet bleeding. Generous souls! -- what
was their reward? Oppression -- plunder -- massacre -- inflicted on their
posterity by that nation which should have strained every nerve that belonged
to it, to atone for its original cruelty. Yes; a British parliament, in which
the voice of America was not heard, authorize a corrupt ministry, under the
pretext of taxes at which the world blushed, to plunge their rapacious hands
into the pockets of Americans. How did America conduct herself under this new
specimen of British barbarity? Did she at once spring to arms to avenge the
outrage? No: her national character again developes itself -- she is all meek
and patient -- she complains indeed, but it is in the mild tone of gentle
remonstrance and humble supplication -- This is the period of our history to
which every American turns with transport. The most unexampled, but the most
portentous moderation had been manifested on the part of America -- Addresses
to the British throne, the parliament and the people, addresses breathing the
spirit of injured innocence, fortified by arguments that were impregnable, and
graced with an eloquence the most manly and pathetic, had been answered by
silent disdain and fresh outrage -- the prophetic voice of Bar and the
heaven-directed tongue of Chatham, had been lifted in vain against the
usurpation -- The streets of Boston had been stained with the innocent blood of
our citizens -- Warren had fallen serene and smiling even in death -- and the
soul of Montgomery had taken its flight from the plains of Abraham, when
America hazarded a step by the side of which, the exploits of an Alexander and
a Caesar sink into contempt and detestation. This was the declaration of
independence -- that immortal monument of the energy and magnanimity of the
American mind. By this measure the door of compromise was shut for ever -- By
this measure America in her infancy, without arms, without an army, without
finances, threw herself upon the theater of war, against a nation grown old in
military enterprise, and armed at all points for the conflict. America knew
that Great Britain considered this as a war against rebels; that, therefore it
would be waged against her with unrelenting severity, and that she was not to
expect from her antagonist any of the usual rights of war. She knew that Great
Britain would now offer no alternatives but abject submission or extermination;
and that in the event of a final defeat, the gibbet or chains and slavery would
be her portion. Yet undaunted by the prospect of consequences and relying
solely on the justice of heaven, she took the decisive step. The nations of the
earth were astonished at the grandeur of the movement, and stood in fearful
expectation of the issue. The great questions were, whether Great Britain,
which had so long held the preponderance in the police of Europe, was now to be
dismembered of the most valuable part of her dominion? Whether a new power was
to be erected in the western world which was sure to grow up soon into immense
consequence and produce the most important effect on all the concerns of the
eastern? But a still more interesting question was, whether a new era was
about to take place in the history of government itself, and America to exhibit
to the world the novel spectacle of a people mildly swaying themselves under
forms so perfect as to ensure their felicity? These were the great points in
controversy. The British cabinet were amused with the chimerical project, and
laughed at the idea of a conflict between the unfledged eagle of America* and
the farfamed British lion. Shallow politicians! They did not know what wonders
the magic name of liberty could work* They did not know that it poured heroism
into the heart of the coward; that it braced the feeble arm and lent to it a
spring and a force as irresistible as the bolt of heaven. This was a lesson
which they were yet to learn in the American school -- They did learn it and
their smile of contempt was changed into the distortion of terror. The storm
began. For seven long years the clouds of war hung upon our land. Amid the
silence of night the thunder of battle was heard to burst, and domestic repose
fled far away -- The gentle bosoms of the neighboring fair were chilled with
dismay. A father, a brother, a husband, or some object dear to their hearts
might have been the victims of the explosion which they had just heard; and
even then might be rolling on the plain in the last agonies of dissolution. The
thought was horror and distraction. The morning comes at last, and a scene more
afflicting presents itself -- All around our infant towns and villages and
hamlets smoking in ruins -- the mangled bodies of our citizens prostrate in the
dust -- pouring out the stream of life on the face of their beloved country --
even in the last moment* lifting from the blood-stained field their dying arms
toward heaven -- invoking success on the holy cause in which they had fallen
-- calling down Victory on their surviving brethren -- and then -- in all the
sweet serenity of virtue, breathing back their souls to their God. Dear, ever
dear, shall ye be to our hearts, ye martyrs in your country's cause. We call
you to witness the grateful fervor in which we are dissolving, while we cast
our eyes over the field in which ye were sleeping in death -- pale -- silent --
placid -- while the guardian genius of America hovered above you, and her tear
of pity started through the smile of triumph. Long -- long shall your memory
fire the bosoms of your descendants, and teach the pulse of glory to beat quick
through the American heart. From your ashes the Phoenix Liberty has sprung. Not
the frantic demon of Athens with furious eye and gorgon looks, brandishing
aloft the torch of discord and faction and pestilence -- nor the spurious
pretender of Venice, tricked off in the meretricious tinsel of aristocracy,
lifting one scale of human beings to heaven and sinking the other to perdition.
But Liberty, genuine Liberty herself, pure, serene, sublime -- holding the
balance level and steady before her, diffusing her smiles equally throughout
society, and cheering the heart of the cottager as well as of the man of
wealth. Such ye fallen heroes, such is the inestimable boon which we owe to you
and which we are now enjoying, but from which -- ye were torn. Were ye not our
fathers, brothers, sons, friends and saviors? Entwined with our souls by every
natural (...) -- by every noble affection? -- Well, then, may we retire from
the transports of the ^ay to hang over your graves, and while our hearts swell
in tumults at the remembrance of your sufferings to drop, on the sacred sod
which covers you, the tear of mingled gratitude and love.

Yet let us not give way to unmanly grief -- their death was glorious -- and
they are happy.

It were needless to dwell on the particular incidents of the revolutionary
war. They are known to us all. We all know how cruel were the sufferings of our
citizens, how deep the groans of our country! But the God of hosts was on our
side and Washington -- was his apostle. Who can ever forget how with his little
band of brothers -- destitute of every comfort and convenience of life --
without food or raiment -- worn down by incessant action -- marking with the
blood of their feet the frozen ground over which they urged their sleepless
march, he watched the holy flame of liberty, and kept it from expiring? Who has
forgotten how, when wants, and difficulties, and dangers indescribable pressed
thick around him; when the earth below him trembled under the shock of battle,
and death presented itself in a thousand forms, his great mind rose superior to
confusion -- like the sun-gilt summit of some lofty mountain, around whose base
the (...) storm wastes itself in vain. If the ancient sentiment be just that
the most pleasing spectacle to the ruler of the universe is a brave man greatly
struggling in the tempest of fate, then the fortitude, the perseverance, the
calmness, the magnanimity of General Washington were such as angels might have
stooped from heaven to witness with rapture -- But he is gone to join them, and
from the bowers of eternal beatitude he smiles upon the prospect of his country.

And have we not reason to be happy too my fellow-citizens? Has not our great
continent emerged from its shameful dependence upon a petty island, and is she
not rising rapidly to her proper grade in the scale of nations? Have we not
gained the grand object of the revolution, the right of the people to govern
themselves? Was not this the polar star which guided us through the hurricane
of war? Was it not to secure this blessing to the people that the blood and
treasure of America were poured out? Do we not enjoy it, and shall we not
transmit it without dimination? Why should we ever abandon this right of self
rule! Have we not proven the fallacy of that gothic position that the people of
a nation are unable to rule themselves -- a position which degrades the
favorite creature of God, and drags him down to a level with the beasts that
perish -- a position founded on the total prostration of the human mind and the
human heart. Yes, our experience has evinced that the reverse of this position
is true -- it has evinced that the people of an enlightened nation are
competent to their own government, and that amid the smiles of peace and
tranquillity. America has held up to the world this new, this brilliant
spectacle -- and does it not reflect new luster upon the dignity of man? For my
own part I am proud to declare that upon this system I stand fast as upon the
rock of ages. I believe in the practicability of a republican form of
government; the experience of America justifies that belief. The system is dear
to my heart -- because it is that for which our fathers fought and bled and
died -- and because I believe it to be the only one which is compatible with
the dignity and happiness of man. Yet if there be among my countrymen any who
hold a different doctrine -- who think a government of orders -- who think a
king, lords and commons material to the happiness of a nation -- be it so --
they have the same right to their opinion which we have to ours. Has the God
who made me given me the privilege of controuling the judgment of others? He
made me man -- but so he made my brothers who differ from me -- he gave me
certain rights as a human being, but he gave to every other human being the
same rights. Shall I then presume to arrogate to myself the pre-eminence, and
in the proud language of insolent reproach to say to my neighbor, you are
wrong -- I am right -- renounce your opinion and adopt mine, or you want
principle -- No -- heaven forbid! Ever dear to my heart shall be the honest
American, whatever may be the complexion of his speculative opinions: And in
the right of opinion, however widely it may differ from my own, my voice and
arm, such as they are, shall be ever raised to defend him. I will meet him
indeed with the weapons of reason and argument -- truth disdains all others --
but I will meet him in the spirit of a brother; not in that of a foe: and to
whatever conclusion his judgment shall conduct him, that conclusion shall be
held sacred and inviolable by me. All who have ever reflected on this subject,
have discovered that no man can control his own opinions -- that in the
formation of them, his mind plays the perfect tyrant -- that it acts upon the
evidence before it, and in spite of his wishes, draws its conclusions
irresistibly. Shall I then, or shall any other man require from his fellow
creatures impossibilities? Shall we demand of him to think as we do -- when
from the original constitution of his nature he is obliged to think as his
judgment directs? No -- no -- illiberality does not become an American.
Political and religious intolerance are twin-demons of darkness -- hatched long
ago during the night of the mind, they started at once into gigantic stature,
and with a frenzy the most wild and terrific, spread havoc and consternation
through the world of man. Let them not profane by their presence the region of
light -- let them not touch with unhallowed foot the consecrated shores of that
country, in which freedom has fixed her residence. They are the certain
harbingers of civil discord and distraction -- blood and carnage and famine are
in their train -- let us unite to repel them -- they do not belong to our
climate.

Peace, meekness, liberality, forbearance, brotherly love -- these form the
splendid retinue of liberty -- these let us cultivate -- they adorn and dignify
humanity, and happiness will forever brighten through the land in which they
flourish. It is important to the world that America should put the last touch
of perfection to that example which she has set them, and which they are
beginning to imitate. Yes -- this work of imitation has begun, nor shall its
inauspicious commencement extinguish in my bosom the hope of a happy issue.

I turn my eyes toward France with emotions that sicken me. For fourteen
centuries were the people of that devoted country buried in Egyptian darkness
and Egyptian bondage. For fourteen centuries had a series of enterprizing
monarchs, supported by an immense nobility and a priesthood still more immense,
better disciplined and invincible in all its operations as the phalanx of
Sparta -- for fourteen centuries had this tremendous combination of political
and religious tyrants been forging chains for the people of France! The effort
to get loose was desperate and threatened to convulse the world. But the nation
had caught from America a glimpse of Liberty -- they were enraptured by her
charms, and determined to put every thing to the hazard to win her. We all know
the consequences -- they were dreadful -- yet let us not impute them to any
deformity in Liberty herself -- No, she is all innocence and beauty and
loveliness -- No -- it was the external force which acted upon France, and
which attempted to arrest the carreer of her revolution -- it was this which
produced those frightful shocks which we heard with horor -- but for this, the
nation might, after the first explosion have settled peaceably on her
foundation. But treason, insurrection, and riot flourished under the
long-protracted cover of foreign invasion and foreign war: and little does it
become the coalition to lay at the door of liberty, those mischiefs, of which
they are themselves the real authors. But they trembled at the name of Liberty
-- they perceived that she was advancing to draw aside the curtain, and expose
their abominations to the world -- they fancied they heard the ancient bas^ile
of despotism cracking in ruins about their ears -- they exerted their invention
to render Liberty hateful to the world -- they endeavored to resist her course
-- they might as well have attempted to stop the splendid flight of the
impetuous comet, or bid the immense plants roll back in their spheres. Yes --
she shall go forth arrayed in all the grace and dignity of beauty -- the
nations of the earth shall kindle under the beam of her eye -- Tyranny, with
all his horrid apparatus of chains and racks and tortures, shall leap
affrighted from his throne at her approach -- shrink from the sublimity of her
mien, and hide his detestable head forever. From pole to pole the white altar
of liberty shall be seen displayed -- Under the benign influence of her
dominoin, the character of man shall tower to its Zenith -- the faculties of
his mind shall expand and bloom in all the richness of luxuriance -- the
rougher passions of his nature shall be softened down -- around his heart shall
beam the ever-living radiance of virtue -- the narrow and crooked policy of the
globe shall yield to universal confidence -- prejudice and distinction and
hostility shall be lost in unbounded affection, and the man of the eastern
hemisphere shall rush with transport into the bosom of his brother of the west.
O! what a transition will this be from the present state of affairs Will it not
be as magnificent as when at the fiat of God, the earth sprang from chaotic
darkness into a stood of light, and all its beauties burst at once upon the
sight of its maker! I look on to the glorious prospect in speechless extacy!


