A DISCOURSE, DELIVERED AT BOSCAWEN,

ON SATURDAY THE 22d OF FEBRUARY, 1800, IN COMMEMORATION OF THE LATE DEATH OF
General George Washington.

BY SAMUEL WOOD, A. M. Pastor of the Church in said Boscawen.

CONCORD: PRINTED BY GEORGE HOUGH.

1800.

DISCOURSE.
JUDGES III. 9. "THE LORD RAISED UP A DELIVERER TO THE CHILDREN OF ISRAEL."
THIS day, a very large and extensive Nation exhibit every token of funeral
sorrow. -- Wherever we turn our eyes, we behold the signals of mourning
displayed. -- The countenance of every American citizen proclaims, in silent
accents, that man is mortal; that no character, or station in life, exempts
from the irrevocable sentence, "Dust thou art, and unto dust shall thou return."

OUR WASHINGTON IS NO MORE! -- Had he continued to this day, he would have
completed sixty eight years; but the LORD of all worlds, who gave him as our
deliverer, has seen fit to call him hence; he departed this life the 14th of
December last. -- And, under the present circumstances, reflecting on past
events, may we not experimentally comment upon the words of the text, and apply
them to ourselves, as they were applied to Israel, respecting the Divine
conduct toward them; -- "the LORD raised up a deliverer to the children of
Israel."

In the time of our distress, the LORD, in like manner, raised up a deliverer
to his American Israel. That we may rightly understand the business, for which
we are convened, it may be inquired, to whom are we to offer these honors? To
offer them to the dead, would be very unsuitable. To GOD only, in memory of the
dead, may such offerings be paid.

In order, therefore, that we may properly realize our loss, and sensibly feel
our obligations of gratitude to the Most High GOD, for past favors; some
general observations upon this passage of Scripture, by way of analogy, will
now be made; which may lead to a more particular improvement.

As from a state of Egyptian bondage, the LORD brought Israel to possess the
land of Canaan; so from a state of oppression, the LORD conducted our
Forefathers to inherit this land, that here they might peaceably enjoy that
religion which they could not in their native country.

The obstacles which obstructed Israel when entering upon their inheritance,
were many and great; and the interpositions of Providence were wonderful in
fulfilling the promise of this event, which was made to Abraham, that his seed
should possess that land. Great also were the dangers which our Progenitors
encountered, and signal were the displays of Divine goodness, in their settling
in this then uncultivated wilderness.

Israel, for a long time, flourished in their new settlements; even so long as
they served the LORD, they sat down quietly, having none to make them afraid;
for the LORD was their defense. No less did the LORD give rest to his people,
in this Columbian land; and defended the vine, which his own right hand had
planted, from the violence of all those who rose up against them.

At this period, referred to by the Divine historian, Israel, because they had
sinned, were greatly oppressed by a foreign nation, into whose hand the LORD
had sold them for their transgression against him: Thus they were greatly
distressed because the Mesopotamians reigned over them. In their trouble, they
cried unto the LORD, and the LORD heard them, and raised up for them a
deliverer -- even Othniel, the son of Kenaz, Caleb's younger brother: And the
Spirit of the LORD came upon him; and the LORD delivered Israel by his hand.
Not unsimilar was the state of our nation, when our liberties were attacked by
the power of Britain.

We may learn something of our critical situation at that time, if we revert
back to the memorable period of the massacre at Boston, which took place in the
year of our LORD 1770. After that, the circumstances grew more threatening, and
the dangers were greatly increased, by the enforcing of the Stamp Act, and
other unreasonable duties, which occasioned the destruction of tea in the year
1773. The consternation from that time spread far and wide, so that the several
States, each one consulting for their own safety, sent Delegates, who met at
Philadelphia, September 5th, 1774, to form a Union, and to adopt measures to
defend the common Interest.

But, humanly speaking, how weak, if compared with those by whom they were
opposed! How unprepared for War, as to military skill, and warlike equipments!
Without any established form of Government, or public resources!

Under these distressing circumstances, what could Congress do? Having
organized themselves, they endeavored to assert the rights to which the
Colonies were entitled by the laws of nature, the principles of the English
Constitution, and their several Charters. Among those rights, were considered
Life, Liberty, and Property; a right to dispose of which, without their
consent, they had given to no sovereign power whatever. Yet, rather than rashly
to set up for Independence, they sue for peace, by way of entreaty.

Now, leaving the infant Republic, trembling through fear, yet firmly asserting
her native right, while she stretches out the suppliant hand, seeking a just
redress of her wrongs; we may, for a moment, turn our eyes on the side of our
unnatural enemy: And we behold them, a great and mighty nation, renowned in all
the arts of war, furnished with every needed supply, masters of the sea, and
deaf to all proposals of accommodation short of unconditional submission. --
Vain, O America! was the help of man! This, our political Fathers saw, in the
day of our calamity. Therefore the Congress, June 7th, 1775, resolved, that
Thursday, July 20th, be observed, throughout the Twelve United Colonies, as a
day of humiliation, fasting, and prayer. Thus in the day of their affliction,
they cried unto the LORD.

It was now needful, that some one should be appointed Commander in Chief, on
whom it should devolve to manage the whole war. June 15th, the Congress, by
ballot, unanimously chose GEORGE WASHINGTON, Esquire. to this office. He was then
in the 43d year of his age. -- From early life he had been trained up for such
a day as this: amply furnished with military skill and political knowledge --
and had now arrived to mature age for renowned exploits. A specimen of his
character, whom GOD raised up as our deliverer, and to whom our country
entrusted all which they held dear, we may see in his answer when invited to
accept his appointment. The President of the House requested his acceptance.
He, (Washington) standing in his place, said:

MR. PRESIDENT,
THOUGH I am truly sensible of the high honor done me, in this appointment,
yet I feel great distress, from a consciousness that my abilities and military
experience may not be equal to the extensive and important trust. However, as
the Congress desire it, I will enter upon the momentous duty, and exert every
power I possess, in their service, and for the support of the glorious cause. I
beg they will accept my most cordial thanks, for this distinguished testimony
of their approbation.

But, lest some unlucky event should happen, unfavourable to my reputation, I
beg it may be remembered, by every gentleman in the room, that I this day
declare, with the utmost sincerity, I do not think myself equal to the command
I am honored with.

"As to pay, Sir, I beg leave to assure the Congress, that, as no pecuniary
consideration could have tempted me to accept this arduous employment, at the
expense of my domestic ease and happiness, I do not wish to make any profit
from it. I will keep an exact account of my expenses: Those, I doubt not, they
will discharge -- and that is all I desire.


From that day, the eyes of all were turned upon him as the Commander in Chief
of the American forces. This office he filled, to the great satisfaction of his
fellow citizens, to the terror of his enemies, and to the astonishment of the
world; -- manifesting, on all occasions, fidelity, skill, firmness, and
resolution; till at length he obtained for the United Independent States. an
honorable peace, which was ratified by Great Britain in the year 1784.

How HE, who rules among the nations, has improved him as an instrument of
saving his peo-people, from the time of his leaving the army, till he departed
this life, it is unnecessary to relate. The history is so recent, and his
public virtues have so deeply impressed the mind of every American citizen,
that we may clearly see, that as "the LORD raised up a deliverer to the
children of Israel." when in their trouble they cried unto him -- so GOD has
done for us.

Thus our subject opens into a very extensive field for contemplation and
practical improvement. -- Whenever we look back upon the complex scene of the
American revolution, and duly consider, from a statement of facts, how it was
brought about -- what difficulties have been overcome -- what obstacles have
been surmounted -- till, from small beginnings, the Republic is become great,
even the most permanent and flourishing kingdom in the world -- an asylum of
Liberty, both civil and religious -- and all this so much owing, as a mean, to
the skill, wisdom, and political virtue of one man -- we are filled with
reverential wonder at the counsels of Heaven. And we may hence nationally
infer, that this great event, in all its connections, was fixed in the divine
mind long before it took place: "For known unto GOD are all his works, from the
beginning of the world; even to him who works all things after the counsel of
his own will."

Hence also it appears evident, that our deliverance, from time to time, was,
has been, and still is, of the LORD. He is the LORD of Hosts: he does his
pleasure among the children of men: he has made use of instruments, such as he
chose; but has ever manifested himself wonderful in counsel. Every instance of
our salvation, he has wrought in such a way and in such a manner as might lead
us to feel our entire dependence: for he has raised up, and has put down;
showing, that the race is not to the swist, nor the battle to the strong -- As
he saved Israel of old, so has he saved us. We may therefore adopt their song,
and say, "If it had not been the Lord who was on our side; now may Israel say,
if it had not been the Lord who was on our side, when men rose up against us,
then they had swallowed us up quick, when their wrath was kindled against us:
then the waters had overwhelmed us, the stream had gone over our soul: then the
proud waters had gone over our soul. Blessed be the Lord, who has not given us
as a prey to their teeth."

We further learn, that to attribute any thing more of our safety to any man,
than as being one whom the Lord raised up, qualified and improved, as an
instrument, would be to rob God of that glory which is due to his name from us
whom he has delivered. There is a propriety in rendering to all their dues;
"tribute, to whom tribute is due; custom, to whom custom; fear, to whom fear;
honor* to whom honor." God is the rightful Proprietor and the Supreme Governor
of all things. Every good, of which any are the recepients, is from him, and
thanksgiving therefore is due to his name. -- Creatures* by whom, as
instruments, God at any time communicates his favors, are, for the same
reason, to be considered as the ministers of God; and as such they are to be
regarded and treated; and, even for their works sake, to be respected. -- But,
we may not give that honor to the servant, which is due to his master; we may
not ascribe that to the creature, which is due to the great Creator, who is
Lord of all -- without being guilty of sacrilege more criminal than can justly
be charged upon the hea^hen world. Let us take heed, therefore, while we render
to man his due, that we also render to God the things which are God's: For we
may with propriety apply to ourselves, what God said upon this subject to his
ancient Israel: "I am the LORD thy God, which have brought thee out of the land
of Egypt, out of the house of bondage. Thou shall have no other gods before Me.
Thou shall not make unto thee any graven image, or any likeness of any thing
that is in Heaven above, or that is in the earth beneath, or that is in the
water under the earth. Thou shall not bow down thyself to them, nor serve them:
For I the LORD thy God am a jealous God visiting the iniquity of the fathers
upon the children, unto the third and fourth generation of them that hat^ me;
and showing mercy unto thousands of them that love me and keep my
commandments." And we may add the words of the prophet, "I am the LORD, that is
my name, and my glory will I not give to another; neither my praise to graven
images."

In reference to the present occasion, our subject may well penetrate every
heart with a feeling sense of this important truth, that as we have reason to
mourn the loss of a much beloved Citizen, who has been, in his day, useful
beyond what we can fully describe; so, in the same proportion, we are under
obligation of gratitude to the Great Giver of every good, for the bestowment of
such an one. In him centred all the rare endowments needful for the important
station to which he was assigned. Through the different stages of his public
life, he has passed with a character unsullied* His virtues are known -- His
examples shine -- (...) counsels (as a parent's to his children) being
regarded, will redound to our future peace: -- So that he, being dead, yet
speaks. When such a friend, so beloved -- when such a citizen, so respected
-- when such a patron, so universally considered as the deliverer of his
country, is removed, who can refrain from tears! When the beauty of America is
fallen, shall not her daughters weep! What heart so insensible as not to share
in the general grief! -- His name will live in the memory of every American, so
long as they shall relish the sweets of Liberty -- or rather than submit to
servitude, they shall choose to be free. -- To what other man were we ever so
much indebted for our independent establishment, political peace, and civil
privileges, as we are to him? Yet while, as worthy of our attention and
imitation, we call to mind the virtues, the public services, and the unshaken
patriotism, of the deceased, and pay these grateful respects to his memory, we
ought carefully to bear this in mind, that to us he was one of the gifts of
Heaven, raised up for those important purposes which were effected by him. Let
us never forget the goodness of God, in his benefits bestowed upon our land.
And to express suitable feelings of heart under this bereaving providence, we
may adopt the words of Job in his affliction, "the Lord gave, and the Lord has
taken away; blessed be the name of the Lord."

Moreover, our political parent, deceased, has left us in the full possession
of the most valuable Legacy, which the great Parent of all blessings did, by
him, as an instrument, bequeath to us -- even an established Independence among
the nations, and a permanent and well organized Government, under which we
enjoy all the natural immunities appertaining to a free people. In conformity
to moral obligation -- in imitation of those virtues, by the medium of which
these public rights were procured -- and influenced by the animating prospect
of future political happiness -- let us exert ourselves, in our several
characters, to maintain our rank in the scale of nations, to support our
constitutional Government, and thereby preserve our privileges inviolate, that
we may leave them a rich inheritance for our posterity.

And now, while we thus decorate the tomb of our much respected friend, with
laurels of respect, wet with tears, and raise monuments to his memory as our
deliverer, we should take heed lest we forget the divine favors received by
the hand of others, and overlook that tribute of respect due to them as having
deserved well of their country, many of whom, while contending in the field of
battle for the cause of Liberty and Religion, met an early death. Many, in
every rank of citizens, have done worthily; and even the private soldier, who
is virtuous and valiant, is entitled to honor. In our struggle to defend our
privileges, the Lord inspired our Senators with wisdom, our Officers with
skill, and our Armies with courage; but sent saintness into the hearts of our
enemies. Therefore our salvation was of the Lord, in ways mysterious and
unexpected -- and to his name be the glory.

We shall now only observe further, that as the Lord has been our refuge, our
strength, and our glory, so there is every encouragement, in a humble, penitent
manner, still to make him our confidence. To whom shall we go, but unto the
Lord? With him is counsel and strength. Praise is due to his name, that we have
so many worthy characters now active on the stage of life; and in particular,
that our Confederate Chair of State is filled with one on whom rests the spirit
of Elijah -- and that our Government is so wisely administered by men of our
own choosing, but of God's providing.

We ought, therefore, ever to implore the Most High, who is the Father of
lights, that he would graciously give us men of integrity, to fill every public
station, and endow them with wisdom to discern both time and judgment: so shall
we be that happy people, whose God is the LORD.

FINIS.

