A PROSPECT of EXTERMINATING the SMALLPOX, BEING THE HISTORY OF THE VARIOLAE
VACCINAE, OR KINE-POX, COMMONLY CALLED THE COW-POX; AS IT HAS APPEARED IN
ENGLAND: With an Account of a series of Inoculations performed for the
KINE-POX, in MASSACHUSETTS.

BENJAMIN WATERHOUSE, M. D. FELLOW OF THE AMERICAN PHILOS. SOCIETY; ACAD. ARTS
AND SCIENCES, MASS. MED. AND ROYAL MED. SOCIE. LONDON; PHYSICAL AND LITERARY
SOCIETY AT (...) PHILOS. AND LITERARY SOCIETY (...) AND PROFESSOR OF THE THEORY
AND PRACTICE OF PHYSIC IN THE UNIVERSITY OF CAMBRIDGE.

Facts like these speak so strongly, and so clearly, that reasoning and
argument must be quite superfluous.

Bishop MADDOX's sermon in favor of Inoculation. PRINTED FOR THE AUTHOR, At
the CAMBRIDGE PRESS, by WILLIAM HILLIARD, and Sold by him, and the other
Booksellers in BOSTON. 1800.

(Copy-right secured according to law.)

THE HISTORY OF THE KINE-POX, From Kine the plural of cow; thus in the
scriptures -- "and they took two milch-kine -- and shut up their calves at
home;" a word equally expressive, and in the opinion of some, more delicate.

Some in this country as well as in England, after having all their objections
obviated, have said, "allowing this cow or kine-pox to be at present
beneficial, can any person say what may be the consequences of introducing a
bestial humor into the human frame after a long lapse of years;" Let us push
this wise observation a little further; and ask "who can tell what may be the
consequences, after a long lapse of years, of introducing into the human frame
cow's milk, beef steaks, or a mutton-chop!"

See RING's Observations on Dr. MOSELY.


COMMONLY CALLED THE COW-POX.
CHAP. I.
IN the beginning of the year 1799, I received from my friend Dr. LETTSOM of
London, a copy of Dr. EDWARD JENNER's " inquiry into the causes and effects of
the VARIOLAE VACCINAE, or COW-POX"; a disease totally unknown in this quarter
of the world. On perusing this work, I was struck with the unspeakable
advantages that might accrue to this country, and indeed to the human race at
large, from the discovery of a mild distemper that would ever after so (...)
the constitution from that terrible scourge, the smallpox. My attention was
not the less awakened by a previous impression that the smallpox came
originally from the brute creation; for all that I could recollect of the
history of the famous Mahomet, and his successor, and of modern Arabia,
conspired to strengthen the idea that the smallpox came to the human race
through the bruce creation.

DR. GEORGE PEARSON's book, which I received soon after that of Dr. JENNER's,
confirmed in a satisfactory manner the most important part of JENNER's doctrine.

As the ordinary mode of communicating even medical discoveries in this country
is by newspapers, I drew up the following account of the cow-pox, which was
printed in the Columbian Sentinel, March 12th, 1799.

SOMETHING CURIOUS IN THE MEDICAL LINE.

EVERY body has heard of those distempers, accompanied with pocks or pustles,
called the small pox, the chicken-pox and the swine-pox, but few have ever
heard of the cow-pox, or if you like the term better, the cow smallpox; or to
express it in technical language, the variolae vaccinae. There is, however,
such a disease, which has been noticed here and there in several parts of
England, more particularly in Gloucestershire, for sixty or seventy years past,
but has never been an object of medical inquiry until very lately.

THIS variolae vaccinae or cow-pox, is very readily communicated to those who
milk cows infected with it. This malady appears first on the teats of the cows
in the form of irregular pustles or pocks. See JENNER, p. 3. and 4.
They are commonly of a palish blue, somewhat approaching to livid, and
surrounded by an erysipelatous inflammation, resembling the St. Anthony's fire.
These pustles, unless timely remedied, degenerate into those ragged ulcers
known by the surgeons under the name of phagedenic. The cows soon become sick,
and the secretion of milk is lessened, but I never heard of one dying with it.
Those who milk cows thus effected, seldom or ever fail catching the distemper,
if there be cracks, wounds, or abrasions in the hands. That is to say, they are
inoculated. When infected, there appear on different parts of the hands and
wrists, inflamed spots, having the appearance of blisters, produced by burns.
These run quickly on to suppuration. These superficial suppurations have a
circular form with their edges more elevated than the center, very much
resembling a certain stage of the smallpox. These depressed pustles or pocks,
are of a color approaching to blue. Absorption now takes place, and a soreness
and sometimes tumors appear in the arm pits. Then the arterial system becomes
affected; the pulse is quickened, and shivering with a general lassitude and
pains in the back and limbs supervene, and these symptoms are not unfrequently
accompanied with vomiting. There is too, a pain in the head and dizziness.
These symptoms varying in their degrees and violence, generally continue from
one day to three or four, leaving ulcerated sores about the hands, resembling
those on the cows teats, from whence they sprung. The lips, nostrils and
eyelids are sometimes affected with sores, but these evidently arise from
their being rubbed or scratched with the patient's infected fingers. This is
the common course of the disease with the human species. No person was ever
known to die of this distemper. But what makes this newly discovered disease so
very curious, and so extremely important is, that every person thus affected,
is EVER AFTER SECURED FROM THE ORDINARY SMALLPOX, let him be ever so much
exposed to the effluvium of it, or let ever so much ripe matter be inserted
into the skin by inoculation. In other words -- a person who has undergone the
local disease and specific fever occasioned by the cow-pox infection, is
thereby rendered ever after unsusceptible of the small pox. See Dr. PEARSON's
publication.
It is worthy of remark that the infection of the cow-pox can be conveyed to
the human species by the ordinary mode of inoculation. And it is observed, that
there is no difference in the effects of the matter taken from the cow, and of
the matter generated successively in the second, third, fourth or fifth human
creature.

SUCH are the outlines of a mild disease, the knowledge of which may lead to
consequences of the utmost importance to the whole human race, no less indeed
than that of superceding, if not extinguishing, that terrible scourge, the
smallpox.

DR. EDWARD JENNER, is the physician in England, who has collected and arranged
a series of facts and experiments respecting the disease called there the
cow-pox. His short work is commented on by Dr. GEORGE PEARSON, physician to St.
George's hospital, London.

THIS imperfect sketch is thrown into the news-paper at this time, with a view
of exciting the attention of our dairy farmers to such a distemper among their
cows. It may also be gratifying to some of the faculty of medicine, who, it is
presumed, are not yet generally informed of an epizootic disease, capable of
being communicated from the brute to the human kind, and which when
communicated, is a certain security against the smallpox. The public anxiety
has been roused of late, to search after the cause of a destructive fever.
Their attention has been directed merely to effluvia, vapors or gasses, while
they may here see a disease, the nearest a kin to the smallpox of any yet
known, which is never communicated by effluvia, or medium of the air. It is
highly probable that some of the most distressing diseases which afflict
mankind, have an animal origin; and time may prove, that smallpox,
whooping-cough, and one kind of quincy, have like the hydrophobia, a similar
source.

Cambridge, March, 12, 1799.

THIS publication shared the fate of most others on new discoveries. A few
received it as a very important discovery, highly interesting to humanity; some
doubted it; others observed that wise and prudent conduct, which allows them to
condemn or applaud, as the event might prove; while a greater number absolutely
ridiculed it as one of those medical whims which arise today and tomorrow are
no more.

AT a meeting of the AMERICAN ACADEMY OF ARTS AND SCIENCES, held a few weeks
after, in one of the rooms of this University, I communicated what I knew of
this novel distemper, by exhibiting Dr. JENNER's beautiful publication, and
recapitulating as many of the most prominent parts of Dr. PEARSON's book as I
could recollect, for I had lent and lost the work itself. The reception of this
communication was much to my satisfaction, especially with the ILLUSTRIOUS
PRESIDENT, who to a profound erudition in laws and politics, joins a no small
knowledge in the science of medicine Lest this should ever be read beyond the
bounds of this Continent, it will not be superfluous to add here, that THE
PRESIDENT OF THE AMERICAN ACADEMY OF ARTS AND SCIENCES IS JOHN ADAMS, PRESIDENT
OF THESE UNITED STATES.
.

WHEN this verbal communication was made, I promised to prepare a memoir on the
subject by the next quarterly meeting. But before that period arrived, Dr.
WOODVILL's publication came to my hands, which I found so entirely to the
purpose, that I withheld my memoir, and presented the Academy with the book
itself, as containing a chain of experiments and facts, arranged in the form of
a table, vastly beyond what I could procure else where. This publication is
entitled, "REPORTS of a series of inoculations for the VARIOLAE VACCINAE, or
COW-POX, with remarks and observations on this disease, considered as a
substitute for the smallpox, by WILLIAM WOODVILLE, M. D. Physician to the
smallpox and Inoculating Hospitals in the city of London."

THIS work I found contained just what I wished, a series of experiments,
conducted by a learned physician, long conversant with the casual and
inoculated smallpox, in the largest city in the world. The publication bore an
additional weight from the opinion given me by Dr. HAYGARTH of the book and of
its author; there being no man now on the stage more thoroughly acquainted with
the laws of contagion than Dr. HAYGARTH. From this publication of Dr.
WOODVILL's, was formed, in a great measure, my second communication, which I
made, like the first, through the medium of a news-paper. It is this which
follows:

COW-POX.

THE curiosity of the public has been excited by a newly discovered disease,
denominated from its origin, the cow-pox, an account of which I sent you last
March. By the history then given, it appeared that this cow-pox pretty exactly
resembles the very mildest smallpox from inoculation; that none had ever died
of it, whether man or beast; and that those who had undergone the cow-pox, were
EVER AFTER SECURED FROM THE SMALLPOX, be they ever so much exposed to the
effluvium of it, or ever so much ripe matter inserted into the skin by
inoculation; or in other words, that those persons who had undergone the local
disease and specific fever occasioned by the cow-pox infection, are thereby
rendered ever after unsusceptible of the smallpox. Many parents are doubtless
anxious to know if these assertions are justified by subsequent experiments,
and substantiated by a well connected chain of facts. I now send you what
information I have gathered from my correspondents in England, and from various
publications, especially from one by Dr. WOODVILLE, on this all important
subject.

Dr. WOODVILLE is physician to the smallpox and inoculating hospitals in the
city of London. It seems, that finding by Dr. JENNER's original publication,
that no fatal effects had ever been known to follow from the cow-pox, and that
it left the constitution in a state of perfect security from the infection of
the smallpox, Dr. WOODVILLE became very anxious to try the effects of
inoculating the matter of this new and singular disease; and as trials could be
made not only with safety, but also with a prospect to advantage, he conceived
it to be a duty that he owed the public in his official situation at the
inoculating hospital, to embrace the first opportunity of carrying the plan
into execution.

HE found the disease at a cow-house in Gray's Inn Lane, where there were about
200 cows kept. One of the milkers, named SARAH RICE, had so perfect a specimen
of the distemper on her hands, that Dr. WOODVILLE entertained no doubt of its
being the genuine cow-pox. It very much resembled the representation given in
the first plate of Dr. JENNER's publication. Dr. WOODVILLE, therefore, in
January last, went to that cow-house, in company with Lord SOMERVILLE, Sir
JOSEPH BANKS, Sir WILLIAM WATSON, Drs. SIMMONS, PEARSON, WELLAN, and others,
and took some of the purulent matter from the teats of the cow, and from SARAH
RICE, with which he immediately inoculated seven children, by scratching the
skin with the point of a lancet till the instrument became tinged with blood.
In the course of three months, Dr. WOODVILLE inoculated two hundred, whose
cases he has given in his pamphlet. By the month of May, he had inoculated
obout six hundred, and has exhibited the result as it regarded the number of
pustles, days of illness, etc. in the form of a table. Nearly all those persons
were afterward inoculated with matter of smallpox, or else exposed to the
infection of it in the smallpox hospital, without the least signs of the
disease. The Dr. then points out where these two diseases agree, and in what
they differ. The cow-pox, he observes, in every case with which we are as yet
acquainted, has been introduced into the human constitution through the medium
of external local inflammation, and is therefore to be considered as an
inoculated disease; for there are no clear instances of its being received by
effluvia, as is the smallpox; nevertheless its virus seems to affect a similar
mode of action, and to be governed by the same laws. Thus, if a person be
inoculated alternately with the smallpox matter, and that of the cow-pox every
day, till fever is excited, all the inoculations make a progress; and as soon
as the whole system becomes disordered, they appear to be all equally advanced
in muturation. It is to be remembered, that the local tumor excited from the
inoculation of the cow-pox, is commonly of a different appearance from that
which is the consequence of the inoculation with variolous matter. The fluid
formed in the cow-pox tumor very rarely becomes puriform, and the scabs which
succeed are of a harder texture, and exhibit a smoother surface than the
smallpox. See Dr.WOODVILL's publication.


IT is evident from Dr. WOODVILLE's publication, that the matter of the cow-pox
has generally produced much fewer pustles and less indisposition, than that
from the inoculated smallpox; for it appears from his summary or table, that
about two fifths of all the persons inoculated for the cow-pox, had no pustles
at all, and that in not more than a fourth part of them was there experienced a
perceptible disorder. But it must at the same time be acknowledged, says Dr.
WOODVILLE, that in several instances, the cow-pox has proved a very severe
disease. Some had 200, some 300, and some 500, and two had 1000 pustles. One
infant at the breast died on the eleventh day after the cow-pox matter had been
inserted into its arm. In this solitary fatal case, the local tumor was very
slight, and the eruptive symptoms took place on the seventh day, when the child
was seized with convulsion fits, which carried it off. The pustles were from 80
to 100. Can we, however, be certain it died in consequence of inoculation?
Finally, the instances which have been brought forward to prove, that those who
have undergone the cow-pox, resisted the infection of the smallpox, are
unquestionable and decisive, and sufficiently numerous to establish that
important fact. This circumstance, then, says Dr. WOODVILLE, appears to be as
much a general law of the system, as that a person having had the smallpox is
thereby rendered unsusceptible of receiving the disease a second time. For all
the patients, says he, whom I have inoculated with variolous matter, after they
had passed through the cow-pox, none were affected with the smallpox; and it
may be remarked, that nearly a fourth part were so slightly affected with the
cow-pox, that it neither produced any perceptible indisposition nor pustles.

I HAVE thought it not improper to throw thus much before the public at this
time. We live in the scrutinizing era of experiment, and we cannot doubt but
our brethren in England, will pursue this important subject with an
indefatigability, characteristic of the nation, and produce a still longer
chain of facts, which seems absolutely necessary before we can all unite in the
resolution to discard the inoculation of the smallpox, and adopt that of the
cow.

B. WATERHOUSE.

Cambridge, Nov. 15, 1799.

I NOW found that the brief history which I had given of the origin and
progress of this disease made a favorable impression on the minds of the
people; for the dread of that terrible scourge the smallpox is still great in
America, especially in New England, as is sufficiently obvious by the numerous
laws and regulations for preventing its contagion, and which are all described
in my letter to Dr. HAYGARTH, printed in London in the year 1782, and glanced
at in several subsequent letters to be found in that gentlemans' " sketch of a
plan to exterminate the casual smallpox from Great Britain, printed at
Warrington in 1792, and dedicated, by permission, to the KING."

PERCEIVING that this disease began to excite a spirit of enquiry among our
literary men, I deemed it of importance to collect and examine every thing that
had or might be published on the subject, and to acquire, from my
correspondents in England, every information respecting a distemper so
interesting to humanity.

As the great question which the professional public were anxious to have
resolved was, whether a person who had been fairly infected with the genuine
cow or KINE-POX, were thereby secured against the smallpox, I bent all my
enquiries to ascertain this point.

IT would be superfluous to mention every question I put, and tedious to relate
the different answers received. Suffice it for the present to say, that I made
my enquiries of physicians living in different parts of Great Britain, and of
those too who were the least sanguine, although most interested in the event;
of men, who objected much, and believed slowly, yet have in the end become its
most potent advocates. And I do now deliberately declare, that I have received
a crowd of evidence in confirmation of the doctrine, "that the cow, or kine-pox
renders the human frame unsusceptible of the smallpox", too great to be
resisted by any mind not perverted by prejudice. In truth, the subject has been
traced in England, by those who doubted, until conviction became too strong for
argument, and theoretical objections gave way to stubborn facts. The
consequence has been, that THIRTY THOUSAND persons, from two weeks old and
upwards, have passed safely through the disease. Dr. JENNER has been
particularly noticed by the KING, who gave him permission to dedicate the new
edition of his book to him.

BUT distance of space operates on some minds like distance of time. People are
not so ready to believe what happened a great while ago, or a great way off. I
therefore found it necessary to bring the matter home to us, and to repeat in
America the experiments performed on the other side of the Atlantic. I wished
also to examine another important fact, of which some eminent physicians in
London expressed some doubts, and which I myself was anxious to see more firmly
established, namely, whether this new disease, this COW-POX, or KINE-POX,
(denominate it which you will) be really not CONTAGIOUS, or catching from one
person to another. And I do now assert, that from all the experiments hitherto
made public, it clearly appears, that this substitute for the smallpox cannot
be communicated by any other means than by the actual CONTACT OF MATTER; or in
other words, is not catching from one person to another by effluvia, like the
smallpox or measles. Even the cows do not convey the distemper by effluvia, or
when there is a fence or hedge interposed between them; and not, says Dr.
JENNER, unless they be handled or milked by those who bring the infectious
matter with them. See JENNER's "further observations on the VARIOLAE VACCINAE."


CHAP. II.
UNDER a serious impression of effecting a public benefit, and conceiving it,
moreover, a duty in my official situation in this University, I sent to England
for some of the vaccine or cow-pox-matter for trial. After several fruitless
attempts, I obtained some by a short passage from Bristol, and with it I
inoculated all the younger part of my family.

THE first of my children that I inoculated, was a boy of five years old, named
DANIEL OLIVER WATERHOUSE. I made a slight incision in the usual place for
inoculation in the arm, inserted a small portion of the infected thread, and
covered it with a sticking-plaster. It exhibited no other appearances than what
would have arisen from any other extraneous substance, until the 6th day, when
an increased redness called forth my attention. On the 8th, he complained of
pain under the inoculated arm, and on the 9th, the inoculated part exhibited
evident signs of virulency. By the 10th, any one, much experienced in the
inoculated smallpox, would have pronounced the arm infected. The pain and
swelling under his arm went on gradually increasing, and by the 11th day from
inoculation, his febrile symptoms were pretty strongly marked. The sore in the
arm proceeded exactly as Drs. JENNER and WOODVILLE describe, and appeared to
the eye very like the second plate in Dr. JENNER's elegant publication. In
short, the appearance and symptoms of this disease, in the old world, and in
the new, were more completely alike than I expected. From the difference of
situation, greater dryness of our atmosphere, and extraordinary heat of the
weather, (from 88. to 96. of Farht.) I did expect a greater variation.

THE inoculated part in this boy, was surrounded by an efflorescence which
extended from his shoulder to his elbow, which made it necessary to apply some
remedies to lessen it; but the " symptoms," as they are called, scarcely drew
him from his play more than an hour or two; and he went through the disease in
so light a manner, as hardly ever to express any marks of peevishness. A piece
of true skin was fairly taken out of the arm by the virus, the part appearing
as if eaten out by a caustic, a never failing sign of thorough section of the
system in the inoculated smallpox.

SATISFIED with the appearances and symptoms in this boy, I inoculated another
of three years of age, with matter taken from his brother's arm, for he had no
pustles on his body. He likewise went through the disease in a perfect and very
satisfactory manner. This child pursued his amusements with as little
interruption as his brother. Then I inoculated a servant boy of about 12 years
of age, with some of the infected thread from England. His arm was pretty sore,
and his " symptoms" pretty severe. He treated himself rather harshly by
exercising unnecessarily in the garden, when the weather was extremely hot
(Farht. Thermr. 96, in the shade!) and then washing his head and upper parts of
his body under the pump, and setting, in short, all rules at defiance, in my
absence. Nevertheless, this boy went through the disorder without any other
accident than a sore throat and a stiffness of the muscles of the neck, all
which soon vanished by the help of a few remedies.

BEING obliged to go from home a few days, I requested my colleague Dr. WARREN,
to visit these children. Dr. DANFORTH, as well as some other physicians, came
from Boston out of curiosity, and so did several practitioners from the
country. I mention this, because it gave rise to a groundless report, that one
of the children had so bad an arm that I thought it prudent to take the advice
of some of my brethren upon it.

FROM a full maturated pustle in my little boy of three years old, I inoculated
his infant sister, already weaned, of one year. At the same time, and from the
same pustle, I inoculated its nursery maid. They both went through the disease
with equal regularity. As this woman was the first adult person on whom I had
performed the operation, I was more constant in my enquiries, and more careful
to note symptoms as they arose. They were very similar to those of the lighter
kind from inoculation for the smallpox, viz. a slight dizziness and nausea,
watery eyes, chilliness, soreness of the flesh, usually called by the common
people in this country, " bones'-ache", a general lassitude, transient pains in
the region of the stomach, loins and head, with a disinclination to animal food
and exercise; yet none of these symptoms were so oppressive as to diminish for
a moment her attention to her little charge, whose symptoms, we conjectured,
kept pace with those of its nurse.

THIS striking similarity of symptoms has induced some practitioners in this
country, as well as some physicians in Great Britain, to conclude, that the
kine-pox was only a variety of the smallpox. We confess they appear to be near
a kin; yet some circumstances lead us to conclude them specifically different;
for example, we can communicate the vaccine poison to any cow by inoculation,
but we cannot give her by any method the smallpox. This is not, however,
peculiar to the cow -- It is true of every other brute on which the trial has
been made; without which provision in nature, the whole human race might again
suffer under this terrific scourge!

I ATTEMPTED to inoculate two more of our female domestics, but failed, owing
probably to using a new method recommended by an eminent surgeon in London,
which was, to pass a needle with an infected thread through the skin, so as to
leave the thread in. This, it is probable, underwent an alteration similar to
what happens in the operation of wire-drawing, where most of the oil and some
of the metal are left behind. Then I performed the operation on four gentlemen,
one of them a physician, whose symptoms were so nearly alike what I have
already related, that I find nothing new to add, excepting that one of them
chose to live pretty freely by way of experiment, and whose febrile symptoms,
especially the headache, were full as much as he could bear and walk about.
This convinced me that the Kine-pox was a disease not to be trifled with.

CHAP. III.
HAVING thus traced the most important facts respecting the causes and effects
of the kine-pox up to their source in England, and having confirmed most of
them by actual experiment in America, one experiment only remained behind to
complete the business. To effect this, I wrote the following letter to Dr.
ASPINWALL, physician to the smallpox hospital in the neighborhood of Boston.
See my account of his hospital, in the 2d vol. of Dr. HAYGARTH's "sketch and
correspondence," printed at Warrington, in England, 1792.


CAMBRIDGE, AUG. 2d, 1800. DEAR DOCTOR,
YOU have doubtless heard of the newly discribed disorder, known in England by
the name of the cow-pox, which so nearly resembles the smallpox, that it is
now agreed in Great Britain, that the former will pass for the latter.

I HAVE collected every thing that has been printed, and all the information I
could procure from my correspondents, respecting this distemper, and have been
so thoroughly convinced of its importance to humanity, that I have procured
some of the vaccine matter, and therewith inoculated seven of my family. The
inoculation has proceeded in six of them exactly as described by WOODVILLE and
JENNER; but my desire is to confirm the doctrine by having some of them
inoculated by you.

I CAN obtain variolous matter, and inoculate them privately, but I wish to do
it in the most open and public way possible. As I have imported a new
distemper, I conceive that the public have a right to know exactly every step I
take in it. I write this, therefore, to enquire whether you will, on
philanthropic principles, try the experiment of inoculating some of my children
who have already undergone the cow-pox. If you accede to my proposal, I shall
consider it as an experiment in which we have co-operated for the good of our
fellow-citizens, and relate it as such in the pamplet I mean to publish on the
subject.

I am, etc. etc. B. W.

Hon. WILLIAM ASPINWALL, Esquire. Brookline.

To this letter the Dr. returned a polite answer, assuring me of his readiness
to give any assistance in his power, to ascertain whether the cow-pox would
prevent the smallpox; observing, that he had at that time fresh matter that he
could depend on, and desiring me to send the children to the hospital for that
purpose. Of the three which I offered, the Dr. chose to try the experiment on
the boy of 12 years of age, mentioned in page 20, whom he inoculated in my
presence by two punctures, and with matter taken that moment from a patient who
had it pretty full upon him. He at the same time, inserted an infected thread,
and then put him into the hospital, where was one patient with it the natural
way. On the 4th day, the Dr. pronounced the arm to be infected. It became every
hour sorer, but in a day or two it dried off, and grew well, without producing
the slightest trace of a disease; so that the boy was dismissed from the
hospital and returned home the 12th day after the experiment. ONE FACT, in such
cases, is worth a thousand arguments. Five more of my family, including three
of my children, are now in Dr. ASPINWALL's hospital.


IT is proper to mention, that there are some circumstances, which if not
attended to critically, may bring the inoculation of this recently imported
distemper into a temporary disrepute. Dr. JENNER, aware of such an accident,
has pointed out the fallacious sources whence a disease imitative of the
variolae vaccinae, or kine-pox, may arise, with a view of preventing a spurious
disease.

Of the sources of spurious cow-pox, he enumerates,

1st -- That arising from pustules on the nipples, or udder of the cow, which
pustles contain no specific virus.

2dly -- From matter, (although originally possessing the specific virus,)
which has suffered a decomposition, either from putrefaction, or from any other
cause less obvious to the senses.

3dly -- From matter taken from an ulcer in an advanced stage, which ulcer
arose from a true cow-pox.

HE then gives a striking instance, where a practitioner was under the
necessity of taking some small-pox-matter from a pustule, which experience
since proved, was advanced too far to answer the purpose intended, and says
that the same may happen in the cow-pox.

HE next shows, that when the inoculated part has degenerated into an ulcer,
the matter, although it may possess the power of inflaming the patient's arm,
is nevertheless, void of that specific virus requisite to produce the genuine
disease; and of course, incapable of securing the human system against the
smallpox.

HE doubts whether pure pus, though contained in a smallpox pustule, is ever
capable of producing the smallpox perfectly. I have often been foiled, says
Dr. JENNER, in my endeavors to communicate the cow-pox by inoculation. An
inflammation will sometimes succeeds the scratch or puncture, and in a few days
disappears without producing any further effect. Sometimes it will even produce
an ichorous fluid, and yet the system will not be affected. The same thing, we
know, happens in the smallpox.

THREE of four instances of the kind are recorded to have happened in England.
The children were inoculated for the smallpox, and took the disorder. The
opposers to the introduction of the kine-pox have uncandidly adduced these
instances, and they have been repeated in this country, without any
explanation, by some who were capable of explaining them.

ANOTHER circumstance, tending to discredit the idea of discarding the
smallpox and substituting the kine-pox, is mixing the two diseases together,
and perhaps giving one for the other, as we presume was done in some of the
hospitals in London. A physician of the first rank, wrote thus to the author,
in Feb. 1799. Dr. W. tells me, that he finds the cow-pox a more serious disease
than was at first imagined; and considering the safety of inoculation, (for
smallpox), and the danger of introducing a new disease into the human frame,
probably the practice will not increase.

IT was just about the same time, that Dr. SIMS wrote the letter referred to in
page 33, so that the flattering prospect of banishing the smallpox forever
from Great Britain, seemed to be obscured for several weeks. But Dr. JENNER,
and Mr. R --, a very distinguished surgeon and native of the county where the
cow-pox first appeared, undertook to examine how it happened that a distemper
so mild in Glocestershire, should be converted into a pretty severe disease in
London. This matter was unravelled, and the end of it appeared to be this: The
first subjects inoculated for the kine-pox, were chiefly people maintained as
poor. They were inoculated at the smallpox hospipitals, and several of them
for both kinds, smallpox and kine-pox at the same time, or at an interval of a
day or two, by way of experiment; and it is more than probable, says one of my
correspondents, that a lancet infected with variolous matter, was used for
inoculating for the kine-pox. Be that as it may, it is certain that the
patients of a celebrated inoculator, had the disease with greater severity than
any other practitioner. In general, the patients had more fever, sorer arms,
and more pustules in London, than in the country. It may be necessary to inform
some of our readers, that the people of England call every part of their Island
"THE COUNTRY" out of London; that city being called, by way of preeminence,
"THE TOWN."
Those of the authors friends who have urged him to establish an hospital for
the kine-pox, will now see more clearly, the reasons for not following their
advice. An hospital might possibly heighten a very mild distemper into a
formidable disease. "Dr. JENNER told me, says Dr. LETTSOM, that his patients in
the country have rarely more than one pustule. So says Mr. R. who comes from
the same neighborhood. He is fully of opinion that the disease has been mixed
at the smallpox hospital, or why should it differ so essentially from the
original disease in the country?"


AFTER this successful investigation, inoculation for the kine-pox went on with
redoubled activity; insomuch, that from the date of Dr. SIMS' letter, to May
following, (just about a year) 29,400 persons of all ages, passed through the
disease WITHOUT A SINGLE DEATH!

HE who reflects on the difference of the two diseases, the kine and the
smallpox, the one contagious, the other not; the one not unfrequently attended
with disagreeable consequences, and sometimes fatal, while the other is as
little hazardous as the swine or chicken-pox -- He, I say, who compares the two
diseases and their consequences, will not hesitate a moment in his preference.

"IN constitutions predisposed to scrophula, says Dr. JENNER, how frequently we
see the inoculated smallpox rouse into activity this distressful malady. There
are many, who, from some peculiarity in the habit, resist the common effects of
the smallpox matter inserted in the skin, and who are, in consequence, haunted
through life with the distressing idea of being insecure from subsequent
infection. A ready mode, says he, of dissipating anxiety, originating from such
a cause, must now appear obvious; for the constitution may at any time be made
to feel the febrile attack of the cow-pox." See JENNER's inquiry, p. 70.


THERE is another circumstance of very great moment to some families, I mean
those in which the smallpox always proves fatal, even under inoculation. But
this can be best enforced and illustrated by the letter of Mr.WALKER, an
eminent engraver in London, addressed to the editors of the MEDICAL AND
PHYSICAL JOURNAL, accompanied with a colored engraving, representing the
disorder in the arm through all its different stages. Vol. 1. p. 118.


"HAVING a son between ten and eleven months old, and the smallpox being in my
opposite, as well as my next neighbor's family, I conceived it so unlikely for
my infant to escape the contagion, and having heard of the benign tendency and
mildness of the cow-pox, I made it the subject of particular enquiry, and from
all I could learn, there had never been known an instance of its proving fatal.
On the other hand, I had experienced the smallpox in my own family, both
natural and inoculated, to terminate mortally. On these considerations, and
admitting it should not have the desired effect of a preventative against the
smallpox, it would still leave my child in the same situation as others; but
if it really were a preservative, as it appears to be in numerous instances,
the advantage would be incalculable; and, if encouraged, might in the end even
annihilate that dreadful scourage of mankind, the smallpox.

"To encourage others, I transmit my observations, made in the progress of the
disorders, accompanied with a drawing, exhibiting the various appearances of
the pustules.

"ON Monday, 19th February 1799, the infection was given by Dr. WOODVILLE, in
the presence of Dr. WILLAN, by two incisions, etc. etc." Then follows an
account of the appearances (with nine representations colored to the life, by
the anxious parent) through the whole disease, which we omit, as they exhibit
nothing new or extraordinary; and shall add only the two last paragraphs, which
are these:

"ON the 18th March, the whole scab was seperating all round the edges, and the
child was inoculated with variolous matter for the common smallpox, which on
this day (March 21st,) is evidently dying away like a simple scratch.

"DURING the whole time, the child never exhibited any particular symptoms of
indisposition, and had so little fever, that it was hardly, if at all,
perceptible; he, however seemed by the motion of his arm, to be sensible of a
soreness under it; but neither that, nor the eruption affected him so much as
to render him cross or peevish, although he cut three teeth during the progress
of the disorder."

London, Rosamond-street, Clerkenwell, 21st March, 1799.

THE editors of this work, (which is one of the best medical reviews in
Europe), make this remark on the above narrative: The preceding communication
on so interesting a subject, we consider as peculiarly valuable, as Mr. WALKER
not only shows a mind sufficiently enlightened to give a fair trial to a new
method of conquering one of the most dreadful scourges to mankind, but from his
professional abilities, also enables us to exhibit the progressive appearances
of the cow-pox. See Med. and Phys. Journal, vol. 1st. p. 120.

HAVING adduced thus much in favor of this newly described distemper, it is
agreeable to the candor we profess, to inform the reader, that one physician of
eminence, and but one in London, has written a letter rather against the
practice; I mean Dr. JOHN SIMS. It is grounded on an extract of a letter from
"an intelligent gentleman, not of the profession," saying that "there is a
gentleman of eminence in the law who has had the cow-pox twice, which he caught
by milking his father's cows when a lad. This gentleman was afterward
inoculated for the smallpox, and had it in so great abundance that his life
was dispaired of. "He describes the cow-pox as the most loathsome of diseases,
and adds, that his right arm was in a state of eruption, both the first and
second time, from one extremity to the other; the pain was excessive, and his
fingers so stiff, he could scarcely move them." -- Nay, he speaks of the
"abhorrence the disease created in the family." Had this gentleman been of the
medical profession, he would have known, at once, that this was not the
cow-pox, but an ulceration, similar to what Dr. JENNER mentions in p. 8. and 9.
of his 2d part. If this was the cow-pox, it was very different from any ever
seen since. It appears pretty clearly, that this gentleman, eminent in the law,
was under a mistake. Dr. SIM's communication is dated Feb. 13th, 1799, and may
be seen in the 1st vol. of the MEDICAL AND PHYSICAL JOURNAL In a second letter
in the same volume, which is explanatory and apologetical, he says, he had no
intention of declaring himself an enemy to the inoculation of this disease;
that his only wish was, to induce the practitioners to parse a little, to
obtain more decided experience of its utility, before it should be generally
recommended. This letter is dated April 20th, 1799, since which, decided
experience of its utility has been obtained, and Dr. SIMS is now among the firm
advocates for the operation. The reader, however, is entreated to peruse these
two letters, because they have been quoted by some who did not advert to their
being written at so early a period of the business.

Dr. MOSELY has raised some objections to the practice; but it would be unkind
to repeat them at this time. We have glanced at some of his notions in the note
at the bottom of our first page. One idea of his, however, we cannot pass over,
because that too has been repeated among us. Coming clothed in the garb of
prudence, we must not treat it but respecfully. We allow, say they, that the
kine-pox secures the constitution from the smallpox for a short time, because
that has been proved; but how do we know it will secure it for a length of
time. Dr. MOSELY, says Mr. Mr. RING, See Med. and Phys. Journal, vol. 2d, p. 25.
expresses a suspicion, that the cow-pox can only render the habit
unsusceptible of the smallpox " for a time." "This, observes Mr. R. is refuted
by volumes of evidence, and a cloud of witnesses." Persons who repeat this
suspicion of Dr. MOSELY, should be informed of the number now living in the
western counties of England, who have had the disease from milking cows in the
early part of life, and who have resisted every attempt to communicate the
smallpox to them after the lapse of 15, 20, 30, and even 50 years and upwards.
See the case of SARAH PORTLOCK, who was inoculated ineffectually for the
smallpox twenty-seven years after receiving the infection of the kine-pox from
milking cows; of MARY BARGE, thirty-one years; of ELIZABETH WIN, thirty-eight
years, and above all, of JOHN PHILLIPS, FIFTY-THREE years after. See also,
several cases in the 1st and 2d volumes of the Med. and Phys. Journal.

THIS was one of the most formidable objections made against inoculation for
the smallpox, when first practiced by Dr. BOYLSTON in Boston, in 1721. Yet the
long experience of eighty years has now effectually removed every suspicion of
the kind.

ALTHOUGH the inoculation for the cow-pox was not received in England, without
a degree of caution becoming an enlightened age and people, yet it may be
asserted with truth, that nothing has occurred in the annals of medicine, which
has been taken up more generally, received more heartily, or conducted more
prudently. And it cannot be supposed, that we Americans shall give it a less
candid reception, or examine it less ingenuously.

THE people of New England, particularly of Boston, set a noble example to
their elder brethren of Old-England, in adopting the Turkish practice of
inoculation for the smallpox, in 1721. Now, the English, in their turn, lead
the way in a practice still more salutiferous. For, although the inoculation
which commenced here in 1721, stripped that horrid disease, the smallpox, of
more than half its terrors, yet it is the kine-pox that will effect its
extermination. If, therefore, it be found that the latter is every way an
easier, safer and more pleasant distemper, and a perfect security against the
former, do not humanity, regard to our country, the dictates of reason, and the
precepts of religion, urge us all to unite our efforts to exterminate "a
disease, which has, during the last thousand years, destroyed full a tenth, and
probably a larger proportion, of the human race." To effect so desirable a
purpose, I have labored to collect all the evidence on this important subject,
and to lay it before the American public, in so plain and simple a manner, as
to require no other preparation for its admission than common sense and an
unprejudiced mind.

FINIS.
APPENDIX.
MY PROFESSIONAL ENGAGEMENTS, PARTICULARLY AT THIS SEASON, IN THE UNIVERSITY,
RENDERED IT CONVENIENT TO INSERT IN THE NEWS-PAPER THE FOLLOWING GENERAL ANSWER
TO A NUMBER OF QUERIES PUT TO ME BY LETTER, AND OTHERWISE, RESPECTING THE
NATURE AND INOCULATION OF THE KINE-POX.
1st. RESPECTING its contagion. It appears, by all the observations and
experiments hitherto made public, that the disease is not contagious or
catching from one person to another. Even the cows do not take it of each
other, if an open rail-fence be interposed between them. Dr. W's. children
laboring under the disorder, slept through the whole course of it with those
not then inoculated for it. "It does not seem possible, (says Dr. JENNER,) for
the contagious matter to produce the disease from effluvia, or by any other
means than contact; so that a single individual in a family might at any time
receive it without the risk of infecting the rest, or of spreading a distemper
that fills a country with error."

2d. RESPECTING diet previous to receiving the disease. Dr. W. had rather
inoculate persons in the plenitude of health, without the least alteration of
diet, or mode of living.

3d. IT is difficult to answer the queries respecting the mildness or severity
of the disorder. Dr. WATERHOUSE answers generally, that in a vast majority of
cases, it is incomparably milder than the inoculated smallpox, and it appears
from experiments in England, that it has become milder as it progressed. Thus
according to Dr. WOODVILL's last report, out of 310 cases, only 39 had pustules
that suppurated; viz. out of the first hundred 19 had pustules; out of the
second 13; and out of the last 110 only 7 had pustules. There have been a few
cases, however, where it has proved an heavy disease, the patient being
burdened with between 1000 and 1500 pustules. It is presumed, that had such
persons been inoculated for the smallpox, they would have died.

4th. As to the best season for receiving the disease. In this region, the
season preferred for inoculation of the kine-pox, as well as the smallpox, is
from August to November; coolish nights and ripe fruit are pleasant assistants
to the inoculator. Very cold weather is unfavorable to the kine-pox. It
aggravated the soreness of the arm to that degree in England, that the
inoculators were obliged to postpone their operations until warmer weather.
Cold, combined with dampness, is worst of all. About a dozen persons passed
through the distemper at Cambridge, when the weather was hotter than ever was
known there since the use of thermometers.

5th. To those of the faculty who have applied to him by letter to supply them
with matter for inoculation -- he would just observe, that as he has taken much
pains in this business, run no small risk of reputation, as well as of personal
feelings, there are few, he trusts, that will wonder he is anxious to have the
matter under his own eye until the practice is more firmly established by the
public opinion. Some unsuccessful cases at the beginning, deprived Scotland of
the blessings of inoculation for the smallpox for (...) than 20 years. He
hopes this idea will (...) excuse at present, even in the minds (...) pupils.
Dr. W is happy to find that every GENTLEMAN of the faculty in Boston and its
vicinity, has understood this, and conducted accordingly.


DR. WATERHOUSE informs those (...) applied to him out of Cambridge, to
inoculate their families, that he declined it only until the disorder had gone
fairly through his own family, and until some of them had been inoculated by
Dr. ASPINWALL, and otherwise exposed to the smallpox. But having now confirmed
his assertion, that the kine-pox protects the constitution from the infection
of the smallpox, by a fair experiment, he is ready to attend them whenever
they choose. Those who live in Boston, may rest assured, that from the
proximity of his residence to the capital, he shall make such arrangements as
to be able to attend them as punctually as if he resided there.

CAMBRIDGE, Aug. 18, 1800.
POSTSCRIPT.
ALTHOUGH I am convinced that the KINE-POX is a shorter, safer, and pleasanter
disease than the inoculated smallpox even (...) in the most fortunate manner,
yet there is some (...) conceiving too lightly of it. The inoculation of (...)
and sixty persons of different ages and (...), has (...) that the KINE-POX
requires some care on the part of (...) well as attention on that of the (...);
and (...) opinion, that an abstinance from animal food (...) ^^^mulating
drinks, is as necessary in the inoculation of (...) as in that of the
Smallpox. A few examples will illustrate what I wish to convey. Two young
gentlemen were rendered somewhat uncomfortable for three or four days in
consequence of eating and drinking as usual. One, the least attentive to
directions, after walking to, and from Boston in A VERY HOT DAY, had his
febrile symptoms very much aggravated. Has headache was excruciating, and a
slight delirium came on in the evening, with a stricture across the region of
the stomach, (...) to what we sometimes find in the casual smallpox. Such
imprudent conduct might have destroyed him if inoculated for the smallpox. A
boy, after eating green-corn, was crammed with fruit, under the absurd idea
that RIPE FRUIT CAN HURT NO ONE, so that with the symptoms of KINE-POX was
joined a CHOLERA MORBUS. In another boy, the MUMES appeared about the 4th day,
and arrested the infection. I could add some other instances to prove that this
new disease, mild and safe as it is, requires more of the physician than merely
putting the matter into the arm; but as this treatise is addressed not so much
to the PHYSICIAN, as to the COMMON SENSE of all, I purposely avoid professional
directions or criticisms.

ERRATUM.
In several places for "PUSTLES," read "PUSTULES."


