A FUNERAL SERMON, IN COMMEMORATION OF THE VIRTUES OF GENERAL WASHINGTON,
DELIVERED BY THE REV'D JOHN V. WEYLIE, ON THE TWENTY-SECOND OF FEBRUARY, AT THE
PARISH OF FREDERICK, AND COUNTY OF FREDERICK.

Published at the request of the Audience.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THE TWENTY-SECOND DAY OF FEBRUARY, Eighteen Hundred, will be ever memorable in
the annals of AMERICA, for the deep and general expression of grief exhibited
by all ranks of Citizens for the loss of their BELOVED WASHINGTON The eloquence
and talents displayed on that sad occasion, in the many Eulogies and Sermons to
which it n^w ^ise, will also, it is conceived, be an hon^ble testimony in
fa^our of the literary char^cter of the c^untry.

That (...) benefaction of that great man to the Academy of ^^^xandria, should
i^ to sh^rt a time have reared up a young man capable ^f emulating the best
discourses delivered ^n that day* must give pleasure to all friends to merit
and unprotected genius; -- The Citiz^ns of Alexandria, for whose immediate
benefit it was cre^ted, must feel in a particular manner. They are all
acquainted with the narrow circumstances of the Parents of the Author of the
following Sermon; and know what must h^ve been his situation, but for such an
institution. As no hu^an c^ndition is exempt from the most painful reverses of
fortune, it must be a comfortable reflection to the r^chest, that such
provis^^n is made for their disasters, as may console them in the deepest
gloom; -- To those among them who are parents, no more need be said.

That Europe has been much in^^^ted, for her brighte^^ literary ^rnaments* to
similar institu^ions, is an undeniable (...) -- May America, deeply impre^sed
with their (...) he induced to adopt the frequent admonitions of WASHINGTON on
this head, and follow his example!

It may be necess^ry t^ observe, that the f^llowing Ser^ (...), by Col. (...)
General WASHINGTON's Aids in the revolutionary war, whose benevolence, and
readiness to patronize worth, are evidenced on all occasions. To him and an
intelligent audience, it appeared to possess too much merit to be suppressed;
-- At their joint request it is offered to the public.

When it is known to be the production of a young Clergyman, not exceeding
twenty-three years of age, who received his education as already described,
patronage and indulgence cannot be solicited in vain. That it is fraught with
advice which would do honor to the oldest Divine, and is marked in a peculiar
manner, by the strong effusions of a grateful heart, will, it is hoped, (...)
readily ad^itted.

A FUNERAL SERMON ON THE DEATH OF GENERAL WASHINGTON.
"How are the mighty fallen, and the weapons of war perished!"

II. Samuel I.^7.
THOUGH the thoughts of death and a future sta^ have not a constant and uniform
influence on human life, yet they will sometimes press upon the imagination.
Our circumstances may be flourishing even to the extent of our wishes; the cup
of affliction may be removed from our lips, and we may enjoy the warmest beams
of prosperity; but still we cannot always avoid the reflection, that we must,
some time or other, bid adieu to all sublunary enjoyments.

As the great end of life is to prepare for death, Providence has surrounded
us with such objects as furnish matter for moral reflections, and continually
remind us that this life is transitory and uncertain. The fall of the leaf in
autumn, and the fading of the grass, give us warning that the fashion of this
world passes away.

But lest these changes in the vegetable world should produce no effect upon
us, we have frequent opportunities of contemplating the ravages of death among
our own species. Almost every day, instances of mortality happen around us, and
numbers are continually dropping into the gulf of eternity. But even these
admonitions are often regarded with indifference. The (...) of an obs^ (...),
but (...) the small circle of his acquaint^ (...) generality consider it as a
thing of course; as a matter in which they are not interested.

It is therefore necessary that more awful intimations should occasionally be
given; that events should sometimes happen, which may irresistably arrest
attention, and teach mankind that they are but mortal. When a person
illustrious for his actions, and beloved for his virtues, departs this life,
the eyes of mankind are opened; those reflections, which they once avoided as
unpleasant, rush involuntarily into the mind, and convince them of the
precarious nature of their enjoyments. The leaves of the forest may fall
unnoticed; but when the majestic oak is torn up by the tempest, and laid
prostrate on the earth, it cannot fail to attract the observation of the
passing traveller. The solitary cottage is gradually destroyed by time, and
sinks imperceptibly into decay; but when the cloud capt towers and gorgeous
palaces are overturned, we pause to contemplate the mighty ruin, and heave a
sigh for the instability of human grandeur.

An event of this kind, my Brethren, has recently happened. A great man has
fallen among u^ The silver cord is loosed, the golden bowl is broken, the
pitcher is broken at the fountain, and the wheel is broken at the cistern.
WASHINGTON has gone to his long home, and the mourners go about the streets.

It is not my intention to trace, at present, the steps by which this great man
rose to the summit of glory, nor to relate those exertions by which he
conducted his country through a long and perilous war, and erected the temple
of Liberty in this western world. -- When a life is marked by such a train of
splendid actions; when a character is distinguished by such an assemblage of
virtues, the mind is at a loss where to begin the striking enumeration. This
subject, therefore, I shall leave to the Livies and Virgils of future ages: to
them it will prove (...) ^stible them* They ^ill tell how (...) united the
(...) the (...) valor of Marceli^^, and (...) the (...) Am^rican Liberty* They
will celebrate his ^^^ent patriotism, his unshaken magnanimity, his extensive
benevolence -- But what am I saying? Already have the pens of the Historian and
the Poet consigned his name to immortality. His renown has already spread as
(...) as the influence of civilizat^on reaches; and it will descend from age
to age with fresh accessions of glory, like a generous river, which is
augmented in its course, by the confluence of tributary streams.

Instead, then, of attempting an eulogium on the character of the deceased, I
shall endeavor, through divine assistance, to make a few ref^^ctions on the
melancholy event, which has separated our friend from u^ for ever.

We have now, my Brethren, a fresh and striking insta^ce, that no human
condition is exempt from mortality.

"The boast of heraldry, the pomp of power,
And all that beauty, all that wealth ever gave,
Await alike the inevitable hour --
The paths of glory lead but to the grave."
WASHINGTON has given us an awful proof of the truth of this assertion. The
man, whose reputation filled the Universe, is now confined within the narrow
compass of a tomb. That arm, which dealt destruction among the foes of his
country, is nerveless and ^nstrung. Those eyes, which beamed benevolence, are
now closed in a long and peaceful slumber -- a slumber that shall last till the
morning of the resurrection. That bosom, which glowed with patriotism and the
love of liberty, has ceased to beat, and is now but a clod of the valley. --
Ye unthinking mortals, who tread the giddy round of pleasure, and spend your
days in petty ^gles, her^r a (...) fix (...)* I^ a (...) portion of glory (...)
by man before (...) ^armest gratitude and affection of millibus; if all the
virtues that dignify human nature, could have averted the stroke of death,
WASHINGTON would still be living. Whatever, then, may be your pursuits;
whatever may be your prospects, remember that this is the goal to which you
must finally come. Let this event, therefore, which has filled America with
sorrow and consternation, be to you a monitory lesson. Let it teach you to be
wise, to consider your latter end; and let it stir you up to live in such a
manner, that you may die the death of the righteous, and that your last end may
be like his.

Veterans of America! ye who have fought in the sacred cause of freedom, and
conquered under the banners of WASHINGTON, what are your feelings on the
present occasion? You have seen your Hero victorious in the conflict of armies;
you have seen him directing the war where to pour its fury; you have seen him
presiding in our councils, and forming plans for the prosperity of a rising
empire; but never again shall you behold him engaged in these glorious and
useful occupations. He who led you to victory and triumph, has fallen himself
beneath the arm of the exterminating angel. Neither the roar of battle, nor
even the voice of his country -- that voice which he always heard with
veneration, and obeyed with alacrity, shall again disturb his repose. He who
taught you how to conquer, has now taught you a more awful and important
lesson; he has taught you how to die. Your Chief was not wanting to himself in
the trying hour of dissolution. He was unlike those men, who can brave death in
the tumult of battle, but shrink from his silent and gradual approaches. To the
very last moment he possessed his soul in peace, and preserved that firmness
and intrepidity which had distinguished him through the whole course of his
life. For him death had no terrors, and the grave was only a quiet asylum.

(...) WASHINGTON! Y^ (...) be sensible that y^ (...) the (...) of that
und^scovered (...) from (...) can return* According to the (...) course of
^^ture, you must expect shortly to rejoin your Hero in the dark dominions of
death. It would, therefore, become you to think seriously of eternity, and mak^
such preparations as will enable you to depart from this world, with the sa^
^rtitude and resignation which he displayed. Do not, however, bolster up
yourselves with fallacious (...), nor suppose that courage alone will bear you
with dignity through the last scene of life. Be not deceived, I entreat you, by
such an expectation. No man was ever braver than WASHINGTON; but his calmness
in a dying moment was not the result of mere constitutional courage. It sprung
from a more exalted principle -- from a steadfast belief in Revelation, and a
strict adherence to the precepts of the Gospel. If you wish, then, after an
honorable and useful life, to die as he died, this is the foundation, and this
is the only one, on which you must build your hopes.

Young men of America! To you I now address myself. At your time of life, the
bosom naturally glows with the love of virtue, and the admiration of
excellence, and pants to emulate the actions of illustrious men. It is
therefore proper, that the most glorious examples should be placed before your
eyes; and is it possible that a model more perfect and unexceptionable than
that of WASHINGTON, should be selected for your imitation? You have heard every
tongue resound his praises: you have seen the aged soldier forget his
infirmities, and kindle with the enthusiasm of other years, while he related
his campaigns, and described the bat^ he has fought with WASHINGTON. You have
heard others extol his charity and benificence, which resembled a river
scattering ver^ure and fertility along its banks. You have heard men of the
greatest wisdom and experience, speak with admiration of his political talents.
And though some, affecting greater sagacity than their neighbors, have
pretended to discover flaws in his conduct as a statesman, yet even these
persons now lament his death with unfeigned sorrow; they acknowledge his
various and uncommon merits, and express their apprehensions that his loss will
never be repaired.

You see then, that virtue, though it may be over shadowed by a transient
cloud, will at last break forth upon the world in full brilliancy. You see that
true merit and real excellence will be respected, when personal invective has
lost its sting, and the insinuations of slander are no longer remembered. With
such prospects before your eyes; with such a model for imitation; with such
hopes to stimulate your exertions, you will be altogether inexcusable, if you
waste your time and misapply your talents. Remember that now is the reason for
making these acquisitions, which may hereafter render you honorable and useful
to your country, and raise you to an equality with WASHINGTON, EPAMINONDAS, and
the worthies of the world. If you are actuated with a generous desire of
reaching such distinguished excellence, you must never lose ^ight of this grand
maxim; that virtue only can conduct you to true glory and substantial
happiness; that no life is pleasing to God, nor respectable in the eyes of the
world, unless it be useful to mankind. Do not deceive yourselves on a subject
of such vast importance as the regulation of your conduct. This affects your
present and future happiness; it will either exalt you to glory, or sink you
into contempt and ignominy.

There are two traits in the character of WASHINGTON, which I must earnestly
recommend to your imitation, as it is to be feared that they are growing rather
unfashionable -- I mean Modesty and Diffidence. These are qualities becoming at
every period of life, but peculiarly graceful and ornamental in youth. They
will never fail to prepossess the world strongly in your favor. ^hey are (...)
and dis^ (...) and have always been inseparable att^ upon (...) greatness. They
characterized in a striking manner the divine Socrates and the immortal Newton.
While the Grecian Sage was inculcating the purest system of morality, which had
then appeared in the world; while he delivered such sublime doctrines of
Religion, and such just ideas respecting the Deity, as astonished an idolatrous
and superstitious age; he was deeply impressed with a sense of human frailty
and ignorance. While the British Philosopher removed the veil, which had so
long concealed the wonders of creation; while he penetrated into the deep
designs of the Almighty; while his vast soul comprehended, at a glance, the
various laws which regulate the movements not only of this world, but of those
myriads of worlds, which are distributed throughout the immensity of space; he
never dreamed of his superiority to the rest of mankind. To these respectable
characters, we may add the AMERICAN FAB^US, who was equally remarkable for
diffidence. -- When his countrym^n, from a conviction of his superior wisdom
and experience, appointed him by an unanimou^ suffrage to the chief command; he
did not think it inconsistent with his dignity, to seek advice from others in
every trying emergency. He knew that all things were not given to all men; that
man was made to assist man; that in a multitude of Counselors there was
safety. Unlike the Hero of Macedon, he requited not the advice of his friends
with unkindness o^ contempt; he never envied their reputation, nor arrogated to
himself the glory that was due to them. He always bestowed ample praise upon
the good conduct of others* but when his own actions were crowned with success,
he piously ascribed it to the superintending care of providence.

Such, my young Friends, was the conduct of WASHINGTON, while he was justly
considered as the first man in America. He condescended to receive instruction
from others, while his own po^etr^ting mind seemed to (...) with ^itive (...),
the most wise and (...). He never ascribed any merit to himself, while he was
making those persevering and gigantic struggles for the freedom and
independence of his country, which astonished the world and endeared him to the
friends of humanity. Before a character so great, so august, so amiable, the
Heroes of antiquity stand abashed, and the modern Attilas " hide their
diminished heads."

Let this example teach you not to think more highly of yourselves than you
ought to think; but to think so^erly. See thou (says Moses) a young man wise
in his own c^^ceit? There is more hope of a fool than of him. If you suppose
yourselves wise enough already, the consequence must be, that you will despise
all future knowledge. If you are satisfied with crossing the threshold of the
temple of science, there your career must terminate, and you will never explore
the interior recesses of that holy sanctuary. If you imagine that the faculties
of your minds are already illimitable, they will never arrive at f^ll maturity.
If you set at naught the wisdom and experience of ages; if you treat with
unbecoming levity the most solemn and important subjects; if you attempt to
overthrow systems, which have been defended by an impenetrable phalanx of
Newtons, and Locks, and Butlers, and Clerks, and Campbells, and Watsoes; if
you spurn the efforts of those venerable ^haracters, who have rallied around
the citadel of our (...), and made a firm stand against the champions of
infidelity; be assured that the world, instead of looking up to you as profound
philosophers, will despise you as conceited pe^ants and ^allow sciol^ts.

Do not then, attempt to establish your reputation by declaiming against the
administration of your country; by scoffing at the sacred religion of your
Forefathers; by adopting the deceitful principles of a newfangled philosophy,
to which the fashion of the day may have given a momentary currency. Such
conduct may, ^ndeed, ra^se you for a time, in the opinion of the ignorant and
vicious; but never will it procure you the esteem of the virtuous and
discerning. It was not by acting thus, that WASHINGTON laid the foundation of
that glory which will last for ages. Nor is it by acting thus, that you will be
enabled to rise to distinction; to save your country in the hour of danger, and
receive the united plaudits and acclamations of your Fellow-Citizens.

I do not pretend to say that all of you will have it in your power to rival
the glory of WASHINGTON. On the contrary, I am convinced that the great
qualities which he displayed, are bestowed only on a chosen few. But even if
you possessed all his powers, it would require an extraordinary concurrence of
circumstances to call them forth into action, and exhibit them in their true
colors to the world. All of you cannot expect to be placed in such a
situation; for Providence does not make use of every man as an instrument for
promoting its great designs, for delivering a country, and giving happiness and
liberty to future generations. -- Human society, you know, cannot exist without
subordination. There must be hands to execute, as well as heads to contrive. --
Still, however, if you endeavor to do your duty in that state of life wherein
you are placed, you may contribute greatly to the public welfare and happiness.
Your life will be respectable, your death will be lamented, and your memory
will be blessed. In one respect, at least, you will equal WASHINGTON himself.
You will enjoy no less than he did, the smiles of an approving conscience; and
this, doubtless, was a reward more grateful to his exalted soul, than all the
honors which this world could have bestowed.

Add to this, that the greatest tribute you can pay to the memory of our
departed Hero, is to imitate his virtues. Statues and monuments are, at best,
but dubious tokens of the public affection. They may be erected to the bad as
well as to the good; to the tyrant, no less than to the Father of his Country.
But when the living endeavor to perpetuate the memory of the deceased by
copying their virtues, we may then infer, without a possibility of being
mistaken, that they act from the most cordial esteem and approbation. -- If
then the name of WASHINGTON was ever grateful to your ears -- if his actions
ever inspired your young minds with love and veneration, endeavor to resemble
him. Be firm and united in maintaining the Liberty and Constitution of your
country. Display a generous ardour for the support of that religion, which is
the only sure anchor that holds man to his duty. Act thus, and I will venture
to predict, that you will in no wise lose your reward. The lips of the hoary
head will bless the band of rising patriots. The late Father of his Country (if
aught of mortality can reach him now) will experience an augmentation of
happiness in the regions of bliss. America, instead of one, will have many
WASHINGTONS, and her enemies will still tremble. -- Although the mighty has
fallen, yet they will know that the holy flame of freedom has not expired; that
the weapons of war have not perished with him.

To those among you, my Countrymen, who direct the Councils of America, I must
not omit this favorable opportunity of addressing a few words. I mean not to
read political lectures from the pulpit, nor to arraign the sentiments and
conduct of any. It would be the height of presumption, for a person of my age
and inexperience, to offer directions to the Senators and Representatives of a
free, powerful, and enlightened nation. But in addressing you on the present
occasion, I fear not the imputation of arrogance and temerity, sheltered as I
am under the respectable authority of WASHINGTON. I only deliver the sentiments
of him who has long been, and will long continue to be, the object of your
affections. I exhort you to the accomplishment of a plan, which was
contemplated with much pl^^^ure by your departed Friend -- I mean the erection
of a National University. As the advantages of such an institution have been
pointed out by our Benefactor, I shall content myself with transcribing his
words.

"As it has always been a source of serious regret with me, to see the youth of
these United States sent to foreign countries for the purpose of education,
often before their minds were formed, or they had imbibed any adequate ideas of
the happiness of their own; contracting too frequently, not only habits of
dissipation and extravagance, but principles unfriendly to republican
government, and to the true and genuine libertie^ of mankind, which thereafter
are rarely overcome; -- For these reasons, it has been my ardent wish to see a
plan devised on a liberal scale, which could have a tendency to spread
systematic ideas through all parts of this rising Empire; thereby to do away
local attachments and state prejudices, as far as the nature of things would,
or indeed ought to admit, from our national councils. -- Looking anxiously
forward to the accomplishment of so desirable an object as this is (in my
estimation) my mind has not been able to contemplate any plan more likely to
effect the measure, than the establishment of an UNIVERSITY in a central part
of the United States, to which the youths of fortune and talents might be ^ent
from all parts thereof, for the completion of their education in all the
branches of polite literature; in arts and sciences, in acquiring knowledge in
the principles of politics and good government, and (as a ma^ter of infinite
importance in my judgment) by associating with each other, and forming
friendships in juvenile years, be enabled to free themselves in a proper degree
from those local prejudices and habitual jealousies which have just been
mentioned; and which, when carried to excess, are never fa^ling sources of
disquietude to the public mind, and pregnant of mischievous consequences to
this country." See the Will of General Washington -- page 8 -- 9.


Of such importance did an institution of this kind appear to our Philosophic
Patriot, that he bequeathed, in his last will, a considerable sum for its
establishment. In doing this, he plainly calls upon you to assist his
benevolent scheme, and not suffer his exertions to prove ineffectual. He has
tacitly exhorted you to show the world that patriotism and public spirit will
flourish in America, when the bones of her hero are mouldering in the dust. --
O WASHINGTON! Thou have been more than a Father to thy Country. The services of
other patriots have terminated with their lives, but thine have reached beyond
the grave. Not content with protecting our fathers and ourselves, thou have
extended a paternal care to our latest posterity. Hail! sacred philanthropy!
Thou source of all that is amiable and generous in our nature! Diffusive as the
light of heaven, and uncircumscribed by present objects, thou extendest a
benevolent regard to the misty regions of futurity. Thou raisest man from the
dust; thou preparest the triumphal arch, through which he advances to a
proximity with his Creator.

As for you, fair Daughters of Columbia, nature has exempted you from the
tumultuous scenes of public life. To you is consigned the pleasing and
important task of rearing the tender mind, and teaching the young idea how to
shoot. It is your province to direct the years of infancy and childhood, and to
you we are generally indebted for the first rudiments of education. You have it
in your power to stamp what impressions you please on the mind^ of your
children* and the impression^ which they now receive will most probably be
indelible. You may cause the gem of virtue to shoot forth with luxuriance and
vigor; or by unskilful management, you may re^ard its growth, and fix it in a
long and unprofitable sterility. It is in your power to retrieve* in some
measure, the heavy loss which your country has sustained, by instilling into
your children such principles as may ^ender them the WARR^N^, the ^NE^, and the
WASHINGTONS of future times. The prospect of this will surely be sufficient to
make you watch over your o^pring with the most assi^uou^ care, in order to
guard them from every vicious prop^nsity.

I shall make one more observation, and then dismis^ the subject.

No man (said an ancient sage) ought to be called happy before his death. As
WASHINGTON is now numbered among the pale nations of the dead, we may pronounce
that his life has been singularly happy. He possessed virtue, riches, honor,
power -- every thing that commonly finds a place in our estimate of human
felicity. He saw his country rescued from slavery by his exertions, and
enjoying the blessings of a free government and equal representation. He saw
her flourishing in Commer^, Arts and Science, and assuming an elevated rank
among the nations of the earth. He saw her afford an ample refutation of that
political dogma, "that ingratitude is always the most prominent ^eature in the
character of R^publics." For though envy often endeavored to blast his
reputation, yet the^e attempts proved abortive, and were never able to deprive
him of the general esteem and confidence of his Countrymen. After having seen
all this, he rose from the feast, like a satisfied guest, and departed with
tranquillity. After having lived enough for nature and for glory, he died,
before he experienced the various infirmities of age; while his constitution
was firm and unbroken; while the faculties of his mind were vigorous and
unimpaired. Providence seemed unwilling that the man, who had so long been
considered as a pattern of all that is great and ex^lte^ in human nature,
should, at last, exhibit a mortifying spectacle of weakness and dec^epi^ude.

Thou art fallen, O WASHINGTON! but thy name is yet mighty. Thy spirit shall
still walk abroad, and preside over the future destiny of ^hy country. In the
hour of danger, i^ shall rouse ten thousand spirits, great (...) ^hy self, in
every hand a thunder, to blast the enemies of Freedom, and wither the nerves of
tyranny and oppression. As long as Virtue shall have friends and admirers, as
long as Gratitude shall remain on earth; so long shall thy memory be revered.
Distant generations shall feel their bosoms glow with the love of Liberty and
of their Country, when they hear of thy deeds, or view the spot in which thy
sacred ashes repose. -- Thus shall the remembrance of thy virtues continue to
flourish, till Heaven and Earth shall pass away, and the Universe sink into its
original chaos.

FINIS.

