Dr. West's Sermon.

Greatness the Result of Goodness.

A SERMON, OCCASIONED BY THE DEATH OF GEORGE WASHINGTON, LATE COMMANDER IN
CHIEF OF THE ARMIES, AND FIRST PRESIDENT, OF THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, WHO
DIED DECEMBER 14, 1799, AGED 68.

BY SAMUEL WEST, D. D. Pastor of the Church in Hollis Street, BOSTON.

BOSTON: FROM THE PRINTING-OFFICE OF MANNING and LORING.

AT a Meeting of the Society in Hollis Street, Voted, That Messrs. EBENEZER
SEAVER, EBENEZER DORR and JOHN PARKER be a Committee, to wait on the Rev. Dr.
WEST, and request a copy of his Sermon on the Death of General WASHINGTON,
delivered on the 29th of December, 1799, for the press.

ALSO, Voted That General WASHINGTON's FAREWELL ADDRESS be printed with and
annexed to it.

Sermon.
UNDER the deep impression of that great event which has clad a nation in
mourning, you will feel the propriety of my addressing you, in the words of
David, on the death of the General of the armies of Israel, 2d Samuel, iii. 38.
A GREAT MAN IS FALLEN.

NEVER could this sentence be applied with greater justice, to any natural
descendant of our primitive parents, than in the present instance. Every heart
assents, whilst awakened by his death, to melancholy reflection; our thoughts
naturally run back to former periods, and retrace the numerous and extensive
services to his country and to mankind, by which the subject of our mourning
obtained, and forever secured, to himself, a just claim to greatness.

WE might here, with very little reserve, adopt the language which our divine
Savior applies to John the Baptist. "Among those who are born of women has
not arisen a greater than" our illustrious WASHINGTON.

BUT he is fallen -- fallen a victim to death, that last enemy, that universal
destroyer of our species, whose shafts level, without distinction, the great
with the little, in the grave. Adored be the GOD of mercy, this last enemy
shall, in the end, be compelled to release his captives, restore his prey, and
be himself completely vanquished, by Him who is higher than the highest, and
greater than the greatest of the children of men.

IN conformity to our text, we will I. GIVE the general outlines of true
greatness, as it respects the character of man; and then, II. APPLY it to the
present occasion, with suitable improvement.


ONE great, wise and benevolent design is apparent, in all the works and ways
of GOD: this leads us to the knowledge of his character, and to adore him as
infinitely good, the fountain of being and of blessedness. This affords us a
standard by which we are to estimate every subject presented to our thoughts,
whether in the material, animal, or rational world.

IT is not merely the diffusive light and warmth of the sun, the salubrity of
the air which we breathe, the verdure and fertility of the earth, with the
numberless sources of innocent and virtuous pleasure, which he has opened to
his rational offspring; but the painful discipline of affliction, by which he
trains us for an happy immortality, equally evidences the parental goodness of
GOD, his affection for us, and that the end of all his dispensations is the
happiness of his universal family.

BY this standard we are to estimate the value of every subject; and the
characters of men rise to greatness, or sink to contempt, in proportion as they
are or are not qualified and disposed to further the accomplishment of this
great design of the benevolent Parent of the universe. When we apply this rule
to rational and intelligent beings, we take into consideration what constitutes
the beauty and moral excellence of every action; it must result from
inclination and choice.

WE thus assign to all nature, and to all creatures, their proper place in our
estimation. Different shades of glory or of greatness are, as St. Paul
observes, annexed to the sun, the moon and the stars; not because they shine
with different degrees of splendor; but because they tend, in different
degrees, to promote the comfort and happiness of mankind.

THE Savior of the world founds greatness on services performed. If any man
will be great among you, let him be your servant -- let him be the servant of
all. On this he founds his own greatness -- I am among you as one who serves.
Many qualifications, and many favorable circumstances, must unite in the man
who rises to distinguished greatness in this way, and by such means as we have
mentioned above.

HE must possess a vigorous, active and enterprising genius, capable of the
most extensive and comprehensive views, of discerning at once what is proper to
be done, and the best means for effecting his purpose. This superior genius
must be connected with a body equally vigorous, and which is capable, not only
of sustaining, but of seconding, the energies of the mind. -- To this must be
added a form and address, suited at once to inspire respect and to conciliate
affection. -- He must possess an high degree of self government, the control of
his passions, his words and his actions, that each, in its place, may be made
to subserve his purpose. This self government must be the effect of exalted
piety toward God; followed by the most extensive good will to men, measured
and regulated by the different grades of social, civil and domestic relation.
These are some of the qualities which must unite in forming the character of
the truly great man.

BUT, in addition to these, there must be an happy concurrence of circumstances
to call his talents and his virtues into action. Some theater must be opened to
him, adapted to his capacity and equal to his views. He must be called to act
on an extensive stage. The part assigned him, in the providence of God, must be
arduous and difficult; such as might terrify another, but is only suited to
call into action the superior powers with which he is entrusted.

THE exercise of the greatest talents, with the concurrence of every favorable
circumstance, is not always followed with success, which it is not in mortals
to insure. The exertions of the good man, in the cause of human happiness,
ought to be acknowledged, though unsuccessful; they cannot, in the end, lose
their reward from Him, whose judgments are righteous altogether. But, with men,
success is wisdom. In order, therefore, to render a man great in the view of
the world, it is necessary that the exercise of the assemblage of virtues, and
the improvement of the happy concurrence of circumstances mentioned above,
should be followed with the accomplishment of some purpose of extensive and
lasting utility to mankind.

THIS success, instead of being attended or followed with the genera^ pride of
conquest, or an increasing fondness for the wealth, pomp and splendor of this
world, must produce effects directly the contrary, and afford an opportunity
for exhibiting an example of disinterestedness, self-denial and humility,
equally extraordinary, and worthy of admiration, as the services performed.

To give to greatness effects still more distinct, extensive and lasting, we
must suppose the possessor to have been equally useful, by the exercise of the
same exalted talents in different departments; and that his exertions,
successful in each, have procured new blessings on his country and on mankind;
and consequently thrown new rays of greatness or of glory around the character
of our illustrious mortal.

To complete the picture, which we meant to draw, of human greatness, to give
it all the force and render it as impressive as possible on the public mind, we
must suppose this distinguished character is withdrawn from our sight, at a
period when it shone with its full splendor, ere the shades of evening had in
any perceptible degree dimmed the luster of its rays, or the debilitating
influence of years had lessened our veneration for or expectations from it. In
that case, whilst we follow the illustrious spirit to the realms of light and
glory, we are ready to lament for ourselves and our country in the language of
Elisha, when he beheld the ascension of Elijah, " My father, my father, the
chariot of Israel, and the horsemen thereof."

SUCH are the requisites to true greatness of character in man. It admits of
infinite varieties, indeed, from the lowly cottager, who acts his little part
in obscurity, confined to the domestic circle, to him who figures in the view
of admiring nations, and is instrumental of obtaining the most rich and lasting
blessings for his country, and for mankind.

How widely different is this from what the world has been used to estimate as
greatness, and to distinguish with its loudest applause! A wanton triumph over
all that is dear and valuable to man, the peace, order, liberty and happiness
of society; a throne to which the aspiring son of pride has waded, through
rivers of human blood, or climbed over heaps of slaughtered fellow creatures,
the splendor of which is supported by the groans and tears of oppressed
millions. Cursed of the GOD of mercy is such destructive greatness; it well
deserves the fate assigned it by the prophet -- " Hell is moved to receive it."

THE character which we have drawn is in direct opposition to this havoc of
lawless ambition; it represents an earthly god, imitating the example of the
GOD of heaven, in diffusing blessings on all around him.

YOU have anticipated me in applying this character to the subject of our
present mourning. Such was our country's favorite son; and whilst we behold
her, with downcast eyes, weeping over the urn which contains his sacred ashes,
we approve her grief, and say, Weep on; never could tears flow for a cause more
just.

ALL the various qualities and circumstances mentioned above, are combined in
the subject of our present mournful admiration.

A MIND capable of the most extensive views; active as light; at once embracing
a variety of objects, comparing them, and forming the most accurate judgment on
the whole; a form and address, adapted at once to please and command respect; a
perfect mastery over his passions, calm and collected in the most trying
situations; a profound sense of the being, perfection and providence of GOD,
and of the necessary dependence of man upon the great Author of his existence,
for individual and for social happiness; an highly cultivated sense of moral
relations, the obligations and duties resulting from them; purity of heart and
life; an ardent, but rational affection for his country and for mankind, are
some of the natural, moral and religious qualities, with which he was enriched
and adorned, and which rendered him instrumental, in the hand of GOD, of
performing the most extensive services, the result of which is, the most solid
and lasting greatness.

BUT, enriched as he was with all the endowments mentioned above, they might
have been exercised in promoting the interest of some obscure village, confined
to a family, or wasted like the virtues of the recluse within the walls of a
cloister, had not the providence of GOD so disposed his lot in the world, as to
call his talents and virtues into action, on a stage so extensive and
conspicuous, as that admiring millions should at once witness the extent of his
services, and be filled with pleasing astonishment at the splendor of his
greatness.

HIS military talents were exercised in arduous enterprise at an early period;
and when, as yet but a youth, it is a well known fact, that his more than manly
prudence, had it been listened to, would have preserved a veteran British
General from the most fatal disafter. Alluding to Braddock's defeat.


WHEN war commenced between this country and our oppressive parent State,
WASHINGTON was the man to whom a propitious Providence directed the eyes of his
country for her defense and deliverance. He soon reduced our armies from
confusion to order; economized our scanty military stores, and in a measure
supplied the deficiency by his wisdom and prudence.

TIME will not permit us to follow this illustrious father of our revolution,
through that admirable train of events which astonished the world, and
terminated in the complete vindication of our liberty, and establishment of our
independence and peace, we trust, on a basis which shall last with time itself.

NEVER could we have had any suitable conception of the worth of WASHINGTON,
had we not been favored with his letters, which breathe at once the greatness
of his views, the ardour of his affection for his country, and the resolute
firmness and perseverance of his soul. When retiring, through the Jerseys, in
the greatest apparent distress, followed by a powerful and exulting enemy, not
a single word do we hear of discouragement, much less did he despair of the
Commonwealth. He retired with dignity, with his eye steadily fixed on his
enemy, and the first moment their inattention afforded opportunity, he turned
the torrent of war on his pursuers, and, by repeated strokes, humbled their
pride and re-animated our hopes.

"GOD," said a wise ancient, "is never absent where prudence presides." How
forcibly is this verified in the example before us. Prudence presided in the
counsels of WASHINGTON, and Heaven, almost by miracle, crowned his efforts with
success.

How do our hearts bleed, for this best and greatest of men, when we read that
he freely exposed himself to the censure of his countrymen, by hiding from them
the weakness of their own army, lest it should come to the knowledge of their
enemies.

THUS the wise parent consults the interest of his children, at the hazard of
their displeasure.

THE last scene, in this great military drama, was worthy the preceding acts,
and equally affecting. With what indescribable dignity did the Hero retire,
when he had accomplished the wish of his country, to enjoy the rewards of his
exalted virtues in the shades of solitude.

BUT, at his country's call, he once more quits his beloved retirement, to
preside in that Convention which formed a Constitution of Government; at once
the boast of the American States, and the admiration of other nations.

WITH what inimitable modesty did he accept the first Presidency in compliance
with the united voice of his country, to him ever sacred. The same greatness
marked his character in civil as in military life. He held the balance of
independence with a steady hand, and taught us a lesson of the greatest
importance, to consider ourselves as Americans, and to disdain foreign
influence.

THE legacy he bequeathed us, when he retired from the chair of government, is
worthy to be written in letters of gold, or, rather, to be inscribed on the
hearts of an enlightened, free, and grateful people. He was still our shield,
our resort and hope, under Providence, in the day of our trouble; and whilst
WASHINGTON lived, his life seemed to be the pledge of our safety and happiness.

THE time and the manner of his death, like every circumstance of his life, are
adapted strongly to impress the public mind. His sun set ere the rays of its
luster were dimmed with age. He has quitted the stage with the unimpaired
admiration of his country and mankind.

HAIL, illustrious shade of our departed father! We follow thy progress to the
reward of thy virtues in the happiness of heaven; forever live thy great
example, for the instruction of mankind; may it inspire millions yet unborn to
emulate thy greatness, by copying thy virtues; may thy fervent prayers, offered
on her behalf, secure to our country peace, prosperity and public happiness,
till time shall be no more.

THUS transient is the glory of this world.

Earth's highest station ends in, Here he lies,
And dust to dust concludes the noblest song.
Dr. YOUNG. LET us learn to cease from man, whose breath is in his nostrils,
and to repose unlimited confidence in that GOD who lives and reigns forever.

FINIS.
The Legacy OF THE Father of his Country.
ADDRESS OF GEORGE WASHINGTON, ON DECLINING BEING CONSIDERED A CANDIDATE FOR
THE PRESIDENCY OF THE UNITED STATES.
To the PEOPLE of the UNITED STATES.
FRIENDS AND FELLOW-CITIZENS,
THE period for a new election of a citizen, to administer the executive
government of the United States, being not far distant, and the time actually
arrived, when your thoughts must be employed in designating the person, who is
to be clothed with that important trust, it appears to me proper, especially as
it may conduce to a more distinct expression of the public voice, that I should
now apprise you of the resolution I have formed, to decline being considered
among the number of those, out of whom a choice is to be made.

I beg you, at the same time, to do me the justice to be assured, that this
resolution has not been taken without a strict regard to all the considerations
appertaining to the relation, which binds a dutiful citizen to his country; and
that, in withdrawing the tender of service, which silence in my situation might
imply, I am influenced by no diminution of zeal for your future interest; no
deficiency of grateful respect for your past kindness: but am supported by a
full conviction that the step is compatible with both.

The acceptance of, and continuance hitherto in the office to which your
suffrages have twice called me, have been a uniform sacrifice of inclination to
the opinion of duty, and to a deference for what appeared to be your desire. I
constantly hoped, that it would have been much earlier in my power,
consistently with motives, which I was not at liberty to disregard, to return
to that retirement, from which I had been reluctantly drawn. The strength of my
inclination to do this, previous to the last election, had even led to the
preparation of an address to declare it to you; but mature reflection on the
then perplexed and critical posture of our affairs with foreign nations, and
the unanimous advice of persons entitled to my confidence, impelled me to
abandon the idea.

I rejoice, that the state of your concerns, external as well as internal, no
longer renders the pursuit of inclination incompatible with the sentiment of
duty, or propriety; and am persuaded, whatever partiality may be retained for
my services, that, in the present circumstances of our country, you will not
disapprove my determination to retire.

The impressions, with which I first undertook the arduous trust, were
explained on the proper occasion. In the discharge of this trust, I will only
say, that I have, with good intentions, contributed toward the organization
and administration of the government, the best exertions of which a very
fallible judgment was capable. Not unconscious, in the outset, of the
inferiority of my qualifications, experience, in my own eyes, perhaps still
more in the eyes of others, has strengthened the motives to dissidence of
myself; and every day the increasing weight of years admonishes me more and
more, that the shade of retirement is as necessary to me as it will be welcome.
Satisfied that if any circumstances have given peculiar value to my services,
they were temporary, I have the consolation to believe, that, while choice and
prudence invite me to quit the political scene, patriotism does not forbid it.

In looking forward to the moment, which is intended to terminate the career of
my public life, my feelings do not permit me to suspend the deep acknowledgment
of that debt of gratitude, which I owe to my beloved country, for the many
honors it has conferred upon me; still more for the steadfast confidence with
which it has supported me; and for the opportunities I have thence enjoyed of
manifesting my inviolable attachment, by services faithful and persevering,
though in usefulness unequal to my zeal. If benefits have resulted to our
country from these services, let it always be remembered to your praise, and as
an instructive example in our annals, that under circumstances in which the
passions, agitated in every direction, were liable to mislead -- amidst
appearances sometimes dubious -- vicissitudes of fortune often discouraging --
in situations in which, not unfrequently, want of success has countenanced the
spirit of criticism -- the constancy of your support was the essential prop of
the efforts, and a guarantee of the plans, by which they were effected.
Profoundly penetrated with this idea, I shall carry it with me to my grave, as
a strong incitement to unceasing vows, that Heaven may continue to you the
choicest tokens of its beneficence -- that your union and brotherly affection
may be perpetual -- that the free constitution, which is the work of your
hands, may be sacredly maintained -- that its administration, in every
department, may be stamped with wisdom and virtue -- that, in fine, the
happiness of the people of these States, under the auspices of liberty, may be
made complete, by so careful a preservation and so prudent a use of this
blessing, as will acquire to them the glory of recommending it to the applause,
the affection, and adoption, of every nation which is yet a stranger to it.

HERE, perhaps, I ought to stop. But a solicitude for your welfare, which
cannot end but with my life, and the apprehension of danger, natural to that
solicitude, urge me, on an occasion like the present, to offer to your solemn
contemplation, and to recommend to your frequent review, some sentiments, which
are the result of much reflection, of no inconsiderable observation, and which
appear to me all-important to the permanency of your felicity as a people.
These will be offered to you with the more freedom, as you can only see in them
the disinterested warnings of a parting friend, who can possibly have no
personal motive to bias his counsel. Nor can I forget, as an encouragement to
it, your indulgent reception of my sentiments on a former and not dissimilar
occasion.

Interwoven as is the love of liberty with every ligament of your hearts, no
recommendation of mine is necessary to fortify or confirm the attachment.

The unity of government, which constitutes you one people, is also now dear to
you. It is justly so; for it is a main pillar in the edifice of your real
independence; the support of your tranquillity at home, your peace abroad; of
your safety; of your prosperity; of that very liberty which you so highly
prize. But, as it is easy to foresee, that from different causes and from
different quarters, much pains will be taken, many artifices employed, to
weaken in your minds the conviction of this truth; as this is the point in your
political fortress, against which the batteries of internal and external
enemies will be most constantly and actively (though often covertly and
insidiously) directed, it is of infinite moment that you should properly
estimate the immense value of your National Union, to your collective and
individual happiness; that you should cherish a cordial, habitual and
immovable attachment to it; accustoming yourselves to think and speak of it as
of the palladium of your political safety and prosperity; watching for its
preservation with jealous anxiety; discountenancing whatever may suggest even a
suspicion that it can in any event be abandoned; and indignantly frowning upon
the first dawning of every attempt to alienate any portion of our country from
the rest, or to enfeeble the sacred ties which now link together the various
parts.

For this, you have every inducement of sympathy and interest. Citizens, by
birth or choice, of a common country, that country has a right to concentrate
your affections. The name of AMERICAN, which belongs to you, in your national
capacity, must always exalt the just pride of patriotism, more than any
appellation derived from local discriminations. With slight shades of
difference, you have the same religion, manners, habits and political
principles. You have, in a common cause, fought and triumphed together; the
independence and liberty you possess are the work of joint councils, and joint
efforts, of common dangers, sufferings and successes.

But these considerations, however powerfully they address themselves to your
sensibility, are greatly out-weighed by those which apply more immediately to
your interest. -- Here every portion of our country finds the most commanding
motives for carefully guarding and preserving the union of the whole.

The North, in an unrestrained intercourse with the South, protected by the
equal laws of a common government, finds in the productions of the latter,
great additional resources of maritime and commercial enterprise, and precious
materials of manufacturing industry. The South, in the same intercourse,
benefiting by the agency of the North, sees its agriculture grow and its
commerce expand. Turning partly into its own channels the seamen of the North,
it finds its particular navigation invigorated; and while it contributes, in
different ways, to nourish and increase the general mass of the national
navigation, it looks forward to the protection of a maritime strength, to which
itself is unequally adapted. The East, in a like intercourse with the West,
already finds, and, in the progressive improvement of interior communications,
by land and water, will more and more find, a valuable vent for the commodities
which it brings from abroad, or manufactures at home. The West derives from the
East supplies requisite to its growth and comfort; and, what is perhaps of
still greater consequence, it must of necessity owe the secure enjoyment of
indispensable outlets for its own productions to the weighty influence, and the
future maritime strength of the Atlantic side of the Union, directed by an
indissoluble community of interest as one nation. Any other tenure, by which
the West can hold this essential advantage, whether derived from its own
separate strength, or from an apostate and unnatural connection with any foreign
power, must be intrinsically precarious.

While, then, every part of our country thus feels an immediate and particular
interest in Union, all the parts combined cannot fail to find, in the united
mass of means and efforts, greater strength, greater resource, proportionably
greater security from external danger, a less frequent interruption of their
peace by foreign nations; and, what is of most inestimable value! they must
derive from Union an exemption from those broils and wars between themselves,
which so frequently afflict neighboring countries, not tied together by the
same government; which their own rivalships alone would be sufficient to
produce, but which opposite foreign alliances, attachments and intrigues would
stimulate and embitter. Hence, likewise, they will avoid the necessity of those
overgrown military establishments, which, under any form of government, are
inauspicious to liberty, and which are to be regarded as particularly hostile
to Republican Liberty. In this sense it is, that your Union ought to be
considered as a main prop of your Liberty, and that the love of the one ought
to endear to you the preservation of the other.

These considerations speak a persuasive language to every reflecting and
virtuous mind, and exhibit the continuance of the UNION as a primary object of
patriotic desire. Is there a doubt, whether a common government can embrace so
large a sphere? Let experience solve it. To listen to mere speculation, in such
a case, were criminal. We are authorized to hope, that a proper organization of
the whole, with the auxiliary agency of governments for the respective
subdivisions, will afford a happy issue to the experiment. It is well worth a
fair and full experiment. With such powerful and obvious motives to Union,
affecting all parts of our country, while experiment shall not have
demonstrated its impracticability, there will always be reason to distrust the
patriotism of those, who in any quarter may endeavor to weaken its bands.

In contemplating the causes which may disturb our Union, it occurs as matter
of serious concern, that any ground should have been furnished for
characterizing parties, by geographical discriminations -- Northern and
Southern -- Atlantic and Western; whence designing men may endeavor to excite
a belief, that there is a real difference of local interests and views. One of
the expedients of party to acquire influence, within particular districts, is
to misrepresent the opinions and aims of other districts. You cannot shield
yourselves too much against the jealousies and heart-burnings which spring from
these misrepresentations; they tend to render alien to each other those who
ought to be bound together by fraternal affection. The inhabitants of our
Western country have lately had a useful lesson on this head: They have seen,
in the negotiation by the Executive, and in the unanimous ^^^tification by the
Senate, of the treaty with Spain, and in the universal satisfaction at that
event, throughout the United States, a decisive proof how unfounded were the
suspicions, propagated among them, of a policy in the General Government and in
the Atlantic States, unfriendly to their interests in regard to the Missisippi:
They have been witnesses to the formation of two treaties, that with Great
Britain and that with Spain, which secure to them every thing they could
desire, in respect to our foreign relations, toward confirming their
prosperity. Will it not be their wisdom to rely, for the preservation of these
advantages, on the UNION by which they were procured? Will they not henceforth
be deaf to those advisers, if such there are, who would sever them from their
brethren, and connect them with aliens?

To the efficacy and permanency of your Union, a government for the whole is
indispensable. No alliances, however strict, between the parts, can be an
adequate substitute; they must inevitably experience the infractions and
interruptions which all alliances, in all times, have experienced. Sensible of
this momentous truth, you have improved upon your first essay, by the adoption
of a Constitution of Government, better calculated than your former, for an
intimate Union, and for the efficacious management of your common concerns.
This Government, the offspring of your own choice, uninfluenced and unawed;
adopted upon full investigation and mature deliberation; completely free in its
principles; in the distribution of its powers, uniting security with energy;
and containing within itself a provision for its own amendment, has a just
claim to your confidence and your support. Respect for its authority,
compliance with its laws, acquiescence in its measures, are duties enjoined by
the fundamental maxims of true liberty. The basis of our political systems is
the right of the people to make and to alter their constitutions of government
-- But, the constitutions which at any time exists, until changed by an
explicit and authentic act of the whole people, is sacredly obligatory upon
all. The very idea of the power and the right of the people to establish
government, presupposes the duty of every individual to obey the established
government.

All obstructions to the execution of the laws, all combinations and
associations, under whatever plausible character, with the real design to
direct, control, counteract or awe the regular deliberation and action of the
constituted authorities, are destructive of this fundamental principle, and of
fatal tendency. They serve to organize faction; to give it an artificial and
extraordinary force; to put in the place of the delegated will of the nation,
the will of a party, often a small, but artful and enterprising minority of the
community; and, according to the alternate triumph of different parties, to
make the public administration the mirror of the ill-concerted and incongruous
projects of faction, rather than the organ of consistent and wholesome plans,
digested by common councils, and modified by mutual interests.

However combinations, or associations, of the above description, may now and
then answer popular ends, they are likely, in the course of time and things, to
become potent engines, by which cunning, ambitious, and unprincipled men, will
be enabled to subvert the power of the people, and to usurp for themselves the
reins of government; destroying, afterward, the very engines which have lifted
them to unjust dominion.

Toward the preservation of your government, and the permanency of your
present happy state, it is requisite, not only that you steadily discountenance
irregular oppositions to its acknowledged authority, but also that you resist,
with care, the spirit of innovation upon its principles, however specious the
pretexts. One method of assault may be to effect, in the forms of the
Constitution, alterations which will impair the energy of the system, and thus
to undermine what cannot be directly overthrown. In all the changes to which
you may be invited, remember that time and habit are at least as necessary to
fix the true character of governments, as of other human institutions; that
experience is the surest standard, by which to test the real tendency of the
existing constitution of a country; that facility in changes, upon the credit
of mere hypothesis and opinion, exposes to perpetual change, from the endless
variety of hypothesis and opinion; and remember, especially, that for the
efficient management of your common interests, in a country so extensive as
ours, a government of as much vigor as is consistent with the perfect security
of liberty, is indispensable. Liberty itself will find in such a government,
with powers properly distributed and adjusted, its surest guardian. It is,
indeed, little else than a name, where the government is too feeble to
withstand the enterprises of faction, to confine each member of the society
within the limits prescribed by the laws, and to maintain all in the secure and
tranquil enjoyment of the rights of person and property.

I have already intimated to you, the danger of parties in a state, with
particular reference to the founding of them on geographical discriminations.
Let me now take a more comprehensive view, and warn you, in the most solemn
manner, against the baneful effects of the spirit of party, generally.

This spirit, unfortunately, is inseparable from our nature, having its root in
the strongest passions of the human mind. It exists, under different shapes, in
all governments, more or less stifled, controlled, or repressed; but in those
of the popular form, it is seen in its greatest rankness, and is truly their
worst enemy.

The alternate domination of one faction over another, sharpened by the spirit
of revenge, natural to party dissension, which, in different ages and
countries, has perpetrated the most horrid enormities, is itself a frightful
despotism: But this leads at length to a more formal and permanent despotism.
The disorders and miseries, which result, gradually incline the minds of men to
seek security and repose in the absolute power of an individual; and, sooner or
later, the chief of some prevailing faction, more able or more fortunate than
his competitors, turns this disposition to the purposes of his own elevation,
on the ruins of public liberty.

Without looking forward to an extremity of this kind (which nevertheless ought
not to be entirely out of sight) the common and continual mischiefs of the
spirit of party are sufficient to make it the interest and duty of a wise
people to discourage and restrain it.

It serves always to distract the public councils, and enfeeble the public
administration. It agitates the community with ill-founded jealousies and false
alarms; kindles the animosity of one part against another; and foments,
occasionally, riot and insurrection. It opens the door to foreign influence and
corruption, which find a facilitated access to the government itself, through
the channels of party passions. Thus the policy and will of one country are
subjected to the policy and will of another.

There is an opinion, that parties in free countries are useful checks up on
the administration of the government, and serve to keep alive the spirit of
liberty. This, within certain limits, is probably true; and in governments of a
monarchical cast, patriotism may look with indulgence, if not with favor, upon
the spirit of party. But in those of the popular character, in governments
purely elective, it is a spirit not to be encourged. From their natural
tendency, it is certain, there will always be enough of that spirit for every
salutary purpose: and there being constant danger of excess, the effort ought
to be, by force of public opinion, to mitigate and assuage it. A fire not to be
quenched, it demands a uniform vigilance to prevent its bursting into a flame,
lest, instead of warming, it should consume.

It is important, likewise, that the habits of thinking, in a free country,
should inspire caution in those entrusted with its administration, to confine
themselves within their respective constitutional spheres, avoiding, in the
exercise of the powers of one department, to encroach upon another. The spirit
of encroachment tends to consolidate the powers of all the departments in one,
and thus to create, whatever be the form of government, a real despotism. A
just estimate of that love of power, and proneness to abuse it, which
predominates in the human heart, is sufficient to satisfy us of the truth of
this position. The necessity of reciprocal checks in the exercise of political
power, by dividing and distributing it into different depositories, and
constituting each the guardian of the public weal against invasions by the
others, has been evinced by experiments, ancient and modern; some of them in
our country, and under our own eyes. To preserve them, must be as necessary as
to institute them. If, in the opinion of the people, the distribution or
modification of the constitutional powers be in any particular wrong, let it be
corrected by an amendment in the way which the Constitution designates. But let
there be no change by usurpation: for though this, in one instance, may be the
instrument of good, it is the customary weapon by which free governments are
destroyed. The precedent must always greatly overbalance, in permanent evil,
any partial or transient benefit which the use can at any time yield.

Of all the dispositions and habits, which lead to political prosperity,
religion and morality are indispensable supports. In vain would that man claim
the tribute of patriotism, who should labor to subvert these great pillars of
human happiness, these firmest props of the duties of men and citizens. The
mere politician, equally with the pious man, ought to respect and to cherish
them. A volume could not trace all their connexions with public and private
felicity. Let it be simply asked, Where is the security for property, for
reputation, for life, if a sense of religious obligation desert the oaths which
are the instruments of investigation in courts of justice? And let us with
caution indulge the supposition, that morality can be maintained without
religion. Whatever may be conceded to the influence of refined education, on
minds of peculiar structure; reason and experience both forbid us to expect
that national morality can prevail, in exclusion of religious principle.

It is substantially true, that virtue or morality is a necessary spring of
popular government. The rule, indeed, extends with more or less force, to every
species of free government. Who, that is a sincere friend to it, can look with
indifference upon attempts to shake the foundation of the fabric?

Promote, then, as an object of primary importance, institutions for the
general diffusion of knowledge. In proportion as the structure of a government
gives force to public opinion, it is essential that public opinion should be
enlightened.

As a very important source of strength and security, cherish public credit.
One method of preserving it is, to use it as sparingly as possible; avoiding
occasions of expense by cultivating peace; but remembering also, that timely
disbursements, to prepare for danger, frequently prevent much greater
disbursements to repel it; avoiding, likewise, the accumulation of debt, not
only by shunning occasions of expense, but by vigorous exertions, in time of
peace, to discharge the debts which unavoidable wars may have occasioned, not
ungenerously throwing upon posterity the burden which we ourselves ought to
bear. The execution of these maxims belongs to your representatives, but it is
necessary that public opinion should cooperate.

To facilitate to them the performance of their duty, it is essential that you
should practically bear in mind, that toward the payment of debts there must
be revenue; that to have revenue there must be taxes; that no taxes can be
devised, which are not, more or less, inconvenient and unpleasant; that the
intrinsic embarrassment inseparable from the selection of the proper objects
(which is always a choice of difficulties) ought to be a decisive motive for a
candid construction of the conduct of the government in making it, and for a
spirit of acquiescence in the measures for obtaining revenue, which the public
exigencies may at any time dictate.

Observe good faith and justice toward all nations; cultivate peace and
harmony with all: religion and morality enjoin this conduct; and can it be,
that good policy does not equally enjoin it? It will be worthy of a free,
enlightened, and (at no distant period) a great nation, to give to mankind the
magnanimous and too novel example of a people always guided by an exalted
justice and benevolence. Who can doubt, that in the course of time and things,
the fruits of such a plan would richly repay any temporary advantages which
might be lost by a steady adherence to it? Can it be, that Providence has not
connected the permanent felicity of a nation with its virtue? The experiment,
at least, is recommended by every sentiment which ennobles human nature. Alas!
is it rendered impossible by its vices?

In the execution of such a plan, nothing is more essential, than that
permanent, inveterate antipathies against particular nations, and passionate
attachments for others, should be excluded; and that, in the place of them,
just and amicable feelings toward all should be cultivated. The nation, which
indulges toward another an habitual hatred, or an habitual fondness, is in
some degree a slave. It is a slave to its animosity or to its affection, either
of which is sufficient to lead it astray from its duty and its interest.
Antipathy in one nation against another, disposes each more readily to offer
insult and injury, to lay hold of slight causes of umbrage, and to be haughty
and intractable, when accidental or trifling occasions of dispute occur. Hence
frequent collisions, obstinate, envenomed and bloody contests. The nation,
prompted by ill will and resentment, sometimes impels to war the government,
contrary to the best calculations of policy. The government sometimes
participates in the national propensity, and adopts, through passion, what
reason would reject; at other times, it makes the animosity of the nation
subservient to the projects of hostility, instigated by pride, ambition, and
other sinister and pernicious motives. The peace often, sometimes perhaps the
liberty, of nations has been the victim.

So, likewise, a passionate attachment of one nation for another, produces a
variety of evils. Sympathy for the favorite nation, facilitating the illusion
of an imaginary common interest, in cases where no real common interest exists,
and infusing into one the enmities of the other, betrays the former into a
participation in the quarrels and wars of the latter, without adequate
inducement or justification. It leads also to concessions to the favorite
nation, of privileges denied to others, which is apt doubly to injure the
nation making the concessions; by unnecessarily parting with what ought to have
been retained; and by exciting jealousy, ill will, and a disposition to
retaliate, in the parties from whom equal privileges are withheld: and it gives
to ambitious, corrupted, or deluded citizens (who devote themselves to the
favorite nation) facility to betray, or sacrifice the interests of their own
country, without odium, sometimes even with popularity; gilding, with the
appearances of a virtuous sense of obligation, a commendable deference for
public opinion, or a laudable zeal for public good, the base or foolish
compliance, of ambition, corruption, or infatuation.

As avenues to foreign influence in innumerable ways, such attachments are
particularly alarming to the truly enlightened and independent patriot. How
many opportunities do they afford to tamper with domestic factions, to practice
the arts of seduction, to mislead public opinion, to influence or awe the
public councils! Such an attachment of a small or weak, toward a great and
powerful nation, dooms the former to be the satellite of the latter.

Against the insidious wiles of foreign influence (I conjure you to believe me,
fellow-citizens) the jealousy of a free people ought to be constantly awake;
since history and experience prove, that foreign influence is one of the most
baneful foes of Republican Government. But that jealousy, to be useful, must be
impartial; else it becomes the instrument of the very influence to be avoided,
instead of a defense against it. Excessive partiality for one foreign nation,
and excessive dislike of another, cause those whom they actuate to see danger
only on one side, and serve to veil and even second the arts of influence on
the other. Real patriots, who may resist the intrigues of the favorite, are
liable to become suspected and odious; while its tools and dupes usurp the
applause and confidence of the people, to surrender their interest.

The great rule of conduct for us, in regard to foreign nations, is, in
extending our commercial relations, to have with them as little political
connection as possible. So far as we have already formed engagements, let them
be fulfilled with perfect good faith. -- Here let us stop.

Europe has a set of primary interests, which to us have none, or a very remote
relation. Hence she must be engaged in frequent controversies, the causes of
which are essentially foreign to our concerns. Hence, therefore, it must be
unwise in us to implicate ourselves, by artificial ties, in the ordinary
vicissitudes of her politics, or the ordinary combinations and collisions of
her friendships or enmities.

Our detached and distant situation invites and enables us to pursue a
different course. If we remain one people, under an efficient government, the
period is not far off, when we may defy material injury from external
annoyance; when we may take such an attitude, as will cause the neutrality, we
may at any time resolve upon, to be scrupulously respected; when belligerent
nations, under the impossibility of making acquisitions upon us, will not
lightly hazard the giving us provocation; when we may choose peace or war, as
our interest, guided by justice, shall counsel.

Why forego the advantages of so peculiar a situation? Why quit our own, to
stand upon foreign ground? Why, by interweaving our destiny with that of any
part of Europe, entangle our peace and prosperity in the toils of European
ambition, rivalship, interest, humor or caprice?

It is our true policy to steer clear of permanent alliances, with any portion
of the foreign world; so far, I mean, as we are now at liberty to do it: for
let me not be understood as capable of patronizing infidelity to existing
engagements. I hold the maxim no less applicable to public than to private
affairs, that honesty is always the best policy. I repeat it, therefore, let
those engagements be observed in their genuine sense. But, in my opinion, it is
unnecessary, and would be unwise, to extend them.

Taking care always to keep ourselves, by suitable establishments, on a
respectable defensive posture, we may safely trust to temporary alliances for
extraordinary emergencies.

Harmony, liberal intercourse with all nations, are recommended by policy,
humanity and interest. But even our commercial policy, should hold an equal and
impartial hand; neither seeking nor granting exclusive favors or preferences;
consulting the natural course of things; diffusing and diversifying, by gentle
means, the streams of commerce, but forcing nothing; establishing, with the
powers so disposed, in order to give trade a stable course, to define the
rights of our merchants, and to enable the government to support them,
conventional rules of intercourse, the best that present circumstances and
mutual opinion will permit, but temporary, and liable to be from time to time
abandoned or varied, as experience and circumstances shall dictate; constantly
keeping in view, that it is folly in one nation to look for disinterested
favors from another; that it must pay, with a portion of its independence, for
whatever it may accept under that character; that, by such acceptance, it may
place itself in the condition of having given equivalents for nominal favors,
and yet of being reproached with ingratitude for not giving more. There can be
no greater error than to expect or calculate upon real favors from nation to
nation. It is an illusion which experience must cure, which a just pride ought
to discard.

In offering to you, my countrymen, these counsels of an old and affectionate
friend, I dare not hope they will make the strong and lasting impression I
could wish; that they will control the usual current of the passions, or
prevent our nation from running the course which has hitherto marked the
destiny of nations: But if I may even flatter myself, that they may be
productive of some partial benefit, some occasional good; that they may now and
then recu^ to moderate the fury of party spirit, to warn against the mischiefs
of foreign intrigue, to guard against the impostures of pretended patriotism;
this hope will be a full recompense for the solicitude for your welfare, by
which they have been dictated.

How far, in the discharge of my official duties, I have been guided by the
principles which have been delineated, the public records, and other evidences
of my conduct, must witness to you and to the world. To myself, the assurance
of my own conscience is, that I have at least believed myself to be guided by
them.

In relation to the still subsisting war in Europe, my proclamation of the 22d
of April, 1795, is the index to my plan. Sanctioned by your approving voice,
and by that of your Representatives in both Houses of Congress, the spirit of
that measure has continually governed me; uninfluenced by any attempts to deter
or divert me from it.

After deliberate examination, with the aid of the best lights I could obtain,
I was well satisfied that our country, under all the circumstances of the case,
had a right to take, and was bound in duty and interest to take, a neutral
position. Having taken it, I determined, as far as should depend upon me, to
maintain it with moderation, perseverance and firmness.

The considerations which respect the right to hold this conduct, it is not
necessary on this occasion to detail. I will only observe, that, according to
my understanding of the matter, that right, so far from being denied by any of
the belligerent powers, has been virtually admitted by all.

The duty of holding a neutral conduct may be inferred, without any thing more,
from the obligation which justice and humanity impose on every nation, in cases
in which it is free to act, to maintain inviolate the relations of peace and
amity toward other nations.

The inducements of interest for observing that conduct will be best referred
to your own reflections and experience. With me, a predominant motive has been
to endeavor to gain time to our country to settle and mature its yet recent
institutions, and to progress, without interruption, to that degree of strength
and consistency, which is necessary to give it, humanly speaking, the command
of its own fortunes.

Though in reviewing the incidents of my administration, I am unconscious of
intentional error, I am nevertheless too sensible of my defects, not to think
it probable that I may have committed many errors. Whatever they may be, I
fervently beseech the Almighty to avert or mitigate the evils to which they may
tend. I shall also carry with me the hope that my country will never cease to
view them with indulgence; and that after forty-five years of my life dedicated
to its service, with an upright zeal, the faults of incompetent abilities will
be consigned to oblivion, as myself must soon be to the mansions of rest.

Relying on its kindness in this as in other things, and actuated by that
fervent love toward it, which is so natural to a man who views in it the
native soil of himself and his progenitors for several generations; I
anticipate, with pleasing expectation, that retreat, in which I promise myself
to realize, without alloy, the sweet enjoyment of partaking, in the midst of my
fellow-citizens, the benign influence of good laws under a free government --
the ever favorite object of my heart, and the happy reward, as I trust, of our
mutual cares, labors and dangers.

G. Washington.
United States, 17th Sept. 1796.
FINIS

