SERMONS ON SEVERAL OCCASIONS. IN FOUR VOLUMES.

BY JOHN WESLEY, M. A. LATE FELLOW OF LINCOLN COLLEGE, OXFORD.

VOL. III.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY HENRY TUCKNISS, FOR EZEKIEL COOPER, NO. 118, NORTH
FOURTH-STREET, NEAR THE METHODIST CHURCH. 1800.

DISCOURSE THE ELEVENTH Upon our Lord's Sermon on the Mount.
MATT. vii. 13, 14. Enter ye in at the strait Gate; for wide is the Gate, and
broad is the Way which leads is Destruction, and many there be which go in
thereat:

Because strait is the Gate, and narrow is the Way which leads unto Life, and
few there be that find it.


1. OUR Lord having warned us of the dangers which easily beset us at our first
entrance upon real religion, the hindrances which naturally arise from within,
from the wickedness of our own hearts: Now proceeds to apprize us of the
hindrances from without, particularly ill example and ill advice. By one or
the other of these, thousands who once ran well, have drawn back unto
perdition: Yea, many of those who were not novices in religion, who had made
some progress in righteousness. His caution therefore against these, he presses
upon us, with all possible earnestness, and repeats again and again, in variety
of expressions, lest by any means we should let it slip. Thus, effectually to
guard us against the former, Enter ye in, says he, at the strait gate: For
wide it the gate and broad is the way that leads to destruction, and many
there be which go in thereat: Because strait is the gate and narrow is the way
which leads unto life, and few there be that find it. To secure us from the
latter, Beware, says he, of false prophets. We shall at present consider the
former only.

2. Enter ye in, says our blessed Lord, at the strait gate; for wide is the
gate and broad is the way that leads to destruction, and many there be which
go in thereat: Because strait is the gate, and narrow is the way which leads
unto life, and few there be that find it.

3. In these words we may observe, First, The inseparable properties of the way
to hell: Wide is the got, broad the way that leads to destruction, and many
there be that go in thereat: Secondly, the inseparable properties of the way to
heaven: Strait is that gate, and few there be that find it: Thirdly, A serious
exhortation grounded thereon, Enter ye in at the strait gate.

I. 1. We may observe, First, The inseparable properties of the way to hell:
Wide is the gate and broad is the way, that leads to destruction, and many
there be that go in thereat.

2. Wide indeed is the gate, and broad the way that leads to destruction. For
sin is the gate of hell, and wickedness the way to destruction. And how wide a
gate is that of sin? How broad is the way of wickedness! The commandment of God
is exceeding broad, as extending not only to all our actions, but to every word
which goes out of our lips, yea, every thought that rises in our heart. And
sin is equally broad with the commandment, seeing any breach of the commandment
is sin. Yea, rather it is a thousand times broader: Since there is only one way
of keeping the commandment: For we do not properly keep it, unless both the
thing done, the manner of doing it, and all the other circumstances are right.
But there are a thousand ways of breaking every commandment: So that this gate
is wide indeed.

3. To consider this a little more particularly. How wide do those parent sins
extend, from which all the rest derive their being? That carnal mind, which is
enmity against God, pride of heart, self-will, and love of the world? Can we
six any bounds to them? Do they not diffuse themselves through all our thoughts,
and mingle with all our tempers? Are they not the leaven which leavens, more or
less, the whole mass of our affections? May we not, on a close and faithful
examination of ourselves, perceive these roots of bitterness, continually
springing up, infecting all our words, and tainting all our actions? And how
innumerable an offspring do they bring forth, in every age and nation? Even
enough to cover the whole earth with darkness and cruel habitations.

4. O! who is able to reckon up their accursed fruits? To count all the sins,
whether against God or our neighbor, not which imagination might paint, but
which may be matter of daily melancholy experience? Nor need we range over all
the earth to find them. Survey any one kingdom, any single country, or city or
town, and how plemeous is this harvest? And let it not be one of those, which
a^^ (...) overspread with mohammedan or pagan darkness. But of those which name
the name of Christ, which profess to see the light of his glorious gospel. Go
no farther than the kingdom to which we belong, the city wherein we are now. We
call ourselves christians: Yea, and that of the purest sort; we are
protestants; reformed christians! But alas! who shall carry on the reformation
of our opinions into our hearts and lives? Is there not a cause? For how
innumerable are our sins? And those of the deepest dye? Do not the grossest
abominations of every kind, abound among us from day to day? Do not sins of
every sort cover the land, as the waters cover the sea? Who can count them?
Rather go and count the drops of rain, or the sands on the seashore. So wide
is the gate, so broad is the way that leads to destruction.

5. And many there be who go in at that gate: Many who walk in that way. Almost
as many as go in at the gate of death, as sink into the chambers of the grave.
For it cannot be denied (though neither can we acknowledge it but with shame
and sorrow of heart) that even in this, which is called a christian country,
the generality of every age and sex, of every profession and employment, of
every rank and degree, high and low, rich and poor, are walking in the way of
destruction. The far greater part of the inhabitants of this city, to this day
live in sin; in some palpable, habitual, known transgression of the law they
profess to observe: Yea, in some outward transgression, some gross, visible
kind of ungodliness or unrighteousness; some open violation of their duty,
either to God or man. These then, none can deny, are all in the way that
leads to destruction. Add to these those who have a name indeed that they
live, but were never yet alive to God: Those that outwardly appear fair to men,
but are inwardly full of all uncleanness: Full of pride, or vanity; of anger,
or revenge; of ambition, or covetousness: lovers of themselves, lovers of the
world, lovers of pleasure more than lovers of God. These indeed may be highly
esteemed of men; but they are an abomination to the Lord. And how greatly will
these saints of the world, swell the number of the children of hell? Yea, add
all, whatever they be in other respects, whether they have more or less of the
form of godliness, who being ignorant of God's righteousness, and seeking to
establish their own righteousness, as the ground of their reconciliation to God
and acceptance with him, of consequence have not submitted themselves unto the
righteousness which is of God by faith. Now all these things joined together in
one, how terribly true is our Lord's assertion, Wide is the gate and broad is
the way that leads to destruction, and many there be who go in thereat.

6. Nor does this only concern the vulgar herd, the poor, base, stupid part of
mankind. Men of eminence in the world, men who have many fields, and yoke of
oxen, do not desire to be excused from this. On the contrary, many wise men
after the flesh, according to the human methods of judging, many mighty, in
power, in courage, in riches, many noble are called: called into the broad way,
by the world, the flesh and the devil; and they are not disobedient to that
calling. Yea, the higher they are raised in fortune and power, the deeper do
they sink into wickedness. The more blessings they have received from God, the
more sins do they commit: Using their honor or riches, their learning or
wisdom, not as means of working out their salvation, but rather of excelling in
vice, and so insuring their own destruction.

II. 1. And the very reason why many of these go on so securely in the broad
way, is because it is broad: Not considering that this is the inseparable
property of the way to destruction. Many there be, says our Lord, who go in
thereat: for the very reason why they should flee from it: Even because strait
is the gate, and narrow is the way that leads unto life, and few there be
that find it.

2. This is an inseparable property of the way to heaven. So narrow is the way
that leads unto life, unto life everlasting; so strait the gate, that nothing
unclean, nothing unholy can enter. No sinner can pass through that gate, until he
is saved from all his sins. Not only from his outward sins; from his evil
conversation received by tradition from his fathers. It will not suffice, that
he has ceased to do evil, and learned to do well. He must not only be saved
from all sinful actions, and from all evil and useless discourse; but inwardly
changed, thoroughly renewed in the spirit of his mind. Otherwise he cannot pass
through the gate of life, he cannot enter into glory.

3. For narrow is the way that leads unto life. The way of universal
holiness. Narrow indeed is the way of poverty of spirit, the way of holy
mourning: The way of meekness, and that of hungering and thirsting after
righteousness. Narrow is the way of mercifulness, of love unfeigned; the way of
purity of heart; of doing good unto all men, and of gladly suffering evil, all
manner of evil for righteousness-sake.

4. And few there be that find it. Alas! how few find even the way of heathen
honesty? How few are there, that do nothing to another, which they would not
another should do unto them? How few, that are clear before God, from (...)
either of injustice or unkindness? How few that do not offend with their
tongue; that speak nothing unkind, nothing untrue? What a ^^all proportion have
their hearts right before God? Clean and holy in his sight? Where are they, w^^
his all-searching eye, discerns to be truly humble? To abhor themselves in dust
and ashes, in the presence of God their Savior? To be deeply and steadily
serious, feeling their wants, and passing the time of their sojourning with
fear? Truly meek and gentle, never overcome of evil, but overcoming evil with
good? Thoroughly athirst for God, and continually panting after a renewal in his
likeness? How thinly are they scattered over the earth, whose souls are
enlarged in love to all mankind? And who love God with all their strength, who
have given him their hearts, and desire nothing else in earth or heaven? How
few are those lovers of God and man, that spend their whole strength in doing
good unto all men? and are ready to suffer all things, yea, death itself, to
save one soul from eternal death?

5. But while so few are found in the way of life, and so many in the way of
destruction, there is great danger, lest the torrent of examples, should bear
us away with them. Even as a single example, if it be always in our sight, is
apt to make much impression upon us: Especially when it has nature on its side;
when it falls in with our own inclinations. How great then must be the force of
so numerous examples, continually before our eyes; and all conspiring together
with our own hearts, to carry us down the stream of nature? How difficult must
it be, to stem the tide, and to keep ourselves unspotted in the world?

6. What heightens the difficulty still more is, that they are not the rude and
senseless part of mankind, at least not these alone, who set us the example,
who throng the downward way: But the polite, the well-bred, the genteel, the
wise, the men who understand the world: The men of knowledge, of deep and
various learning, the rational, the eloquent! These are all, or nearly all,
against us. And how shall we stand against these? Do not their tongues drop
manna? and have they not learned all the arts of soft persuasion? And of
reasoning too: For these are versed in all controversies and strife of words.
It is therefore a small thing with them to prove, that the way is right,
because it is broad: That he who follows a multitude, cannot do evil, but only
he who will not follow them: That your way must be wrong, because it is narrow;
and because there are so few that find it. These will make it clear to a
demonstration, that evil is good, and good is evil: That the way of holiness is
the way of destruction, and the way of the world, the only way to heaven.

7. O how can unlearned and ignorant men, maintain their cause against such
opponents! And yet these are not all with whom they must contend, however
unequal to the task. For there are many mighty, and noble, and powerful men, as
well as wise, in the road that leads to destruction. And these have a shorter
way of confuting, than that of reason and argument. They usually apply, not to
the understanding, but to the fears of any that oppose them. A method that
seldom fails of success, even where argument profits nothing: As lying level to
the capacities of all men: For all can fear, whether they can reason or no. And
all who have not a firm trust in God, a sure reliance both on his power and
love, cannot but fear to give any disgust to those, who have the power of the
world in their hands. What wonder therefore if the example of these is a law,
to all who know not God?

8. Many rich are likewise in the broad way. And these apply to the hopes of
men; and to all their foolish desires, as strongly and effectually, as the
mighty and noble to their fears. ^o that hardly can you hold on in the way of
the kingdom, unless you are dead to all below, unless you are crucified to the
world and the world crucified to you, unless you desire nothing more but God.

9. For how dark, how uncomfortable, how forbidding is the prospect on the
opposite side? A strait gate! A narrow way! And few finding that gate! Few
walking in the (...) Besides, even those few, are not wise men, ^en of learning
or eloquence. They are ^ble to reason either strongly or clearly; the ^ot
propose an argument to any advantage. They know not how to prove what they
profess to believe; or to explain even what they say they experience. Surely
such advocates as they, will never recommend, but rather discredit the cause
they have espoused.

10. Add to this, that they are not noble, not honorable men: (if they were,
you might bear with their folly.) They are men of no interest, no authority, of
no account in the world. They are mean and base, low in life; and such as have
no power, if they had the will to hurt you. Therefore there is nothing at all
to be seared from them: And there is nothing at all to hope. For the greater
part of them may say, Silver and gold have I none: at least a very moderate
share. Nay, some of them have scarcely food to eat or raiment to put on. For
this reason, as well as because their ways are not like those of other men,
they are every where spoken against, are despised, have their names cast out as
evil, are variously persecuted, and treated as the filth and offscouring of
the world. So that both your fears, your hopes, and all your desires (except
those which you have immediately from God) yea, all your natural passions
continually incline you to return into the broad way.

III. 1. Therefore it is, that our Lord so earnestly exhorts, Enter ye in at
the strait gate. Or (as the same exhortation is elsewhere expressed) Stri^
enter in. (...). Strive as in (...). For many, says our Lord, shall seek (...)
in, indolently strive, and shall not be able.

2. It Is true, he intimates what may seem another reason for this, for their
not being able to enter in, in the words which immediately follow these. For
after he had said, Many, I say unto you, will seek to enter in, and shall not
leable, he subjoins, When once the master of the house is risen up and has
shut to the door, and ye begin to s^d without ((...). Rather, Ye stand without;
for (...) seems to be only an elegant expletive) and to knock at the door,
saying, Lo^ Lord, open unto us: He shall answer and say unto you, I know ye
not. Depart from me all ye worker^ of iniquity. Luke xiii. 26, etc.

3. It may appear, upon a transient view of these words, that their delaying to
seek (...) rather than their manner of seeking, was (...) reason why they were
not able to enter in. (...) it comes, in effect, to the same thing. The were
therefore commanded to depart, because they had been workers of iniquity,
because they had walked in the broad road: In other (...) Because they had not
agonized to enter in (...) the strait gate. Probably they did seek, before the
door was shut: But that did not suffice. And they did strive, after the door
was shut. But then it was too late.

4. Therefore, strive ye now, in this your day, to enter in at the strait gate.
And in order hereto, settle it in your heart, and let it be ever uppermost in
your thoughts, That if you are in a broad way, you are in the way that leads
to destruction. If many go with you, as sure as God is true, both they and you
are going to hell. If you are walking as the generality of men walk, you are
walking to the bottomless pit. Are many wise, many rich, many mighty or noble
traveling with you in the same way? By this token, without going any farther,
you know, it does not lead to life. Here is a short, a plain, an infallible
rule, before you enter into particulars. In whatever profession you are
engaged, you must be singular or be damned. The way to hell has nothing
singular in it; but the way to heaven is singularity all over: If you move but
one step toward God, you are not as other men are. But regard not this. It Is
far better to stand alone, than to fall into the pit. Run then with patience
the race which is set before thee, though thy companions therein are but few.
They will not always be so. Yet a little while and thou will come to an
innumerable company of angels, to the general assembly and church of the first
born, and to the spirits of just men made perfect.

5. Now then strive to enter in at the strait gate, being penetrated with the
deepest sense, of the inexpressible danger your soul is in, so long as you are
in a broad way: So long as you are void of poverty of spirit, and all that
inward religion, which the many, the rich, the wise account madness. Strive to
enter in, being pierced with sorrow and shame, for having so long run on with
the unthinking crowd, utterly neglecting if not despising that holiness,
without which no man can see the Lord. Strive as in an agony of holy fear,
lest, a promise being made you of entering into his rest, even that rest which
remains for the people of God, you should nevertheless come short of it.
Strive in all the fervor of desire, with groanings which cannot be uttered.
Strive by prayer without ceasing, at all times, in all places lifting up your
heart to God, and giving him no rest, till you awake up after his likeness and
are satisfied with it.

6. To conclude. Strive to enter in at the strait gate, not only by this agony
of soul, of conviction, of sorrow, of shame, of desire, of fear, of unceasing
prayer, but likewise by ordering thy conversation right, by walking with all
thy strength, in all the ways of God, the way of innocence, of piety, and of
mercy. Abstain from all appearance of evil: Do all possible good to all men:
Deny thyself, thy own will, in all things, and take up thy cross daily. Be
ready to cut off thy right hand, to pluck out thy right eye and cast it from
thee: To suffer the loss of goods, friends, health, all things (...) earth, so
thou may enter into the kingdom of heaven.

DISCOURSE THE TWELFTH Upon our Lord's Sermon on the Mount.
MATT. vii. 15, 20. Beware of false Prophets, which come to you in Sheeps'
Clothing, but inwardly they are ravening Wolves.

Ye shall know them by their Fruits. Do Men gather Grapes of Thorns, or Figs of
Thistles?

Even so every good Tree brings forth good Fruit^ But a corrupt Tree brings
forth evil Fruit.

A good Tree cannot bring forth evil Fruit, neither can a corrupt Tree bring
forth good Fruit.

Every Tree that brings not forth good Fruit, is hewn down and cast into the
Fire.

Wherefore by their Fruits ye shall know them.


1. IT is scarce possible to express or conceive, what multitudes of souls run
on to destruction, because they would not be persuaded to walk in a narrow way,
even though it were the way to everlasting salvation. And the same thing we may
still observe daily. Such is the folly and madness of mankind, that thousands
of men still rush on in the way to hell, only because it is a broad way. They
walk in it themselves, because others do: Because so many perish they will add
to the number. Such is the amazing influence of example, over the weak,
miserable children of men! It continually peoples the regions of death, and
drowns numberless souls in everlasting perdition.

2. To warn mankind of this, to guard as many as possible against this
spreading contagion, God has commanded his watchmen to cry aloud, and show the
people the danger they are in. For this end he has sent his servants the
prophets, in their succeeding generations, to point out the narrow path, and
exhort all men, not to be conformed to this world. But what if the watchmen
themselves fall into the snare, against which they should warn others? What if
the prophets prophesy deceits? If they cause the people to err from the way?
What shall be done if they point out as the way to eternal life, what is in
truth the way to eternal death? And exhort others to walk, as they do
themselves, in the broad, not the narrow way.

3. Is this an unheard of, is it an uncommon thing? Nay, God knows, it is
not. The instances of it are almost innumerable. We may find them in every age
and nation. But how terrible is this? When the ambassadors of God, turn agents
for the devil? When they who are commissioned to teach men the way to heaven,
do in fact teach them the ^y to hell? These are like the locusts of Egypt,
which eat up the residue that had escaped, that had remained after the hail.
They devour even the residue of men that had escaped, that were not destroyed
by ill example. It is not therefore without cause that our wise and gracious
master, so solemnly cautions us against them: Beware, says he; of false
prophets, which come to you in sheep's clothing, but inwardly they are
ravening wolves.

4. A caution this of the utmost importance. That it may the more effectually
sink into our hearts, let us inquire, First, who these false prophets are,
Secondly, what appearance they put on, and Thirdly, how we may know what they
really are, notwithstanding their fair appearance.

I. 1. We are, First, to inquire, who these false prophets are. And this it is
needful to do the more diligently, because these very men have so labored to
wrest this scripture, to their own (though not only their own) destruction. In
order therefore to cut off all dispute, I shall raise no dust (as the manner of
some is) neither use any loose, rhetorical exclamations, to deceive the hearts
of the simple, but speak sough, plain truths, such as none can deny, who has
either understanding or modesty lest: And such truths as have the closest
connection, wish the whole tenor of the preceding discourse. Whereas too many
have interpreted these words, without any regard to all that went before: A^ if
they bore no manner of relation to the sermon, in the close of which they stand.

2. By prophets here (as in many other passages of scripture, particularly in
the New Testament) are meant not those who foretell things to come, but those
who speak in the name of God: Those men who profess to be sent of God, to teach
others the way to heaven.

Those are false prophets, who teach a false way to heaven, a way which does
not lead thither. Or (which comes in the end to the same point) who do not
teach the true.

3. Every broad way is infallibly a false one. Therefore this is one plain,
sure rule, "They who teach men to walk in a broad way, a way that many walk in,
are false prophets."

Again, the true way to heaven is a narrow way. Therefore this is another
plain, sure rule, "They who do not teach men to walk in a narrow way, to be
singular, are false prophets."

4. To be more particular. The only true way to heaven, is that pointed out in
the preceding sermon. Therefore they are false prophets who do not teach men to
walk in this way.

Now the way to heaven pointed out in the preceding sermon, is the way of
lowliness, mourning, meekness, and holy, desire, love of God and of our
neighbor, doing good, and suffering evil for Christ's sake. They are therefore
false prophets, who teach as the way to heaven, any other way than this.

5. It matters not, what they call that other way. They may call it faith, or
good works: Or faith and works: Or repentance: Or repentance, faith and new
obedience. All these are good words. But if under these, or any other terms
whatever, they teach men any way disstinct from this, they are properly (...)
prophets.

6. How much more do they fall under that condemnation, who speak evil of this
good way? But above all, they who teach the directly opposite way? The way of
pride, of levity, of passion, of worldly desires, of loving pleasure more than
God, of unkindness, to (...) neighbor, of unconcern for good works, and
suffering no evil, no pers^ecutions for righteousness-sake?

7. If it be asked, why who ever did ^h this? Or who does teach it, as the way
to heaven? I answer, Ten thousand wise and honorable men: Even all those, of
whatever denomination, who encourage the proud, the trifler, the passionate,
the lover of the world, the (...) of pleasure, the unjust or unkind, the easy,
(...) less, harmless, useless creature, the man who suffers no repooach for
righteousness' sake, to imagine he is in the way to heaven. These are false
prophets in the highest sense of the word. These are traitors both to God and
man. These are no other than the first born of Satan: The oldest sons of
Apollyon, the destroyer, These are far above, the ^^nk of ordinary cut throats;
for they (...) souls of men. They are continually people (...) of night: And
whenever they follow the poor souls whom they have destoryed, (...) shall be
moved from beneath, to meet them (...)ing.

II. 1. But do they come now, in their (...) shape? By no means. If it were so,
they (...) not dest^. You would take the (...), and (...) for your life.
Therefore they put on a quite contrary appearance: (which was the second thing
to be considered.) They come to you in sheep's clothing, although inwardly
they are ravening wolves.

2. They come to you in sheep's clothing; that is, with an appearance of
harmlessness. They come in the most mild, inoffensive manner, without any mark
or token of enmity. Who can imagine, that these quiet creatures, would do any
hurt to any one? Perhaps they may not be so zealous and active in doing good,
as one would wish they were. However, you see no reason to suspect, that they
have even the desire to do any harm. But this is not all:

3. They come, Secondly, with an appearance of usefulness. Indeed to this, to
do good they are particularly called. They are set apart for this very thing.
They are particularly commissioned, to watch over your soul and to train you up
to eternal life. It Is their whole business, to go about doing good, and healing
those that are oppressed of the devil. And you have been always accustomed to
look upon them in this light, as messengers of God, sent to bring you a
blessing.

4. They come, Thirdly with an appearance of religion. All they do, is for
conscience sake! They assure you, it is out of mere zeal for God, that they are
making God a liar. It is but of pure concern for religion, that they would
destroy it, root and branch, All they speak, is only from a love of truth, and
a fear lest it should suffer. And, it may be, from a regard for the church, and
a desire to defend her from all her enemies.

5. Above all they come with an appearance of love. They take all these pains,
only for your good. They should not trouble themselves about you, but that they
have a kindness for you. They will make large professions of their goodwill, of
their concern for the danger you are in, and of their earnest desire, to
preserve you from error, from being entangled in new and mischievous doctrines.
They should be very sorry to see one who means so well, hurried into any
extreme, perplexed with strange and unintelligible notions, or deluded into
enthusiasm. Therefore it is, that they advise you, to keep still, in the plain
middle way: And to beware of being righteous overmuch, lest you should destroy
yourself.

III. 1. But how many we know, what they really are, notwithstanding their fair
appearance? This was the third thing into which it was preposed to inquire.

Our blessed Lord saw how needful it was for all men to know false prophets,
however disguised. He saw likewise, how unable most men were, to deduce a truth
through a long train of consequences. He therefore gives us a sh^^t and plain
rule, easy to be understood by men of the meanest capacities, and easy to be
applied upon all occasions. Ye shall know them by their fruits.

2. Upon all occasions you may easily apply this rule. In order to know whether
any who speak in the name of God, are false or (...) prophets, it is easy to
observe, First, what are the fruits of their doctrine, as to themselves? What
effect has it had upon their lives? (...) they holy and unblamable in all
things? What effect has it had upon their hearts? Does it appear by the general
tenor of their conversation that their tempers are holy, heavenly, divine? That
the mind is in them which was in Christ Jesus? That they are meek, lowly,
patient lovers of God and man, and zealous of good works?

3. You may easily observe, Secondly, What are the fruits of their doctrine, as
to those that hear them? In many, at least, though not in all: For the apostles
themselves did not convert all that heard them. Have these the mind that was in
Christ? And do they walk as he also walked? And was it by hearing these men,
that they began so to do? Were they inwardly and outwardly wicked, till they
heard them? If so, it is a manifest proof, That those are true prophets,
teachers sent of God. But if it is not so, if they do not effectually teach
either themselves or others to love and serve God; it is a manifest proof, that
they are false prophets; that God has not sent them.

4. An hard saying this! How few can bear it? This our Lord was sensible of,
and therefore condescends to prove it at large, by several clear and convincing
arguments. Do men, says he, gather grapes of thorns or figs of thistles? v. 16.
Do you expect that these evil men should bring forth good fruit? As well might
you expect that thorns should bring forth grapes, or that figs should grow upon
thistles! Every good Tree brings forth good fruit: but a corrupt tree
brings forth evil fruit. v. 17. Every true prophet, every teacher whom I have
sem^ brings forth the good fruit of holiness. But a false prophet, a teacher
whom I have not sent, brings forth only sin and wickedness. A good tree cannot
bring forth evil fruit, neither can a corrupt tree bring forth good fruit. A
true prophet, a teacher sent from God, does not bring forth good fruit,
sometimes only, but always; not accidentally, but by a kind of necessity. In
like manner, a false prophet, one whom God has not sent, does not bring forth
evil fruit, accidentally or sometimes only, but always and of necessity. Every
tree that brings not forth good fruit, is hewn down and cast into the fire.
v. 19. Such infallibly will be the lot of those prophets, who bring not forth
good fruit, who do not save souls from sin, who do not bring sinners to
repentance. Wherefore let this stand as an eternal rule, By their fruits ye
shall know them. v. 20. They who in fact bring the proud, passionate,
unmerciful lovers of the world, to be lowly, gentle lovers of God and man: They
are true prophets, they are sent from God, who therefore confirms their word.
On the other hand, they whose hearers, if unrighteous before, remain
unrighteous still, or at least, void of any righteousness which exceeds the
righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees: They are false prophets; they are
not sent of God: therefore their word falls to the ground. And without a
miracle of grace they and their hearers together, will fall into the bottomless
pit.

5. O beware of these false prophets! For though they come in sheep's clothing,
yet inwardly they are ravening wolves. They only destroy and devour the flock:
They tear them in pieces, if there be none to help them. They will not, cannot
lead you in the way to heaven. How should they? When they know it not
themselves. O beware they do not turn you out of the way, and cause you to lose
what you have wrought.

6. But perhaps you will ask, If there be such danger in hearing them, ought I
to hear them at all? It is a weighty question, such as deserves the deepest
consideration, and ought not to be answered, but upon the ca^uest though^, the
most deliberate reflection. For many years, I have been almost afraid, to speak
at all concerning it: Being unable to determine one way or the other, or to
give any judgment upon it. Many reasons there are which readily occur, and
incline me to say, "Hear them not." And yet what our Lord speaks concerning the
false prophets of his own times, seems to imply the contrary. Then spoke Jesus
unto the multitude and to his disciples, saying, The Scribes and the Pharisees
set in Moses' seat, are the ordinary, stated teachers in your church: All
therefore whatsoever they bid you observe, that observe and do. But do not ye
after their works; for they say and do not. Now that these were false prophets
in the highest sense, our Lord had shown during the whole course of his
ministry: As indeed he does in those very words, They say, and do not.
Therefore by their fruits his disciples could not but know them, seeing they
were open to the view of all men. Accordingly he warns them again and again, to
beware of false prophets. And yet he does not forbid them to hear even these.
Nay, he in effect commands them so to do, in those words, All therefore
whatsoever they bid you observe, that observe and do. For unless they heard
them, they could not know, much less observe whatsoever they bade them do. Here
then our Lord himself gives a plain direction, both to his apostles and the
whole multitude, in some circumstances, to hear even false prophets, known and
acknowledge so to be.

7. But perhaps it will be said, he only directed to hear them, when they read
the scripture to the congregation. I answer, at the same time that they thus
read the scripture, they generally expounded it too. And here is no kind of
intimation, that they were to hear the one, and not the other also. Nay the
very terms, All things whatsoever they bid you observe, exclude any such
limitation.

8. Again, unto them, unto false prophets, undeniably such, is frequently
committed (O grief to speak! For surely these things ought not so to be) the
administration of the sacraments also. To direct men therefore, not to hear
them, would be in effect to cut them off from the ordinances of God. But this
we dare not do, considering the validity of the ordinance does not depend on
the goodness of him that administers, but on the faithfulness of him that
ordained it, who will and does meet us in his appointed ways. Therefore on this
account likewise I scruple to say, hear not even the false prophets. Even by
these who are under a curse themselves, God can, and does give us his blessing.
For the bread which they break we have experimentally known to be the Communion
of he body of Christ. And the cup which God blessed even by their unhallowed
lips, was to us the communion of the blood of Christ.

9. All therefore which I can say is this: In any particular case, wait upon
God by humble and earnest prayer, and then act according to the best light you
have. Act according to what you are persuaded, upon the whole, will be most for
your spiritual advantage. Take great care that you do not judge rashly; that
you do not lightly think any to be false prophets. And when you have full
proof, see that no anger or contempt have any place in your heart. After this,
in the presence and in the fear of God, determine for yourself. I can only say,
if by experience you find, that the hearing them hurts your soul, then hear
them not: Then quietly refrain, and hear those that profit you. If on the other
hand, you find, it does not hurt your soul, you then may hear them still. only
take heed how you hear: Beware of them and of their doctrine. Hear with fear
and trembling, lest you should be deceived, and given up, like them, to a
strong delusion. As they continually mingle truth and lies, how easily may you
take in both together? Here with fervent and continual prayer, to him who alone
teaches man wisdom. And see that you bring whatever you hear, to the law and
to the testimony. Receive nothing untried, nothing till it is weighed in the
balance of the sanctuary. Believe nothing they say, unless it is clearly
consumed by plain passages of holy writ. Wholly reject whatsoever differs
therefrom, whatever is not confirmed thereby. And in particular, reject, with
the utmost abhorrence, whatsoever is described as the way of salvation, that is
either diffe^ from or short of the way, our Lord has marked out in the forgoing
discourse.

10. I can not conclude, without addressing a few plain words, to those of whom
we have now been speaking. O ye false prophets, O ye dry bones, hear ye for
once the word of the Lord. How long will ye lie in the name of God? Saying God
has spoken: And God has not spoken by you. How long will ye pervert the right
ways of the Lord, putting darkness for light, and light for darkness? How long
will ye teach the way of death, and call it the way of life? How long will ye
deliver to Satan the souls, whom ye profess to bring unto God?

11. Woe unto you, ye blind leaders of the blind! For ye shut the kingdom of
heaven against men. Ye neither go in yourselvs, neither suffer ye them that are
entering to go in. Them that would strive to enter in at the strait gate, ye
call back into the broad way. Them that have scarce gone (...) step in the ways
of God, you devilishly caution against going too far. Them that just begin to
hunger and thirst after righteousness, you warn, not to be righteous overmuch.
Thus you cause them to stumble at the very threshold; yea, to fall and rise no
more. O wherefore d^ ye this? What profit is there in their blood, when they go
down to the pit? Miserable profit to you. They shall perish in iniquity: but
their blood will God require at your hands!

12. Where are your eyes? Where is your understanding? Have ye deceived others,
till you have deceived yourselves also? Who has required this at your hands,
to teach a way which ye never knew? are you given up to so str^^^ a de^, that
ye not only teach but believe (...), And can you possibly believe, that God
(...) sent you? That ye are his messengers? Nay; if the Lord had sent you, the
Work of the Lord would prosper in your hand. As the Lord lives, if ye were
messengers of God, he would confirm the word of his messengers. But the work of
the Lord does not prosper in you hand: You bring no sinners to repentance. The
Lord does not consirm your word: For you save no souls from death.

13. How can you possibly evade the force of our Lord's words? So full, so
strong, so express? How can ye evade knowing yourselves by your fruits? Evil
fruits of evil trees! And how should it be otherwise! Do men gather grapes of
thorns or figs of thistles? Take this to yourselves, ye to whom it belongs. O
ye barren Trees, why cumber ye the grounds? Every good tree brings forth good
fruit. See ye not, that here is no exception? Take knowledge then, ye are not
good trees: For ye do not bring forth good fruit. But a corrupt tree brings
forth evil fruit. And so have ye done from the beginning. Your speaking as from
God has only confirmed them that heard you, in the tempers, if not works, of
the devil. O take warning of him in whose name ye speak, before the sentence he
has pronounced take place. Every tree which brings not forth good fruit is
hewn down and cast into the fire.

14. My dear brethren, harden not your hearts. You have too long shut your eyes
against the light. Open them now before it is too late before you are cast into
outer darkness. Let not any temporal consideration weigh with you: For eternity
is at stake. Ye have run before ye were sent. O go no farther. Do not persist
to damn yourselves and them that hear you! You have no fruit of your labors.
And why is this? Even because the Lord is not with you. But can you go this
warfare at your own cost? It cannot be. Then humble yourselves before him. Cry
unto him out of the dust, that he may first quicken thy soul: Give thee the
faith that works by love: That is lowly and meek, pure and merciful, zealous
of good works; rejoicing in tribulation, in reproach, in distress, in
persecution for righteousness' sake. So shall the spirit of glory and of Christ
rest upon thee, and it shall appear, that God has sent thee. So shall thou
indeed do the work of an evangelist, and make full proof of thy ministry. So
shall the word of God in thy mouth be an hammer that breaks the rocks in
pieces. It shall then be known by thy fruits, that thou art a prophet of the
Lord, even by the children whom God has given thee. And having turned many to
righteousness, thou shall shine as the stars for ever and ever.

DISCOURSE THE THIRTEENTH Upon our Lord's Sermon on the Mount.
MATT. vii. 21-27. Not every one that says unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter
into the Kingdom of Heaven: But he that does the Will of my Father which is in
Heaven.

Many will say to me in that Day, Lord, Lord, have we not prophesied in thy
Name? And in thy Name have cast out Devils? And in thy Name done many wonderful
Works?

And then will I profess unto them, I never knew you: Depart from me, ye that
work Iniquity.

Therefore whosoever hears these Sayings of ^ine, and does them, I will
liken him unt^ a wise Man, which built his House upon a Rock.

And the Rain descended, and the Floods came, and the Winds blew, and beat upon
that House: And it fell not, for it was founded upon a (...).

And every one that hears these Sayings of mine, and does them not, shall be
likened unto a foolish man, which built his House upon the Sand:

And the rain descended, and the Floods came, and the Winds blew, and beat upon
that House: And it fell, and great was the Fall of it.


1. OUR divine teacher having declared the whole counsel of God, with regard to
the way of salvation, and observed the chief hindrances of those who desire to
walk therein: Now closes the whole with these weighty words; thereby as it were
setting his seal to his prophecy, and impressing his whole authority on what he
had delivered, that it might stand firm to all generations.

2. For thus says the Lord, that none may ever conceive, there is any other
way than this, Not every one that says unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into
the kingdom of heaven. Many will say to me in that day, Lord, Lord; have we not
prophesied in thy name? And in thy name have cast out devils? And in thy name
done many wonderful works? And then will I profess unto them, I never knew you:
Depart from me ye that work iniquity. Therefore every one that hears these
sayings of mine and does them not, shall be likened unto a foolish man which
built his house upon the sand. And the rain descended, and the floods came, and
the winds blew, and beat upon that house: And it f^ll, and great was the fall
of it.

3. I design in the following discourse, First, to consider the case of him,
who thus builds his house upon the sand: Secondly, to show the wisdom of him
who built upon a rock, and Thirdly, To conclude with a practical application.

I. 1. And, First, I am to consider the case of him who builds his house upon
the sand. It is concerning him our Lord says, Not every one that says unto
me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of heaven. And this is a decree
which cannot pass; which stands fast for ever and ever. It therefore imports
us in the highest degree, thoroughly to understand the force of these words. Now
what are we to understand by that expression, That says unto me, Lord, Lord?
It undoubtedly means, "that thinks of going to heaven by any other way than
that which I have now described." It therefore implies (to begin at the lowest
point) all good words, all verbal religion. It includes, whatever creeds we may
rehearse, whatever professions of faith we make: Whatever number of prayers we
may repeat, whatever thanksgivings we read or say to God. We may speak good of
his name; and declare his loving kindness to the children of men. We may be
talking of all his mighty acts, and telling of his salvation from day to day.
(...) comparing spiritual things with spiritual, we may show the meaning of the
oracles of God. We may explain the mysteries of his kingdom, which have been
hid from the beginning of the world. We may speak with the tongue of angels
rather than men, concerning the deep things of God. We may proclaim to sinners,
Behold the Lamb of God, who takes away the Sin of the world. Yea, we may do
this with such a measure of the power of God, and such demonstration of his
spirit, as to save many ^uls from death, and hide a multitude of sins. And yet
it is very possible, all this may be no more than saying, Lord, Lord. After I
have thus successfully preached to others, still I myself may be a castaway. I
may in the hand of God, snatch many souls from hell, and yet drop into it, when
I have done. I may bring many others to the kingdom of heaven, and yet myself
never enter there. Reader, if God has ever blessed my word to thy soul, pray
that he may be merciful to me a sinner!

2. The saying, Lord, Lord! may, Secondly, imply, the doing no harm. We may
abstain from every presumptuous sin, from every kind of outward wickedness. We
may refrain from all those ways of acting or speaking, which are forbidden in
Holy Writ. We may be able to say to all those among whom we live, Which of you
convinces me of sin? We may have a conscience void of any external offense,
toward God and toward man. We may be clear of all uncleanness, ungodliness
and unrighteousness, as to outward act: Or (as the apostle testifies concerning
himself) touching the righteousness of the law, i. e. outward righteousness,
blameless. But yet we are not hereby justified. Still this is no more than
saying, Lord, Lord! And if we go no farther than this, we shall never enter
into the kingdom of he^^^^.

3. The saying, Lord, Lord, may imply, Thirdly, man of what are usually styled
good works. A (...) may attend the supper of the Lord, may hear abundance of
excellent sermons, and omit no opportunity of partaking all the other
ordinances of God. I may do good to my neighbor, deal my bread to the hungry,
and cover the naked with a garment. I may be so zealous of good works, as even
to give all my goods to feed the poor. Yea, and I may do all this, with a
desire to please God, and a real belief that I do please him thereby: (which is
undeniably the case of those our Lord introduces, saying unto him, Lord, Lord!)
and still I may have no part, in the glory which shall be revealed.

4. If any man marvel at this, let him acknowledge he is a stranger to the
whole religion of Jesus Christ: And in particular, to that perfect portraiture
thereof, which he has set before us in this discourse. For how far short is all
this, of that righteousness and true holiness, which he has described therein!
How widely distant from that inward kingdom of heaven, which is now opened in
the believing soul? Which is first sown in the heart as a grain of
mustard seed, but afterward puts forth great branches, on which grow all
the fruits of righteousness, every good temper and word and work.

5. Yet as clearly as he had declared this, as frequently as he had repeated,
That none (...) have not this kingdom of God within (...) shall enter into the
kingdom of heaven (...) Lord well knew, that many would not (...) this saying,
and therefore confirms it y^^ (...) Many (says he; not one; not a few only; it
is not a rare o^ an uncommon case) shall say (...) me in that day: Not only we
have said many prayers; we have spoken thy praise; we have refrained from evil;
we have excercised ourselves in doing good: But what is abundantly more than
this, We have prophesied in thy name. In thy name have we cast out devils; in
thy name done many wonderful works. We have prophesied: we have declared thy
will to mankind; we have showed sinners the way to peace and glory. And we have
done this, in thy name, according to the truth of thy gospel. Yea, and by thy
authority, who did confirm the word, with the Holy Ghost sent down from
heaven. For in or by thy name, by the power of thy word and of thy Spirit, have
we cast out devils; out of the souls which they had long claimed as their own,
and whereof they had full and quiet possession. And in thy name, by thy power,
not our own, have we done many wonderful works: Insomuch that even the dead
heard the voice of the Son of God speaking by us, and lived. And then will I
profess even unto them, I never knew you: No, not then, when you were casting
out devils in my name. Even then I did not know you as my own: For your heart
was not right toward God. Ye were not yourselves meek and lowly, ye were not
lovers of God and of all mankind: Ye were not renewed in the image of God. Ye
were not holy as I am holy. Depart from me, ye who, not withstanding all this,
are workers of iniquity; (...). Ye are transgressors of my law, my law of holy
and perfect love.

6. It is to put this beyond all possibility of contradiction, that our Lord
confirms it by that opposite comparison. Every one, says he, who hears these
sayings of mine and does them not, shall be likened unto a foolish man, which
built his house upon the sand. And the rain descended, and the floods came, and
the winds blew, and beat upon that house: As they will surely do, sooner or
later, upon every soul of man; even the floods of outward affliction, or inward
temptation: the storms of pride, anger, fear or desire. And it fell, and great
was the fall of it: So that it perished for ever and ever. Such must be the
portion of all, who rest in any thing short of that religion which is above
described. And the greater will their fall be, because they heard those
sayings, and yet did them not.

II. 1. I am, Secondly, To show the wisdom of him that does them, that builds
his house upon a rock. He indeed is wise, who does the will of my father which
is in heaven. He is truly wise, whose righteousness exceeds the righteousness
of the Scribes and Pharisees. He is poor in spirit, knowing himself even as
also he is known. He sees and feels all his sin, and all his guilt, till it is
washed away by the atoning blood. He is conscious of his lost estate, of the
wrath of God abiding on him, and of his utter inability to help himself, till
he is filled with peace and joy, in the Holy Ghost. He is meek and gentle,
patient toward all men, never returning evil for evil, or railing for railing,
but contrariwise blessing, till he o^^ comes evil with good. His soul is
athirst for nothing on earth, but only for God, the living God. He has bowels
of love for all mankind, and is ready to lay down his life for his enemies. He
loves the Lord his God with all his heart, and with all his mind and soul and
strength. He alone shall enter into the kingdom of heaven, who in this spirit
does good unto all men; and who being for this cause despised and rejected of
men; being hated, reproached and persecuted, rejoices and is exceeding glad,
knowing in whom he has believed; and being assured, these light, momentary
afflictions will work out for him an eternal weight of glory.

2. How truly wise is this man! He knows himself: An everlasting spirit, which
came forth from God, and was sent down into an house of clay, not to do his own
will, but the will of him that sent him. He knows the world; the place in which
he is to pass a few days or years, not as an inhabitant, but as a stranger and
sojourner, in his way to the everlasting habitations: And accordingly he uses
the world, as not abusing it, and as knowing the fashion of it passes away. He
knows God, his father and his friend, the parent of all good, the center of the
spirits of all flesh, the sole happiness of all intelligent beings. He sees,
clearer than the light of the noon day sun, that this is the end of man, To
glorify him who made him for himself and to love and enjoy him for ever. And
with equal clearness he sees the means to that end, to the enjoyment of God in
glory, even now to know, to love, to imitate God, and to believe in Jesus
Christ whom he has sent.

3. He is a wise man, even in God's accou^; for he builds his house upon a
rock: Upon the rock of ages, the everlasting rock, the Lord Jesus Christ. Fitly
is he so called; for he changes not. He is the same yesterday, today, and for
ever. To him both the man of God of old, and the apostle citing his words bear
witness, Thou, Lord, in the beginning have laid the foundation of the earth,
and the heavens are the works of thine hands. They shall perish, but thou
remainest; they all shall wax old as does a garment. And as a vesture shall
thou fold them up, and they shall be changed: But thou art the same and thy
years shall not fail. Heb. i. 10, 11, 12. Wise therefore is the man who
builds on him; who lays him for his only foundation; who builds only upon
his blood and righteousness, upon on what he h^ done and suffered for us. On
this cornerstone he fixes his faith, and rests the whole weight of his soul
upon it. He is taught of God to say, Lord, I have sinned: I deserve the
nethermost hell. But I am justified freely by thy grace, through the redemption
that is in Jesus Christ. And the life I now live, I live by faith in him, who
loved me and gave himself for me. The life I now live: Namely, a divine,
heavenly life, a life which is hid with Christ in God. I now live even in the
flesh, a life of love, of pure love both to God and man: A life of holiness and
happiness, praising God and doing all things to his glory.

4. Yet let not such an one think, that he shall not see war any more, that he
is now out of t^ reach of temptation. It still remains, for God to prove the
grace he has given: He shall be tried as gold in the fire. He shall be temp^ed
not less, than they who know not God: Perhaps abundantly more. For (...) will
not fail to try to the uttermost, those whom he is not able to destroy.
Accordingly, the (...) will impetuously descend: Only at such times and (...)
such a manner, as seems good, not to the prince of the power of the air, but to
him whose kingdom rules over all. The floods, or torrents, will come; they
will lift up their waves and rage horribly. But to them also, the Lord that
sits above the water-floods, that remains a king for ever, will say,
Hitherto shall ye come, and no farther: Here shall your proud waves be stayed.
The winds will blow and beat upon that house, as though they would tear it up
from the foundation. But they cannot prevail: It falls not: for it is founded
upon a r^k. He builds on Christ by faith and love: Therefore he shall not be
cast down. He shall not fear, though the earth be moved, and though the hills
be carried into the midst of the sea. Though the waters thereof rage and swell,
and the mountains shake at the tempest of the same: Still he dwells under the
defense of the Most High, and is safe under the shadow of the Almighty.

III. 1. How nearly then does it concern every child of man, practically to
apply these things to himself? Diligently to examine, on what foundation he
builds, whether on a rock or on the sand? How deeply are you concerned to
inquire, what is the foundation of my hope? Whereon do I build my expectation
of entering into the kingdom of heaven? Is it not built on the sand? Upon my
orthodoxy or right opinions (which by a gross abuse of wor^ I have called
faith!) Upon my having a set of notions (suppose more rational or scriptural
than many others have.) Alas! What m^dness is this? Surely this is building on
the sand: Or rather on the froth of the sea! Say, I am convinced of this. Am I
not again building my hope on what is equally unable to support it? Perhaps on
my belonging to "so excellent a church: reformed after the true
scripture-model: Blessed with the purest doctrines, the most primitive liturgy,
the most apostolical form of government." These are doubtless so many reasons
for praising God, as they may be so many helps to holiness. But they are not
holiness itself. And if they are separate from it, they will profit me nothing.
Nay, they will leave me the more without excuse, and exposed to the greater
damnation. Therefore if I build my hope upon this foundation, I am still
building upon the sand.

2. You cannot, you dare not rest here. Upon what next will you build your hope
of salvation? Upon your innocence? Upon your doing no harm? Your not wronging
or hurting any one? Well; allow this plea to be true. You are just in all your
dealings: You are a downright honest man. You pay every man his own: You
neither cheat, nor extort: You act fairly with all mankind. And you have a
conscience toward God: You do not live in any known sin. Thus far is well. But
still it is not the thing. You may go thus far, and yet never come to heaven.
When all this harmlessness flows from a right principle, it is the least part
of (...) religion of Christ. But in you it does not flow from a right
principle, and therefore is no part at all of religion. So that in grounding
your hope of salvation on this, you are still building upon the sand.

3. Do you go farther yet? Do you add to the doing no harm, the attending all
the ordinances of God? Do you at all opportunities partake of the Lord's
supper? Use public and private prayer? Fast often? Hear and search the
scriptures, and meditate thereon? These things likewise ought you to have done,
from the time you first set your face toward heaven, Yet these things also are
nothing, being alone. They are nothing without the weightier matters of the
law. And those you have forgotten. At least you experience them not; Faith,
mercy, and the love of God: Holiness of heart: heaven opened in the soul. Still
therefore you build upon the sand.

4. Over and above all this, are you zealous of good works? Do you, as you have
time, do good to all men? Do you feed the hungry and clothe the naked, and
visit the fatherless and widow in their affliction? Do you visit those that are
sick? Relieve them that are in prison? Is any a stranger and do you take him
in? Friend, come up higher. Do you prophesy in the name of Christ? Do you
preach the truth as it is in Jesus? And does the influence of his spirit attend
your word, and make it the power of God unto salvation? Does he enable you to
bring sinners from darkness to light, from the power of satan unto God? Then go
and learn what thou have so often taught, By grace (...) are saved, through
faith. Not by works of righteousness, which we have done, but of his own mercy
he saves us. Learn to hang naked upon the cross of Christ, counting all thou
have done out dung and dross. Apply to him just in the spirit of the dying
thief, of the harlot with her seven devils. Else thou art still on the sand,
and after saving others, thou will lose thy own soul.

5. Lord, increase my faith, if I now believe! Else, give me faith, though but
as a grain of mustard seed! -- But what does it profit, if a man say he has
faith, and have not works? Can that faith save him? O no! That faith which has
not works, which does not produce both inward and outward holiness, which does
not stamp the whole image of God on the heart, and purify us as he is pure:
That faith which does not produce the whole of the religion described in the
foregoing chapters, is not the faith of the gospel; not the christian faith,
not the faith which leads to glory. O beware of this, above all other snares of
the devil, of resting on unholy, unsaving faith! If thou lay stress on this,
thou art lost for ever: Thou still buildest thy house upon the sand. When the
rain descends and the floods come, it will surely fall, and great will be the
fall of it.

6. Now therefore, build thou upon a rock. By the grace of God, know thyself.
Know and feel, that thou wast shapen in wickedness, and in sin did thy mother
conceive thee: And yet thou thyself had been heaping sin upon sin, ever since
thou could discern good from evil. ^^n thyself guilty of eternal death: And
renounce all hope of ever being able to save thyself. Be it all thy hope, to be
washed in his blood, and purified by his spirit, who himself here all thy sins,
in his own body, upon the tree. And if thou know he has taken away thy sins,
so much the more abase thyself before him, in a continued sense of thy total
dependence on him for every good thought and word and work, and of thy utter
inability to all good, unless he water thee every moment.

7. Now weep for your sins, and mourn after God till he turns your heaviness
into joy. And even then weep with them that weep: And for them that weep not
for themselves. Mourn for the sins and miseries of mankind: And see, but just
before your eyes, the immense ocean of eternity, without a bottom or a shore;
which has already swallowed up millions of millions of men, and is gaping to
devour them that yet remain. See here the house of God, eternal in the heavens;
there, hell and destruction without a covering. And thence learn the importance
of every moment, which just appears, and is gone for ever!

8. Now add to your seriousness, meekness of wisdom. Hold an even scale as to
all your passions, but in particular as to anger, sorrow, and fear, Calmly
acquiesce in whatsoever is the will of God. Learn in every state wherein you
are, therewith to be content. Be mild to the good: Be gentle toward all men;
but especially toward the evil and the unthankful. Beware not only of outward
expressions of adger, such as calling thy brother raca, or thou fool! But of
every inward emotion contrary to love, though it go no farther than the heart.
Be angry at sin, at an affront offered to the majesty of heaven; but love the
sinner still: Like our Lord, who looked round about upon the pharise^ with
anger, being grieved for the hardness of their hearts. He was grieved at the
sinners, angry at the sin. Thus be thou angry and sin not.

9. Now do thou hunger and thirst, not for the meat that perishes, but for
that which endures unto everlasting life. Trample under foot the world and the
things of the world: All these riches, honors, pleasures. What is the world to
thee? Let the dead bury their dead: But follow thou after the image of God. And
beware of quenching that blessed thirst, if it be already excited in thy soul,
by what is vulgarly called religion, a poor, dull farce, a religion of form, of
outside show, which leaves the heart still cleaving to the dust, as earthly and
sensual as ever. Let nothing satisfy thee but the power of godliness, but a
religion that is spirit and life; the dwelling in God and God in thee; the
being an inhabitant of eternity; the entering in by the blood of sprinkling
within the veil, and sitting in heavenly places with Christ Jesus.

10. Now, seeing thou can do all things through Christ strengthening thee, be
merciful as thy Father in heaven is merciful. Love thy neighbor as thyself.
Love friends and enemies as thy own soul. And let thy love be long-suffering,
and patient toward all men. Let it be kind, soft, benign: Inspiring thee with
the most amiable sweetness, and the most fervent and tender affection. Let it
rejoice in the truth, wheresoever it is found, the truth that is after
godliness. Enjoy whatsoever brings glory to God, and promotes peace and
good will among men. In love cover all things, of the dead and the absent,
speaking nothing but good: Believe all things which may any way tend to clear
your neighbor's character: Hope all things in his favor, and endure all
things, triumphing over all opposition. For true love never fails, in time or
in eternity.

11. Now be thou pure in heart; purified through faith from every unholy
affection, cleansing thyself from all filthiness of flesh and spirit, and
perfecting holiness in the fear of God. Being through the power of his grace
purified from pride by deep poverty of spirit, from anger, from every unkind or
turbulent passion, by meekness and mercifulness, from every desire but to
please and enjoy God, by hunger and thirst after righteousness; now love the
Lord thy God with all thy heart and with all thy strength.

12. In a word: Let thy religion be the religion of the heart. Let it lie deep
in thy inmost soul. Be thou little and base, and mean and vile (beyond what
words can express) in thy own eyes; amazed and humbled to the dust, by the love
of God which is in Christ Jesus. Be serious Let the whole stream of thy
thoughts, words, and actions flow from the deepest conviction, that thou
stand on the edge of the great gulf, thou and all the children of men, just
ready to drop in, either into everlasting Glory or everlasting burnings. Let
thy soul be filled with mildness, gentleness, patience, long-suffering toward
all men: At the same time that all which is in thee is athirst for God, the
living God; longing to to awake up after his likeness, and to be satisfied with
it. Be thou a lover of God and of all mankind. In this spirit do and suffer all
things. Thus show thy faith by thy works: Thus do the will of thy Father which
is in heaven. And as sure as thou now walk with God on earth, thou shall
reign with him in glory.

The Original, Nature, Properties, and Use of the LAW. A SERMON
ON ROMANS vii. 12. Wherefore the Law is holy, and the Commandment holy, and
just, and good.


1. PERHAPS there are few subjects within the whole compass of religion, so
little understood as this. The reader of this epistle is usually told, by the
law St. Paul means the Jewish law: And so apprehending himself to have no
concern therewith, passes on without farther thought about it. Indeed some are
not satisfied with this account: But observing the epistle is directed to the
Romans, thence infer, that the apostle in the beginning of this chapter,
alludes to the old Roman law. But as they have no more concern with this, than
with the ceremonial law of Moses, so they spend not much thought, on what they
suppose is occasionally mentioned, barely to illustrate another thing.

2. But a careful observer of the apostle's discourse, will not be content with
these slight explications of it. And the more he weighs the words, the more
convinced he will be, that St. Paul by the law mentioned in this chapter, does
not mean either the ancient law of Rome, or the ceremonial law of Moses. This
will clearly appear to all who attentively consider the tenor of his discourse.
He begins the chapter, Know ye not, brethren (for I speak to them that know the
low, to them who have been instructed therein from their youth) That the law
has dominion over a man as long as he lives? ver. 1. (What, the law of Rome
only, or the ceremonial law? No surely; but the moral law) for, to give a plain
instance, the woman that has an husband, is bound by the (moral) law to her
husband as long as he lives. But if her husband be dead, she is loosed from
the law of her husband. ver. 2. So then, if while her husband lives, she be
married to another man, she shall be called an adultress: But if her husband be
dead, she is free from that law, so that she is no adultress, though she be
married to another man. ver. 3. From this particular instance the apostle
proceeds to draw that general conclusion. Wherefore, my brethren, by a plain
parity of reason, ye also are become dead to the law, the whole Mosaic
institution, by the body of Christ offered for you, and bringing you under a
new dispensation: That ye should without any blame be married to another, even
to him who is raised from the dead, and has thereby given proof of his
authority to make the change, that ye should bring forth fruit unto God. ver.
4. And this we can do now, whereas before we could not: For when we were in the
flesh, under the power of the flesh, that is, of corrupt nature (which was
necessarily the case till we knew the power of Christ's resurrection the
motions of sin, which were by the law, which were shown and inflamed by the
mosaic law, not conquered, did work in our members, broke out various ways, to
bring forth fruit unto death. ver. 5. (...) now we are delivered from the law,
from that whole moral as well as ceremonial economy; that being dead whereby
we were held: That entire institution being now as it were dead, and having no
more authority over us, than the husband when dead has over his wife: That we
should serve him who died for us and rose again, in newness of spirit, in a new
spiritual dispensation, and not in the oldness of the letter, ver. 6. with a
bare outward service, according to the letter of the Mosaic institution.

3. The apostle having gone thus far, in proving that the christian had set
aside the Jewish dispensation, and that the moral law itself, though it could
never pass away, yet stood on a different foundation from what it did before,
now stops to propose and answer an objection. What shall we say then? Is the
law sin? So some might infer from a misapprehension of those words, the motions
of sin which were by the law. God forbid! says the apostle, that we should say
so. Nay, the law is an irreconcilable enemy to sin; searching it out wherever
it is. I had not known sin but by the law. I had not known lust, evil desire to
be sin, except the law had said, Thou shall not covet, ver. 7. After opening
this farther in the four following verses, he subjoins this general conclusion,
with regard more especially to the moral law, from which the preceding instance
was taken: Wherefore the law is holy, and the commandment holy, and just and
good.

4. In order to explain and enforce these deep words, so little regarded,
because so little understood, I shall endeavor to show, First, The original of
this law; Secondly, The nature thereof; Thirdly, The properties, that it is
holy and just and good; and Fourthly, the uses of it.

I. 1. I shall, First, endeavor to show the original of the moral law, often
called the law, by way of eminence. Now, this is not, as some may possibly have
imagined, of so late an institution as the time of Moses. Noah declared it to
men long before that time, and Enoch before him. But we may trace its original
higher still, even beyond the foundation of the world, to that period, unknown
indeed to men, but doubtless enrolled in the annals of eternity, when the
morning stars first sang together, being newly called into existence. It
pleased the great Creator to make these his first born sons, intelligent
beings, that they might know him that created them. For this end he endued them
with understanding, to discern truth from falsehood, good from evil: And as a
necessary result of this, with liberty, a capacity of choosing the one and
refusing the other. By this they were likewise enabled to offer him a free and
willing service: A service rewardable in itself, as well as most acceptable to
their gracious master.

2. To employ all the faculties which he had given them, particularly their
understanding and liberty, he gave them a law, a complete model of all truth,
so far as intelligible to a finite being, and of all good, so far as angelic
minds were capable of embracing it. It was also the design of their beneficent
Governor herein, to make way for a continual increase of their happiness:
Seeing every instance of obedience ^o that law, would both add to the
perfection of their nature, and entitle them to an higher reward, which the
righteous judge would give in its season.

3. In like manner, when God in his appointed time, had created a new order of
intelligent beings, when he had raised man from the dust of the earth, breathed
into him the breath of life, and caused him to become a living soul, endued
with power to choose good or evil: He gave to this free, intelligent creature,
the same law as to his firstborn children: Not wrote indeed upon tables of
stone, or any corruptible substance, but engraven on his heart by the finger of
God, wrote in the inmost spirit both of men and of angels: To the intent it
might never be afar off, never hard to be understood; but always at hand, and
always shining with clear light, even as the sun in the midst of heaven.

4. Such was the original of the law of God. With regard to man, it was coeval
with his nature. But with regard to the elder sons of God, it shone in its full
splendour, or ever the mountains were brought forth, or the earth and the round
world were made. But it was not long before man rebelled against God, and by
breaking this glorious law, well nigh effaced it out of his heart; the eyes of
his understanding being darkened, in the same measure as his soul was alienated
from the life of God. And yet God did not despise the work of his own hands:
But being reconciled to man through the Son of his love, he, in some measure,
re-inscribed his aw on the heart of his dark, sinful creature. He again showed
thee, O man, what is good (although not as in the beginning) even to do justly
and to love mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God.

5. And this he showed not only to our first parents, but likewise to all their
posterity, by that true light which enlightens every man that comes into the
world. But notwithstanding this light, all flesh had in process of time
corrupted their way before him: Till he chose out of mankind a peculiar people,
to whom he gave a more perfect knowledge of his law. And the heads of this,
because they were slow of understanding, he wrote on two tables of stone; which
he commanded the fathers to teach their children, through all succeeding
generations.

6. And thus it is, that the law of God is now made known to them that know not
God. They hear, with the hearing of the ear, the things that were written
aforetime for our instruction. But this does not suffice. They cannot by this
means comprehend the height and depth and length and breadth thereof. God alone
can reveal this by his spirit. And so he does to all that truly believe, in
consequence of that gracious promise, made to all the Israel of God: Behold,
the days come, says the Lord, that I will make a new covenant with the house
of Israel. And this shall be the covenant that I will make, I will put my law
in their inward parts, and write it in their hearts, and I will be their G^l,
and they shall be my people. Jer. xxxi. 31, etc.

II. 1. The nature of that law which was originally given to angels in heaven
and man in paradise, and which God has so mercifully promised to write afresh,
in the hearts of all true believers, was the second thing I proposed to show.
In order to which I would first observe, That although the law and the
commandment are sometimes differently taken (the commandment meaning but a part
of the law) yet in the text they are used as equivalent terms, implying one and
the same thing. But we cannot understand here, either by one or the other, the
ceremonial law. It is not the ceremonial law, whereof the apostle says, in the
words above recited, I had not known sin but by the law: This is too plain to
need a proof. Neither is it the ceremonial law which says, in the words
immediately subjoined, Thou shall not covet. Therefore the ceremonial law, has
no place in the present question.

2. Neither can we understand by the law mentioned in the text, the Mosaic
dispensation. It is true, the word is sometimes so understood: As when the
apostle says, speaking to the Galatians (chap. iii. ver. 17.) The covenant
which was confirmed before (namely with Abraham the father of the faithful) the
Low, i. e. the mosaic eispensation, which was four hundred and thirty years
after, cannot disannul. But it cannot be so understood in the text; for the
apostle never bestows, so high commendations as these upon that imperfect and
shadowy dispensation. He no where affirms, the mosaic to be a spiritual law;
Or, that it is holy and just and good. Neither is it true, that God will write
that law in the hearts of them whose iniquities he remembers no more. It
remains, that the law, eminently so termed, is no other than the moral law.

3. Now this law is an incorruptible picture of the high and holy one that
inhabiteth eternity. It is he whom in his essence no man has seen or can see,
made visible to men and angels. It is the face of God unveiled: God manifested
to his creatures as they are able to bear it: Manifested to give and not to
destroy life; that they may see God and live It is the heart of God disclosed
to man. Yea, in some sense we may apply to this law, what the apostle says of
his son, it is (...). The streaming forth or ^^^^^ing of his glory, the express
image of his person.

4. "If virtue, said the ancient heathen, could assume such a shape as that we
could behold her with our eyes, what wonderful love would she excite in us!" If
virtue could do this! It is done already. The law of God is all virtues in one,
in such a shape, as to be beheld with open face, by all those whose eyes God
has enlightened. What is the law, but divine virtue and wisdom, assuming a
visible form? What is it, but the original ideas of truth and good, which were
lodged in the uncreated mind from eternity, now drown forth and clothed with
such a vehicle, as to appear even to human understanding?

5. If we survey the law of God in another point of view, it is supreme,
unchangeable reason: It is unalterable rectitude: It is the overlasting fitness
of all things that are or ever were created. I am sensible, what a shortness,
and even impropriety there is, in these and all other human expressions, when
we endeavor by these faint pictures, to shadow out the deep things of God.
Nevertheless we have no better, indeed no other way, during this our infant
state of existence. As we now know but in part, so we are constrained to
prophesy, i. e. speak of the things of God in part also. We cannot order our
speech by reason of darkness, while we are in this house of clay. While I am a
child I must speak as a child. But I shall soon put away childish things. For
when that which is perfect is come, that which is in part shall be done away.

6. But to return. The law of God (speaking after the manner of men) is a copy
of the eternal mind, a transcript of the divine nature: Yea it is the fairest
offspring of the everlasting Father, the brightest efflux of his essential
wisdom, the visible beauty of the Most High. It is the delight and wonder of
cherubim and seraphim and all the company of heaven, and the glory and joy of
every wise believer, every well instructed child of God upon earth.

III. 1. Such is the nature of the ever-blessed law of God. I am, in the third
place, to show the properties of it: Not all; for that would exceed the wisdom
of an angel. But those only which are mentioned in the text. These are three:
It is holy, just, and good. And first, The law is holy.

2. In this expression the apostle does not appear to speak of its effects, but
rather of its nature: As St. James, speaking of the same thing under another
name, says, The wisdom from above (which is no other than this law, written in
our heart) is first pure, c. iii. 17. (...), chaste, spotless, internally, and
essentially holy. And consequently, when it is transcribed into the life, as
well as the soul (it is as the same apostle terms it) c. i. 27. (...). Pure
religion and undefiled; or the pure, clean, unpolluted worship of God.

3. It is indeed, in the highest degree, pure, chaste, clean, holy. Otherwise
it could not be the immediate offspring, and much less the express resemblance
of God, who is essential holiness. It is pure from all sin, clean and unspotted
from any touch of evil. It is a chaste virgin incapable of any de^^ement, of
any mixture with that which is unclean or unholy. It has no fellowship with sin
of any kind. For what communion has light with darkness? As sin is in its very
nature enmity to God, so his law is enmity to sin.

4. Therefore it is, that the apostle rejects with such abhorrence, that
blasphemous supposition, that the law of God is either sin itself, or the cause
of sin. God forbid, that we should suppose, it is the cause of sin, because it
is the discoverer of it: Because it detects the hidden things of darkness, and
drags them out into open day. It is true, by this means (as the apostle
observes, ver. 13.) Sin appears to be sin. All its disguises are torn away, and
it appears in its native deformity. It is true likewise, that sin by the
commandment becomes exceeding sinful. Being now committed against light and
knowledge, being stripped even of the poor plea of ignorance, it loses its excuse
as well as disguise, and becomes far more odious both to God and man. Yea, and
it is true, that sin works death by that which is good, which itself is pure
and holy. When it is dragged out to light, it rages the more: When it is
restrained, it bursts out with greater violence. Thus the apostle (speaking in
the person of one, who was convinced of sin, but not yet delivered from it) Sin
taking occasion by the commandment, detecting and endeavoring to restrain it,
disdained the restraint, and so much the more wrought in me all manner of
concupiscence, ver. 8. All manner of foolish and hurtful desire, which that
commandment sought to restrain. Thus, when the commandment came, sin ^^^ived,
ver. 9. It fretted and raged the more. But this is no stain on the commandment.
Though it is abused it cannot be defiled. This only proves, that the heart of
man is desperately wicked. But the law of God is holy still.

5. And it is, Secondly, just. It renders to all their due. It prescribes
exactly what is right, precisely what ought to be done, said, or thought both
with regard to the author of our being, with regard to ourselves, and with
regard to every creature which he has made. It is adapted in all respects to
the nature of things, of the whole universe and every individual. It is suited
to all the circumstances of each, and to all their mutual relations, whether
such as have existed from the beginning, or such as commenced in any following
period. It is exactly agreeable to the fitnesses of things, whether essential
or accidental. It clashes with none of these in any degree; nor is ever
unconnected with them. If the word be taken in that sense, there is nothing
arbitrary in the law of God. Although still the whole and every part thereof,
is totally dependent upon his will: So that thy will be done, is the supreme,
universal law both in earth and heaven.

6. "But is the will of God the cause of his law? Is his will the original of
right and wrong? Is a thing therefore right, because God wills it? Or does he
will it, because it is right?"

I fear, this celebrated question is more curious than useful. And perhaps, in
the manner it is usually treated of, it does not so well consist with the
regard that is due from a creature, to the Creator and Governor of all things.
It is hardly decent from man, to call the supreme God to give an account to
him! Nevertheless, with awe and reverence we may speak a little. The Lord
pardon us, if we speak amiss!

7. It seems then, that the whole difficulty arises, from considering God's
will as distinct from God. Otherwise it vanishes away. For none can doubt, but
God is the cause of the law of God. But the will of God is God himself. It is
God considered as willing thus or thus. Consequently, to say, That the will of
God, or that God himself is the cause of the law, is one and the same thing.

8. Again; If the law, the immutable rule of right and wrong, depends on the
nature and fitnesses of things, and on their essential relations to each other:
(I do not say, their eternal relations; because the eternal relations of things
existing in time, is little less than a contradiction:) If, I say, this depends
on the nature and relations of things, then it must depend on God, or the will
of God: Because those things themselves, with all their relations, are the work
of his hands. By his will, for his pleasure alone, they all are and were
created.

9. And yet it may be granted (which is probably all that a considerate person
would contend for) that in every particular case, God wills this or this
(suppose that men should honor their parents) because it is right, agreeably to
the sitness of things, to the relation wherein they stand.

10. The law then is right and just concerning all things. And it is good as
well as just. This we may easily infer from the fountain whence it flowed For
what was this, but the goodness of God? What but goodness alone inclined him to
impart that divine copy of himself to the holy angels? To what else can we
impute his bestowing upon man the same transcript of his own nature? And what
but tender love constrained him afresh to manifest his will to fallen man?
Either to Adam, or any of his seed, who like him were come short of the Glory
of God? Was it not mere love that moved him to publish his law, after the
understandings of men were darkened? And to send his prophets to declare that
law, to the blind, thoughtless children of men? Doubtless his goodness it was
which raised up En^ch and N^ah, to be preachers of righteousness; which caused
Abraham, his friend, and Isaac and Jacob, to bear witness to his truth. It was
his goodness alone, which when darkness had covered the earth, and thick
darkness the people, gave a written law to Moses, and through him, to the
nation whom he had chosen. It was his love which explained these living oracles
by David and all the prophets that followed: Until, when the fullness of time
was come, he sent his only-begotten Son, not to destroy the law but to fulfill,
to confirm every jot and tittle thereof, till having wrote it in the hearts of
all his children, and put all his enemies under his feet, he shall deliver up
his mediatorial kingdom to the Father, that God may be all in all.

11. And this law which the goodness of God gave at first, and has preserved
through all ages, is, like the fountain from whence it springs, full of goodness
and benignity: It is mild and kind; it is (as the psalmist expresses it)
sweeter than honey and the honeycomb. It is winning and amiable. It includes
whatsoever things are lovely or of good report. If there be any virtue, if
there be any praise before God and his holy angels, they are all comprised in
this: Wherein are hid all the treasures of the divine wisdom and knowledge and
love.

12. And it is good in its effects, as well as in its nature. As the tree is,
so are its fruits. The fruits of the law of God written in the heart, are
righteousness and peace and assurance for ever. Or rather, the law itself is
righteousness, filling the soul with a peace that passes all understanding,
and causing us to rejoice evermore, in the testimony of a good conscience
toward God. It is not so properly a pledge, as an earnest of our inheritance,
being a part of the purchased possession. It is God made manifest in our flesh,
and bringing with him eternal life: Assuring us by that pure and perfect love,
that we are sealed unto the day of redemption: That he will spare us as a man
spares his own son that serves him, in the day when he makes up his jewels,
and that there remains for us a crown of glory which fades not away.

IV. 1. It remains only, to show, in the fourth and last place, the uses of the
law. And the first use of it, without question, is, to convince the world of
sin. This is indeed the peculiar work of the Holy Ghost: Who can work it
without any means at all, or by whatever means it pleases him, however
insufficient in themselves, or even improper to produce such an effect. And
accordingly some there are whose hearts have been broken in pieces in a moment,
either in sickness or in health, without any visible cause, or any outward
means whatever. And others (one in an age) have been awakened to a sense of the
wrath of God abiding on them, by hearing, That God was in Christ, reconciling
the world unto himself. But it is the ordinary method of the spirit of God, to
convict sinners by the law. It is this, which being set home on the conscience,
generally breaks the rocks in pieces. It is more especially this part of the
word of God, which is (...), quick and powerful, full of life and energy, and
sharper than any two edged-sword. This in the hand of God and of those whom he
has sent, pierces through all the folds of a deceitful heart, and divides
asunder even the soul and spirit, yea, as it were the very joints and marrow.
By this is the sinner discovered to himself. All his fig leaves are ^orn away,
and he sees that he is wretched and poor and miserable and blind and naked. The
law flashes conviction on every side. He s^^ls himself a mere sinner. He has
nothing to (...). his mouth is stopped, and he stands guilty before God.

2. To slay the sinner is then the first use of the law; to destroy the life
and strength wherein he trusts, and convince him that he is dead while he
lives; not only under sentence of death, but actually dead unto God, void of
all spiritual life, dead i^ trespasses and sins. The second use of it is, to
bring him unto life, unto Christ, that he may live. It is true, in performing
both these offices, it acts the part of a severe schoolmaster. It drives us by
force, rather than draws us by love. And yet love is the spring of all. It is
the spirit of love, which by this painful means, tears away our confidence in
the flesh, which leaves us no broken reed whereon to trust, and so constrains
the sinner, stripped of all, to cry out in the bitterness of his soul, or groan
in the depth of his heart, "I give up every plea beside,
"Lord, I am damned -- But thou have died.


3. The third use of the law is, to keep us alive. It is the grand means
whereby the blessed Spirit prepares the believer for larger communications of
the life of God.

I am afraid this great and important truth is little understood, not only by
the world, but even by many whom God has taken out of the world, who are real
children of God by faith. Many of these lay it down as an unquestioned truth,
that when we come to Christ, we have done with the law; and that in this sense,
Christ is the end of the law, to every one that believes. The end of the law.
So he is, for righteousness, for justification to every one that believes.
Herein the law is at an end. It justifies none; but only brings them to Christ.
Who is also in another respect, the end or scope of the law, the point at which
it continually aims But when it has brought us to him, it has yet a farther
office, namely, to keep us with him. For it is continually exciting all
believers, the more they see of its height and depth and length and breadth, to
exhort one another so much the more, "Closer and closer let us cleave
To his beloved embrace:
Expect his fullness to receive,
And grace to answer grace."


4. Allowing then that every believer has done with the law, as it means the
Jewish ceremonial law, or the entire Mosaic dispensation (for these Christ has
taken out of the way) Yea, allowing we have done with the moral law, as a means
of procuring our justification (for we are justified freely by his grace,
through the redemption that is in Jesus.) Yet in another sense, we have not
done with this law. For it is still of unspeakable use, First, in convincing us
of the sin that yet remains both in our hearts and lives, and thereby keeping
us close to Christ, that his blood may cleanse us every moment; Secondly, in
deriving strength from our head into his living members, whereby be empowers
them to do what his law commands; and Thirdly, in confirming our hope of
whatsoever it commands, and we have not yet attained, of receiving grace upon
grace, till we are in actual possession of the fullness of his promises.

5. How clearly does this agree with the experience of every true believer!
While he cries out, O what love have I unto thy law! all the day long is my
study in it: He sees daily in that divine mirror, more and more of his own
sinfulness. He sees more and more clearly, that he is still a sinner in all
things; that neither his heart nor his ways are right before God. And that
every moment sends him to Christ. This shows him the meaning of what is
written, Thou shall make a plate of pure gold, and grave upon it, Holiness to
the Lord. And it shall be upon Aaron's forehead (the type of our great High
Priest: that Aaron may bear the iniquities of the holy things, which the
children of Israel shall hallow, in all their holy gifts: (so far are our
prayers or holy things from atoning for the rest of our sins!) And it shall be
always upon his forehead, that they may be accepted before the Lord. Exodus
xxviii. 36, 38.

6. To explain this by a single instance. The law says, Thou shall not kill,
and hereby (as our Lord teaches) forbids not only outward acts, but every
unkind word or thought. Now the more I look into this perfect law, the more I
feel how far I come short of it: And the more I feel this, the more I feel my
need of his blood to atone for all my sin: and of his spirit to purify my
heart, and make me perfect and entire, lacking nothing.

7. Therefore I cannot spare the law one moment, no more than I can spare
Christ: Se^ing I now want it as much, to keep me to Christ, as ever I wanted it
to bring me to him. Otherwise, this evil heart of unbelief would immediately
depart from the living God. Indeed each is continually sending me to the other,
the law to Christ, and Christ to the law. On the one hand, the height and depth
of the law constrain me to fly to the love of God in Christ. On the other, the
love of God in Christ, endears the law to me above gold or precious stones:
Seeing I know every part of it is a gracious promise, which my Lord will fulfill
in its season.

8. Who art thou then, O man, that judge the law, and speak evil of the
law? That rankest it with sin, Satan, and death, and sendest them all to hell
together! The apostle James esteemed judging or speaking evil of the law, so
enormous a piece of wickedness, that he knew not how to aggravate the guilt of
judging our brethren, more than by showing it included this. So now, says he,
thou art not a d^^r of the law, but a judge! A judge of that which God has
ordained to judge thee. So thou have set up thyself in the judgment seat of
Christ, and cast down the rule whereby he will judge the world! O take
knowledge what advantage Satan has gained over thee! And for the time to come
never think or speak lightly of, much less dress up as a scarecrow this
blessed instrument of the grace of God. Yea, love and value it for the sake of
him from whom it came, and of him to whom it leads. Let it be thy glory and
joy, next to the cross of Christ. Declare its praise, and make it honorable
before all men.

9. And if thou art thoroughly convinced, That it is the offspring of God, that
it is the copy of all his i^^able perfections, and that it is holy and just and
good, but especially to them that believe: then instead of casting it away as a
polluted thing, see that thou cleave to it more and more. Never let the law of
mercy and truth, of love to God and man, of lowliness, meekness and purity
forsake thee. Bind it about thy neck: Write it on the table of thy heart. Keep
close to the law, if thou will keep close to Christ: Hold it fast: Let it not
go. Let this continually lead thee to the atoning blood, continually confirm
thy hope, till all the righteousness of the law is fulfilled in thee, and thou
art filled with all the fullness of God.

10. And if thy Lord has already fulfilled his word, if he has already
written his law in thy heart, then stand fast in the liberty, wherewith Christ
has made thee free. Thou art not only made free from Jewish ceremonies, from
the guilt of sin and the fear of hell: These are so far from being the whole,
that they are the least and lowest part, of Christian liberty:) but what is
infinitely more, from the power of sin, from serving the devil, from offending
God. O stand fast in this liberty, in comparison of which, all the rest is not
even worthy to be named. Stand fast in loving God with all thy heart, and
serving him with all thy strength. This is perfect freedom; thus to keep his
law, and to walk in all his commandments blameless. Be not entangled again with
the yoke of bondage. I do not mean of Jewish bondage: Nor yet of bondage to the
fear of hell: These, I trust, are far from thee. But beware of being entangled
again with the yoke of sin, of any inward or outward transgression of the law.
Abhor sin far more than death or hell; abhor sin itself, far more than the
punishment of it. Beware of the bondage of pride, of desire, of anger; of every
evil temper or word or work. Look unto Jesus, and in order thereto, look more
and more into the perfect law, the law of liberty. And continue therein: So
shall thou daily grow in grace and in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ.

The LAW established through FAITH. A SERMON
ON ROMANS iii. 31. Do we then make void the Law through Faith? God forbid. Yea,
we establish the law.


1. SAINT Paul having in the beginning of this epistle, laid down his general
proposition, namely, That the gospel of Christ is the power of God unto
salvation, to every one that believes: The powerful means, whereby God makes
every believer a partaker of present and eternal salvation, goes on to show,
that there is no other way under heaven, whereby men can be saved. He speaks
particularly of salvation from the guilt of sin, which he commonly terms
justification. And that all men stood in need of this, that none could plead
their own innocence, he proves at large by various arguments, addressed to the
Jews as well as the heathens. Hence he infers (in the 19th verse of this
chapter) That every mouth, whether of Jew or heathen, must be stopped from
excusing or justifying himself, and all the world become guilty before God.
Therefore, says he, by his own obedience, by the works of the law, shall no
flesh be justified in his sight, ver. 20. But now the righteousness of God
without the law, without our previous obedience thereto, is manifested, ver.
21. Even the righteousness of God, which is by faith of Jesus Christ, unto all
and upon all that believe, ver. 22. For there is no difference, as to their
need of justification, or the manner wherein they attain it. For all have
sinned, and come short of the glory of God, (ver. 23.) the glorious image of
God wherein they were created: And all (who attain) are justified freely by his
grace, through the redemption that is in Jesus Christ: ver. 24. Whom God has
set forth to be a propitiation, through faith in his blood -- ver. 25. That he
might be just, and yet the justifier of him which believes in Jesus; ver. 26.
that without any impeachment to his justice, he might show him mercy, for the
sake of that propitiation. Therefore we conclude (which was the grand position
he had undertaken to establish) That a man is justified by faith, without the
works of the law. ver. 28.

2. It was easy to foresee an objection which might be made, and which has in
fact been made in all ages: namely, That to say we are justified without the
works of the law, is to abolish the law. The apostle, without entering into a
formal dispute, simply denies the charge. Do we then, says he, make void the
law through faith? God forbid! Yea, we establish the law.

3. The strange imagination of some, that St. Paul, when he says, A man is
justified without the works of the law, means only the ceremonial law, is
abundantly confuted by these very words. For did St. Paul establish the
ceremonial law? It is evident, he did not. He did make void that law through
faith, and openly avowed his doing so. It was the moral law only of which he
might truly say, We do not make void but establish this through faith.

4. But all men are not herein of his mind. Many there are who will not agree
to this. Many in all ages of the church, even among those who bore the name of
Christians, have contended, That the faith once delivered to the saints, was
designed to make void the whole law. They would no more spare the moral than
the ceremonial law, but were for hewing, as it were, both in pieces before the
Lord: Vehemently maintaining, "If you establish any law, Christ shall profit
you nothing: Christ is become of no effect to you: ye are fallen from grace.

5. But is the zeal of these men according to knowledge? Have they observed the
correction between the law and faith? And that considering that close
connection between them, to destroy one is indeed to destroy both? That to
abolish the moral law is in truth to abolish faith and the law together? As
leaving no proper means, either of bringing us to faith, or of stirring up that
gift of God in our soul.

6. It therefore behooves all who desire either to come to Christ, or to walk in
him whom they have received, to take heed how they make void the law through
faith: To secure us effectually against which, let us enquire, First, which are
the most usual ways of making void the law through faith, and Secondly, How we
may follow the apostle, and by faith establish the law.

I. 1. Let us, First, enquire, Which are the most usual ways of making void the
law through faith. Now the way for a preacher to make it all void at a stroke,
is, not to preach it at all. This is just the same thing, as to blot it out of
the oracles of God. More especially when it is done with design; when it is
made a rule, "Not to preach the law:" And the very phrase, "A preacher of the
law," is used as a term of reproach, as though it meant little less than "an
enemy to the gospel."

2. All this proceeds from the deepest ignorance of the nature, properties, and
use of the law: And proves that those who act thus, either know not Christ, are
utter strangers to the living faith: or at least, that they are but babes in
Christ, and as such unskilled in the word of righteousness.

3. Their grand plea is this: "That preaching the gospel (that is, according to
their judgment, the speaking of nothing but the sufferings and merits of
Christ) answers all the ends of the law." But this we utterly deny. It does not
answer the very first end of the law, namely, The convincing men of sin, the
awakening those who are still asleep on the brink of hell. There may have been
here and there an exempt case. One in a thousand may have been awakened by the
gospel. But this is no general rule. The ordinary method of God, is to convict
sinners by the law, and that only. The gospel is not the means which God has
ordained, or which our Lord himself used, for this end. We have no authority in
scripture for applying it thus, nor any ground to think it will prove
effectual. Nor have we any more ground to expect this, from the nature of the
thing. They that be whole, as our Lord himself observes, need not a physician,
but they that be sick. It is absurd therefore to offer a physician to them that
are whole, or that at least imagine themselves so to be. You are first, to
convince them, that they are sick: otherwise they will not thank you for your
labor. It is equally absurd to offer Christ to them, whose heart is whole,
having never yet been broken. It is in the proper sense, casting pearls before
swine. Doubtless they will trample them under foot. And it is no more than you
have reason to expect, if they also turn again and rend you.

4. "But although there is no command in scripture, to offer Christ to the
careless sinner, yet are there not scriptural precedents for it?" I think not:
I know not any. I believe you cannot produce one, either from the four
evangelists, or the Acts of the Apostles. Neither can you prove this to have
been the practice of any of the apostles, from any passage in all their
writings.

5. "Nay, does not the apostle Paul say, in his former epistle to the
Corinthians, We preach Christ crucified? chap. i. ver. 23. And in his latter,
We preach not ourselves, but Christ Jesus the Lord? chap. iv. ver. 5."

We consent to rest the cause on this issue: To tread in his steps, to follow
his example. Only preach you, just as St. Paul preached, and the dispute is at
an end.

For although we are certain he preached Christ, in as perfect a manner as the
very chief of the apostles, yet who preached the law more than St. Paul?
Therefore he did not think the gospel answered the same end.

6. The very first sermon of St. Paul's, which is recorded, concludes in these
words. By him all that believe are justified from all things, from which ye
could not be justified by the law of Moses. Beware, therefore, lest that come
upon you which is spoken of in the prophets, Behold, ye despisers, and wonder
and perish. For I work a work in your days, a work which you will in no wise
believe, though a man declare it unto you, Acts xiii. 39, etc. Now it is
manifest, all this is preaching the law, in the sense wherein you understand
the term: Even although great part of, if not all his hearers, were either Jews
or religious proselytes, ver. 43. and therefore probably many of them, in some
degree at least, convinced of sin already. He first reminds them, That they
could not be justified by the law of Moses, but only by faith in Christ: And
then severely threatens them with the judgments of God, which is in the
strongest sense preaching the law.

7. In his next discourse, that to the heathens at Lystra (chap. xiv. ver. 15,
etc.) we do not find so much as the name of Christ. The whole purport of it is,
that they should tur^ from those vain idols, unto the living God. Now confess
the truth. Do not you think, i^ you had been there, you could have preached
much better than he? I should not wonder, if you thought too, that his
preaching so ill, occasioned his being so ill treated: And that his being
stoned, was a just judgment upon him, for not preaching Christ!

8. To the jailor indeed, when he sprang in and came trembling, and fell down
before Paul and Silas, and said, Sirs, What must I do to be saved, he
immediately said, Believe in the Lord Jesus Christ (chap. xvi. ver. 29, etc.)
And in the case of one so deeply convinced of sin, who would not have said the
same? But to the men of Athens you find him speaking in a quite different
manner, reproving their superstition, ignorance and idolatry; and strongly
moving them to repent, from the consideration of a future judgment, and of the
resurrection from the dead (chap. xvii. ver. 24 -- 31.) likewise when Felix
sent for Paul, on purpose that he might hear him concerning the faith in
Christ; instead of preaching Christ in your sense (which would probably have
caused the governor either to mock, or to contradict and blaspheme) he reasoned
of righteousness, temperance and judgment to come, till Felix (hardened as he
was) trembled. (chap. xxiv. ver. 24, 25.) Go thou and tread in his steps.
Preach Christ to the careless sinner, by reasoning of righteousness,
temperance, and judgment to come!

9. If you say, "But he preached Christ in a different manner in his epistles:"
I answer, he did not there preach at all: Not in that sense wherein we speak:
For preaching in our present question, means, speaking before a congregation.
But waving this, I answer, 2. His epistles are directed, not to unbelievers,
such as those we are now speaking of, but to the saints of God in Rome,
Corinth, Philippi and other places. Now, unquestionably, he would speak more of
Christ to these, than to those who were without God in the world. And yet, 3.
Every one of these is full of the law, even the epistles to the Romans and the
Galatians: In both of which he does what you term preaching the law, and that
to believers as well as unbelievers.

10. From hence it is plain, you know not what it is, to preach Christ, in the
sense of the apostle. For doubtless St. Paul judged himself to be preaching
Christ, both to Felix, and at Antioch, Lystra, and Athens. From whose example
every thinking man must infer, that not only the declaring the love of Christ
to sinners, but also the declaring that he will come from heaven in flaming
fire, is, in the apostle's sense, preaching Christ: Yea, in the full scriptural
meaning of the word, to preach Christ, is, to preach what he has revealed,
either in the old or new testament: So that you are then as really preaching
Christ, when you are saying, The wicked shall be turned into hell, and all the
people that forget God, as when you are saying, Behold the Lamb of God, which
takes away the Sin of the world!

11. Consider this well; That to preach Christ, is to preach all things that
Christ has spoken; all his promises, all his threatenings and commands; all
that is written in his book. And then you will know how to preach Christ,
without making void the law.

12. "But does not the greatest blessing attend those discourses, werein we
peculiarly preach the merits and sufferings of Christ?"

Probably, when we preach to a congregation of mourners or of believers, these
will be attended with the greatest blessing: because such discourses are
peculiarly suited to their state. At least, these will usually convey the most
comfort. But this is not always the greatest blessing. I may sometimes receive
a far greater, by a discourse that cuts me to the heart and humbles me to the
dust. Neither should I receive that comfort, if I were to preach or to hear no
discourses but on the sufferings of Christ. These by constant repetition would
lose their force and grow more and more flat and dead: Till at length they
would become a dull round of words, without any spirit or life or virtue. So
that thus to preach Christ, must in process of time, make void the gospel as
well as the law.

II. 1. A second way of making void the law through faith, is, the teaching that
faith supersedes the necessity of holiness. This divides itself into a thousand
smaller paths: And many there are that walk therein. Indeed there are few that
wholly escape it: Few who are convinced, we are saved by faith, but are sooner
or later, more or less, drawn aside into this by-way.

2. All those are drawn into this by way, who if it be not their settled
judgment, that faith in Christ entirely sets aside the necessity of keeping his
law, yet suppose either, 1. That holiness is less necessary now than it was
before Christ: or, 2. That a less degree of it is necessary; or, 3. That it is
less necessary to believers than to others. Yea, and so are all those, who
although their judgment be right in the general, yet think they may take more
liberty in particular cases, then they could have done before they believed.
Indeed the using the term liberty, in such a manner, for "Liberty from
obedience or holiness," shows at once, that their judgment is perverted, and
that they are guilty of what they imagined to be far from them, namely of
making void the law through faith, by supposing faith to supersede holiness.

3. The first plea of those who teach this expressly, is, that "we are now
under the covenant of grace, not works: And therefore we are no longer under
the necessity of performing the works of the law."

And who ever was under the covenant of works? none but Adam before the fall.
He was fully and properly under that covenant, which required perfect,
universal obedience, as the one condition of acceptance; and left no place for
pardon, upon the very least transgression. But no man else was ever under this,
neither Jew nor Gentile, neither before Christ nor since. All his sons were and
are under the covenant of grace; the manner of their acceptance is this: The
free grace of God through the merits of Christ, gives pardon to them that
believe, that believe with such a faith as working by love produces all
obedience and holiness.

4. The case is not therefore as you suppose, that men were once more obliged
to obey God, or to work the works of his law than they are now. This is a
supposition you cannot make good. But, we should have been obliged, if we had
been under the covenant of works, to have done those works antecedent to our
acceptance. Whereas now all good works, though as necessary as ever, are not
antecedent to our acceptance but consequent upon it. Therefore the nature of
the covenant of grace, gives you no ground no encouragement at all, to set
aside any instance or degeee of obedience, any part or measure of holiness.

5. "But are we not justified by faith, without the works of the law?"
Undoubtedly we are, without the works either of the ceremonial or the moral
law. And would to God all men were convinced of this. It would prevent
innumerable evils: Antinomianism, in particular; for generally speaking, they
are the pharisees who make the antinomians. Running into an extreme so palpably
contrary to scripture, they occasion others to run the opposite one. These
seeking to be justified by works, affright those from allowing any place for
them.

6. But the truth lies between both. We are doubtless justified by faith. This
is the cornerstone of the whole christian building. We are justified without
the works of the law, as any previous condition of justification. But they are
an immediate fruit of that faith, wereby we are justified. So that if good
works do not follow our faith, even all inward and outward holiness, it is
plain our faith is nothing worth: We are yet in our sins. Therefore, that we
are justified by faith, even by faith without works, is no ground for making
void the law through faith: or for imagining that faith is a dispensation, from
any kind or degree of holiness.

7. "Nay, but does not St. Paul expressly say, Unto him that works not, but
believes on him that justifies the ungodly, his faith is counted for
righteousness? And does it not follow from hence, that faith is to a believer
in the room, in the place of righteousness? But if faith is in the room of
righteousness or holiness, what need is there of this too?"

This, it must be acknowledged, comes home to the point, and is indeed the main
pillar of antinomianism. And yet it needs not a long or labored answer. We
allow, 1. That God justifies the ungodly, him, that till that hour is totally
ungodly, full of all evil, void of all good. 2. That he justifies the ungodly
that works not, that till that moment works no good work; neither can he;
for an evil tree cannot bring forth good fruit. 3. That he justifies him by
faith alone, without any goodness or righteousness preceding; and, 4. That
Faith is then counted to him for righteousness, namely, for preceding
righteousness: i. e. God, through the merits of Christ, accepts him that
believes, as if he had already fulfilled all righteousness. But what is all
this to your point? The apostle does not say, either here or elsewhere, that
this faith is counted to him for subsequent righteousness. He does teach, that
there is no righteousness before faith. But where does he teach, that there is
none after it? He does assert, holiness cannot precede justification: but not,
that it need not follow it. St. Paul therefore gives you no color for making
void the law, by teaching that faith supersedes the necessity of holiness.

III. 1. There is yet another way of making void the law through faith, which is
more common than either of the former. And that is, the doing it practically:
The making it void in fact, though not in Principle: The living, as if faith was
designed to excuse us from holiness.

How earnestly does the apostle guard us against this, in those well known
words: What then? Shall we sin, because we are not under the law, but under
grace? God forbid! Romans vi. 15. A caution which it is needful thoroughly to
consider, because it is of the last importance.

2. The being under the law may here mean, 1. The being obliged to observe the
ceremonial law. 2. The being obliged to conform to the whole Mosaic
institution. 3. The being obliged to keep the whole moral law, as the condition
of our acceptance with God: and, 4. The being under the wrath and curse of God,
under sentence of eternal death; under a sense of guilt and condemnation, full
of horror and slavish fear.

3. Now altho'a believer is not without law to GOD, but under the law to
Christ, yet from the moment he believes, he is not under the law, in any of the
preceding senses. On the contrary, he is under grace, under a more benign,
gracious dispensation. As he is no longer under the ceremonial law, nor under
the Mosaic institution; as he is not obliged to keep even the moral law, as the
condition of his acceptance: So he is delivered from the wrath and the curse of
GOD, from al^ sense of guilt and condemnation, and from all that horror and
fear of death and hell, whereby he was all his life before subject to bondage.
And he now performs (which while under the law. he could not do) a willing and
universal obedience. He obeys not from the motive of slavish fear, but on a
nobler principle, namely, the grace of God ruling in his heart, and causing all
his works to be wrought in love.

4. What then? Shall this evangelical principle of action, be less powerful
than the legal? Shall we be less obedient to GOD, from filial love, than we
were from servile fear?

'It is well, if this is not a common case; if this practical antinomianism,
this unobserved way of making void the law through faith, has not infected
thousands of believers.

Has it not infected you? Examine yourself honestly and closely. Do you not do
now, what you durst not have done when you was under the law, or (as we
commonly call it) under conviction? For instance. You durst not then indulge
yourself in food. You took just what was needful, and that of the cheapest
kind. Do you not allow yourself more latitude now? Do you not indulge yourself
a little more than you did? O beware, lest you sin, because you are not under
the law but under grace.

5. When you was under conviction, you durst not indulge the lust of the eye in
any degree. You would not do any thing, great or small, merely to gratify your
curiosity. You regarded only cleanliness and necessity, or at most very
moderate convenience, either in furniture or apparel; Superfluity and finery of
whatever kind, as well as fashionable elegance, were both a terror and an
abomination to you.

Are they so still? Is your conscience as tender now in these things, as it was
then? Do you still follow the same rule both in furniture and apparel,
trampling all finery, all superfluity, every thing useless, every thing merely
ornamental, however fashionable, under foot? Rather, have you not resumed what
you had once laid aside, and what you could not then use without wounding your
conscience? And have you not learned to say, "O, I am not so scrupulous now." I
would to God you were! Then you would not sin thus, because you are not under
the law but under grace.

6. You was once scrupulous too of commending any to their face, and still
more, of suffering any to commend you. It was a stab to your heart: You could
not bear it: You sought the honor that comes of God only. You could not
endure such conversation: nor any conversation, which was not good, to the use
of edifying. All idle talk, all trifling discourse you abhorred, you hated as
well as feared it, being deeply sensible of the value of time, of every
precious, fleeting moment. In like manner, you dreaded and abhorred idle
expense; valuing your money only less than your time, and trembling lest you
should be found an unfaithful steward even of the mammon of unrighteousness.

Do you now look upon praise as deadly poison, which you can neither give nor
receive but at the peril of your soul? Do you still dread and abhor all
conversation, which does not tend to the use of edifying; and labor to improve
every moment, that it may not pass without leaving you better than it found
you? Are not you less careful as to the expense both of money and time? Cannot
you now lay out either, as you could not have done once? Alas! How has that
which should have been for your health, proved to you an occasion of falling?
How have you sinned, because you was not under the law, but under grace!

7. God forbid you should any longer continue thus to turn the grace of God
into lasciviousness! O remember, how clear and strong a conviction you once
had, concerning all these things. And at the same time you was fully satisfied,
from whom that conviction came. The world told you, you was in in a delusion:
But you knew, it was the voice of God. In these things you was not too
scrupulous then; but you are not now scrupulous enough. God kept you longer in
that painful school, that you might learn those great lessons the more
perfectly. And have you forgot them already? O recollect them, before it is too
late. Have you suffered so many things in vain? I trust, it is not yet in vain.
Now use the conviction without the pain: Practice the lesson without the rod.
Let not the mercy of God weigh less with you now, than his fiery indignation
did before. Is love a less powerful motive than fear? If not, let it be an
invariable rule "I will do nothing now I am under grace, which I durst not have
done when under the law."

8. I cannot conclude this head, without exhorting you to examine yourself
likewise touching sins of omission. Are you as clear of these, now you are
under grace, as you was when under the law? How diligent was you when in
hearing the word of God? Did you neglect any opportunity? Did you not attend
thereon day and night? Would a small hinderance have kept you away? A little
business? A visitant? A slight indisposition? A soft bed? A dark or cold
morning? -- Did not you then fast often? Or use abstinence to the uttermost of
your power? Was not you much in prayer, (cold and heavy as you was) while you
was hanging over the mouth of hell? Did you not speak and not spare, even for
an unknown God? Did you not boldly plead his cause? Reprove sinners? And avow
the truth, before an adulterous generation? -- And are you now a believer in
Christ? Have you the faith that overcomes the world? What! and are you less
zealous for your master now, than you was when you knew him not? Less diligent
in fasting, in prayer, in hearing his word, in calling sinners to God? O
repent. See and feel your grievous loss! Remember from whence you are fallen!
Bewail your unfaithfulness! Now be zealous and do the first works; lest if you
continue to make void the law through faith, God cut you off, and appoint you
your portion with the unbelievers!

The LAW established through FAITH. A SERMON
ON ROMANS iii. 31. Do we then make void the Law through Faith? God forbid. Yea,
we establish the Law.


1. IT has been shown in the preceding discourse, which are the most usual ways
of making void the law through faith: Namely, First, The not preaching it at
all, which effectually makes it all void at a stroke: And this under color of
preaching Christ and magnifying the gospel, though it be in truth, destroying
both the one and the other: Secondly, the teaching (whether directly or
indirectly) that faith supersedes the necessity of holiness: That this is less
necessary now, or a less degree of it necessary, than before Christ came: That
it is less necessary to us, because we believe, than otherwise it would have
been: Or, that Christian liberty is a liberty from any kind or degree of
holiness: (So perverting those great truths, that we are now under the covenant
of grace and not of works:) That a man is justified by faith, without the works
of the law; and that to him that works not but believes, his faith is
counted for righteousness: Or, Thirdly, The doing this practically; the making
void the law in practice, though not in principle: The living or acting, as if
faith was designed to excuse us from holiness: The allowing ourselves in sin,
because we are not under the law, but under grace. It remains to enquire, how
we may follow a better pattern, how we may be able to say with the apostle, Do
we then make void the law through faith? God forbid! Yea, we establish the law.

2. We do not indeed establish the old ceremonial law: We know that is
abolished for ever. Much less do we establish the whole Mosaic dispensation.
This, we know, our Lord has nailed to his cross. Nor yet do we so establish the
moral law (which it is to be feared, too many do) as if the fulfilling it, the
keeping all the commandments, were the condition of our justification. If it
were so, surely in his sight, should no man living be justified But all this
being allowed, we still in the apostle's sense, establish the law, the moral
law.

I. 1. We establish the law, First, By our doctrine: by endeavoring to preach
it in its whole extent, to explain and enforce every part of it, in the same
manner as our great teacher did, while upon earth. We establish it, by
following St. Peter's advice, If any man speak, let him speak as the oracles of
God; as the holy men of old moved by the Holy Ghost, spoke and wrote for our
instruction, and as the apostles of our blessed Lord, by the direction of the
same Spirit. We establish it whenever we speak in his name, by keeping back
nothing from them that hear; by declaring to them, without any limitation or
reserve, the whole counsel of God. And in order the more effectually to
establish it, we use herein great plainness of speech. We are not as many that
corrupt the word of God, (...)(as artful men their bad wines, we do not
cauponize, mix, adulterate, or soften it, to make it suit the taste of the
hearers. But as of sincerity, but as of God in the sight of God, speak we in
Christ: As having no other aim, than by manifestation of the truth, to commend
ourselves to every man's conscience in the sight of God.

2. We then by our doctrine establish the law, when we thus openly declare it
to all men: And that, in the fullness wherein it is delivered by our blessed
Lord and his apostles: When we publish it in the height and depth and length
and breadth thereof. We then establish the law, when we declare every part of
it, every commandment contained therein, not only in its full literal sense,
but likewise in its spiritual meaning: Not only with regard to the outward
actions, which it either forbids or enjoins: But also with respect to the
inward principle, to the thoughts, desires and intents of the heart.

3. And indeed this we do the more diligently, not only because it is of the
deepest importance; inasmuch as all the fruit, every word and work, must be
only evil continually, if the tree be evil, if the dispositions and tempers of
the heart, be not right before God: But likewise, because as important as these
things are, they are little considered or understood. So little, that we may
truly say of the law too, when taken in its full spiritual meaning, It is a
mystery which was hid from ages and generations s^ire the world began. It was
utterly hid from the heathen world. They, with all their boasted wisdom,
neither found out God, nor the law of God, not in the letter, much less in the
spirit of it. Their foolish hearts were more and more darkened, while
professing themselves wise, they became fools. And it was almost equally hid as
to its spiritual meaning, from the bulk of the Jewish nation. Even these who
were so ready to declare concerning others, this people that know not the law,
is accursed, pronounced their own sentence therein, as being under the same
curse, the same dreadful ignorance. Witness our Lord's continual reproof of the
wisest among them, for their gross misinterpretations of it. Witness the
supposition almost universally received among them, that they needed only to
make clean the outside of the cup: that the paying tithe of mint, anise, and
cummin, outward exactness would atone for inward unholiness; for the total
neglect both of justice and mercy, of faith and the love of God. Yea, so
absolutely was the spiritual meaning of the law hidden from the wisest of them,
that one of their most eminent Rabbi's comments thus, on those words of the
psalmist, If I incline unto iniquity with my heart, the Lord will not hear me:
That is, says he, if it be only in my heart, if I do not commit outward
wickedness, the Lord will not regard it; he will not punish me, unless I
proceed to the outward act!

4. But alas! The law of God, as to its inward spiritual meaning, is not hid
from the Jews or heathens only, but even from what is called the christian
world; at least, from a vast majority of them. The spiritual sense of the
commandments of God, is still a mystery to these also. Nor is this observable
only in those lands, which are overspread with Romish darkness and ignorance.
But this is too sure, that the far greater part, even of those, who are called
reformed Christians, are utter strangers at this day to the law of Christ, in
the purity and spirituality of it.

5. Hence it is that to this day the scribes and pharisees, the men who have
the form but not the power of religion, and who are generally wise in their own
eyes, and righteous in their own conceits; hearing these things are offended:
Are deeply offended, when we speak of the religion of the heart, and
particularly when we show, that without this, were we to give all our goods to
feed the poor, it would profit us nothing. But offended they must be: For we
cannot but speak the truth as it is in Jesus. It is our pa^^ whether they will
hear or whether they will for bear, to deliver our own soul. All that is
written in the book of God we are to declare, not as pleasing men, but the
Lord. We are to declare not only all the promises, but all the threatenings too
which we find therein. At the same time that we proclaim all the blessings and
privileges, which God had prepared for his children, we are likewise to teach
all the things, whatsoever he has commanded. And we know, that all these have
their use: either for the awakening those that sleep, the instructing the
ignorant, the comforting the feeble-minded, or the building up and perfecting
of the saints. We know that all scripture, given by inspiration of God, is
profitable either for doctrine or for reproof, either for correction or for
instruction in righteousness: And that the man of God, in the process of the
work of God in his soul, has need of every part thereof, that he may at length,
be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all good works.

6. It is our part, thus to preach Christ, by preaching all things whatsoever
he has revealed. We may indeed without blame, yea, and with a peculiar
blessing from God, declare the love of our Lord Jesus Christ. We may speak, i^
a more especial manner, of the Lord our righteousness. We may expatiate upon
the grace of God in Christ reconciling the world unto himself. We may, at
proper opportunities, dwell upon his praise, as bearing, the iniqu^i^s of us
all, as wounded for our transgressions and bruised for our iniquities, that by
his stripes we might be healed. But still we should not preach Christ,
according to his word, if we were wholly to confine ourselves to this. We are
not ourselves clear before God, unless we proclaim him in all his offices. To
preach Christ, as a workman that needs not to be ashamed, is to preach him
not only as our great high priest, taken from among men, and ordained for men,
in things pertaining to God; as such, reconciling us to God by his blood, and
ever living to make intercession for us: but likewise as the prophet of the
Lord, who of God is made unto us wisdom. Who by his word, and his spirit, is
with us always, guiding us into all truth: Yea, and as remaining a king for
ever; as giving laws to all whom he has bough with his blood: As restoring
those to the image of God, whom he had first re-instated in his favor: As
reigning in all believing hearts, until he has subdued all things to himself;
until he has utterly cast out all sin, and brought in everlasting
righteousness.

II. 1. We establish the law, secondly, when we so preach faith in Christ, as
not to supersede, but produce holiness: to produce all manner of holiness,
negative and positive, of the heart and of the life.

In order to this, we continually declare (what should be frequently and deeply
considered, by all who would not make void the law through faith) that faith
itself, even christian faith, the faith of God's elect, the faith of the
operation of God, still is only the handmaid of love. As glorious and
honorable as it is, it is not the end of the commandment. God has given this
honor to love alone: love is the end of all the commandments of God. Love is
the end, the sole end of every dispensation of God, from the beginning of the
world, to the consummation of all things. And it will endure when heaven and
earth flee away; for love alone never fails. Faith will totally fail: It will
be swallowed up in sight, in the everlasting vision of God. But even then love
"Its nature and its office still the same,
Lasting its lamp and unconsum'd its flame,
In deathless triumph shall for ever live,
And endless good diffuse, and endless prai^^ receive."


2. Very excellent things are spoken of faith, and whosoever is a partaker
thereof, may well say with the apostle, thanks be to God, for his unspeakable
gift. Yet still it loses all its excellence, when brought into a comparison
with love. What St. Paul observes concerning the superior glory of the gospel,
above that of the law, may with great propriety be spoken of the superior glory
of love, above that of faith. Even that which was made glorious, has no glory
in this respect, by reason of the glory that excels. For if that which is
done away is glorious, much more does that which remains exceed in glory.
Yea, all the glory of faith before it is done away, arises hence, that it
ministers to love. It is the great temporary means which God has ordained to
promote that eternal end.

3. Let those who magnify faith beyond all proportion, so as to swallow up all
things else, and who so totally misapprehend the nature of it, as to imagine it
stands in the place of love, consider farther, that as love will exist after
faith, so it did exist long before it. The angels, who from the moment of their
creation, beheld the face of their father that is in heaven, had no occasion
for faith, in its general notion, as it is the evidence of things not seen.
Neither had they need of faith, in its more particular acceptance, faith in
the blood of Jesus: for he took not upon him the nature of angels; but only the
seed of Abraham. There was therefore no place before the foundation of the
world, for ^aith either in the general or particular sense. But there was for
love. Love existed from eternity, in God, the great ocean of love. Love had a
place in all the children of God, from the moment of their creation. They
received at once from their gracious Creator, to exist, and to love.

4. Nor is it certain (as ingeniously and plausibly as many have descanted upon
this) That faith, even in the general sense of the word, had any place in
paradise. It is highly probable, from that short and uncircumstantial account
which we have in holy writ, that Adam before he rebelled against God, walked
with him by sight and not by faith. "For then his reason's eye was strong and
clear,
And as an eagle can behold the sun,
Might have beheld his Maker's face as near,
As th'intellectual angels could have done."
He was then able to talk with him face to face, whose face we cannot now see
and live. And consequently had no need of that faith, whose office it is, to
supply the want of sight.

5. On the other hand, it is absolutely certain, faith in its particular sense
had then no place. For in that sense it necessarily presupposes sin, and the
wrath of God declared against the sinner: without which there is no need of an
atonement for sin, in order to the sinner's reconciliation with God.
Consequently, as there was no need of an atonement before the fall, so there
was no place for faith in that atonement^ man being then pure from every stain
of sin, holy as God is holy. But love even then filled his heart. It reigned in
him without a rival. And it was only when love was lost by sin, that faith was
added, not for its own sake, nor with any design, that it should exist any
longer, than until it had answered the end for which it was ordained, namely,
to restore man, to the love from which he was fa^ten. At the fall therefore was
added this evidence of things unseen, which before was utterly needless: this
confidence in redeeming love, which could not possibly have any place, till the
promise was made, that the seed of the woman should bruise the serpent's head.

6. Faith then was originally designed of God, to re-establish the law of love.
Therefore in speaking thus, we are not undervaluing it, or robbing it of its
due praise: but on the contrary showing its real worth, exalting it in its just
proportion, and giving it that very place which the wisdom of God assigned it
from the beginning. It is the grand means of restoring that holy love, wherein
man was originally created. It follows, that although faith is of no value in
itself (as neither is any other means whatsoever) yet as it leads to that end,
the establishing anew the law of love in our hearts, and as, in the present
state of things, it is the only means under heaven for effecting it: It is, on
that account, an unspeakable blessing to man, and of unspeakable value before
God.

III. 1. And this naturally brings us to observe, Thirdly, the most important
way of establishing the law: namely, the establishing it in our own hearts and
lives. Indeed without this, what would all the rest avail? we might establish
it by our doctrine; we might preach it in its whole extent, might explain and
enforce every part of it. We might open it in its most spiritual meaning, and
declare the mysteries of the kingdom; we might preach Christ in all his
offices, and faith in Christ, as opening all the treasures of his love. And yet
all this time, if the law we preached, were not established in our hearts, we
should be of no more account before God, than sounding brass or tinkling
cymbals. All our preaching would be so far from profiting ourselves, that it
would only increase our damnation.

2. This is therefore the main point to be considered, how may we establish the
law in our own hearts, so that it may have its full influence on our lives? and
this can only be done by faith.

Faith alone it is, which effectually answers this end, as we learn from daily
experience. For so long as we walk by faith, not by sight, we go swiftly on in
the way of holiness. While we steadily look, not at the things which are seen,
but at those which are not seen, we are more and more crucified to the world,
and the world crucified to us. Let but the eye of the soul be constantly fixed,
not on the things which are temporal, but on those which are eternal, and our
affections are more and more loosened from earth, and fixed on things above. So
that faith in general is the most direct and effectual mean^ of promoting all
righteousness and true holiness: of establishing the holy and spiritual law, in
the hearts of them that believe.

3. And by faith, taken in its more particular meaning, for a confidence in a
pardoning God, (...) establish his law in our own hearts, in a still more
effectual manner. For there is no motive which so powerfully inclines us to
love God, as the sense of the love of God in Christ. Nothing enables us like a
piercing conviction of this, to give our hearts to him who was given for us.
And from this principle of grateful love to God, arises love to our brother
also. Neither can we avoid loving our neighbor, if we truly believe the love
wherewith God has loved us. Now this love to man grounded on faith and love to
God, works no ill to our neighbor. Consequently, it is (as the apostle
observes) the fulfilling of the whole negative law. For this, thou shall not
commit adultery, thou shall not kill, thou shall not steal, thou shall not bear
false witness, thou shall not covet: and if there be any other commandment, it
is briefly comprehended in this saying, thou shall love thy neighbor as
thyself. Neither is love content with barely working no evil to our neighbor.
It continually incites us to do good: as we have time, and opportunity, to do
good in every possible kind and in every possible degree to all men. It is
therefore the fulfilling of the positive likewise, as well as of the negative
law of God.

4. Nor does faith fulfill either the negative or positive law, as to the
external part only: but it works inwardly by love, to the purifying of the
heart, the cleansing it from all vile affections. Every one that has this
faith in himself, purifieth himself even as he is pure: Purifieth himself from
every earthly, sensual desire, from all vile and inordinate affections: yea,
from the whole of that carnal mind, which is enmity against God. At the same
time, if it have its perfect work, it fills him with all goodness,
righteousness and truth. It brings all heaven into his soul, and causes him to
walk in the light even as God is in the light.

5. Let us thus endeavor to establish the law in ourselves: not sinning,
because we are under Grace, but rather using all the power we receive thereby,
to fulfill all righteousness. Calling to mind, what light we received from God,
while his spirit was convincing us of sin, let us beware we do not put out that
light: what we had then attained let us hold fast. Let nothing induce us to
build again what we have destroyed; to resume any thing, small or great, which
we then clearly saw was not for the Glory of God, or the profit of our own
soul: or to neglect any thing, small or great, which we could not then neglect,
without a check from our own conscience. To increase and perfect the light
which we had before, let us now add the light of faith. Confirm we the former
gift of God, by a deeper sense of whatever he had then shown us: by a greater
tenderness of conscience, and a more exquisite sensibility of sin. Walking now
with joy and not with fear, in a clear, steady sight of things eternal, we
shall look on pleasure, wealth, praise, all the things of earth, as on bubbles
upon the water: counting nothing important, nothing desirable, (...) thing
worth a deliberate thought, but only what is within the veil, where Jesus
sits at the right hand of God.

6. Can you say, Thou art merciful to my unrighteousness: my sins thou
rememberest no more? Then for the time to come, see that you fly from sin, as
from the face of a serpent. For how exceeding sinful does it appear to you now?
How heinous above all expression? On the other hand, in how amiable a light do
you now see the holy and perfect will of God? Now therefore labor that it may
be fulfilled, both in you, by you, and upon you. Now watch and pray that you
may sin no more, that you may see and shun the least transgression of his law.
You see the motes which you could not see before, as when the sun shines into a
dark place. In like manner you see the sins which you could not see before, now
the sun of righteousness shines in your heart. Now then do all diligence to
walk in every respect, according to the light you have received. Now be zealous
to receive more light daily, more of the knowledge and love of God, more of the
spirit of Christ, more of his life, and of the power of his resurrection. Now
use all the knowledge, and love, and life, and power you have already attained.
So shall you continually go on from faith to faith. So shall you daily increase
in holy love, till faith is swallowed up in sight, and the law of love is
established to all eternity.

The Nature of Enthusiasm. A SERMON
ON ACTS. xxvi. 24. And Festus said with a loud Voice, Paul, Thou art beside
thyself.


1. AND so say all the world, the men who know not God, of all that are of
Paul's religion; of every one who is so a follower of him, as he was of Christ.
It is true, there is a sort of religion, nay and it is called christianity too,
which may be practiced without any such imputations, which is generally allowed
to be consistent with common sense. That is, a religion of form, a round of
outward duties, performed in a decent, regular manner. You may add orthodoxy
thereto, a system of right opinions, yea, and some quantity of heathen
morality. And yet not many will pronounce, that much religion has made you
mad. But if you aim at the religion of the heart, if you talk of righteousness
and peace and joy in the Holy Ghost, then it will not be long before your
sentence is past, Thou art beside thyself.

2. And it is no compliment which the men of the world ^ay you herein. They,
for once, mean what they say. They not only affirm, but cordially believe, that
every man is beside himself, who says, the love of God is shed abroad in his
heart, by the Holy Ghost given unto him, and that God has enabled him to
rejoice in Christ, with joy unspeakable and full of glory. If a man is indeed
alive to God, and dead to all things here below; if he continually sees him
that is invisible, and accordingly walks by faith and not by sight: then they
account it a clear case; beyond all dispute, much religion has made him mad.

3. It is easy to observe, that the determinate thing which the world accounts
madness, is that utter contempt of all temporal things, and steady pursuit of
things eternal; that divine conviction of things not seen; that rejoicing in
the favor of God; that happy, holy love of God; and that testimony of his
spirit with our spirit, that we are the children of God. That is, in truth, the
whole spirit and life and power of the religion of Jesus Christ.

4. They will however allow, in other respects, the man acts and talks like one
in his senses. In other things, he is a reasonable man: it is in these instances
only his head is touched. It is therefore acknowledged, that the madness under
which he labors, is of a particular kind. And accordingly they are accustomed
to distinguish it by a particular name, ENTHUSIASM.

5. A term this, which is exceeding frequently used, which is scarce ever out
of some men's mouths. And yet it is exceeding rarely understood, even by those
who use it most. It may be therefore not unacceptable to serious men, to all
who desire to understand what they speak or hear, if I endeavor to explain the
meaning of this term, to show what enthusiasm is. It may be an encouragement to
those who are unjustly charged therewith: and may possibly be of use to some
who are justly charged with it, at least to others, who might be so, were they
not cautioned against it.

6. As to the word itself, it is generally allowed to be of Greek extraction.
But whence the Greek word (...), is derived, none has yet been able to show.
Some have endeavored to derive it from (...), in God, because all enthusiasm
has reference to him. But this is quite forced; there being small resemblance
between the word derived, and those they strive to derive it from. Others would
derive it from (...) in sacrifice, because many of the enthusiasts of old, were
affected in the most violent manner, during the time of sacrifice. Perhaps it
is a fictitious word, invented from the noise, which some of those made who
were so affected.

7. It is not improbable, that one reason why this uncouth word has been
retained in so many Languages, was because men were no better agreed,
concerning the meaning than concerning the derivation of it. They therefore
adopted the Greek word, because they did not understand it: they did not
translate it into their own tongues, because they knew not how to translate it:
it having been always a word of a loose, uncertain sense, to which no
determinate meaning was affixed.

8. It is not therefore at all surprising, that it is so variously taken at
this day: different persons understanding it in different senses, quite
inconsistent with each other. Some take it in a good sense, for a divine
impulse or impression, superior to all the natural faculties, and suspending
for the time, either in whole or in part, both the reason and the outward
senses. In this meaning of the word, both the prophets of old, and the apostles
were proper enthusiasts: being at diverse times so filled with the spirit, and
so influenced by him who dwelt in their hearts, that the exercise of their own
reason, their senses, and all their natural faculties being suspended, they
were wholly actuated by the power of God, and spoke only as they were moved by
the Holy Ghost

9. Others take the word in an indifferent sense, such as is neither morally
good nor evil. Thus they speak of the enthusiasm of the poets; of Homer and
Virgil in particular. And this a late eminent writer extends so far as to
assert, there is no man excellent in his profession, what soever it be, who has
not in his temper a strong tincture of enthusiasm. By enthusiasm these appear
to understand, an uncommon vigor of thought, a peculiar fervor of spirit, a
vivacity and strength not to be found in common men: elevating the soul to
greater and higher things, than cool reason could have attained.

10. But neither of these is the sense wherein the word enthusiasm is most
usually understood. The generality of men, if no farther agreed, at least agree
thus far concerning it, that it is something evil: and this is plainly the
sentiment of all those, who call the religion of the heart, enthusiasm.
Accordingly I shall take it in the following pages, as an evil; a misfortune,
if not a fault.

11. As to the nature of enthusiasm, it is undoubtedly a disorder of the mind;
and such a disorder, as greatly hinders the exercise of reason. Nay, sometimes,
it wholly sets it aside: it not only dims, but shuts the eyes of the
understanding. It may therefore well be accounted a species of madness; of
madness rather than of folly: seeing a fool is properly one who draws wrong
conclusions from right premises: whereas a madman draws right conclusions, but
from wrong premises. And so does an enthusiast. Suppose his premises true, and
his conclusions would necessarily follow. But here lies his mistake, his
premises are false. He imagines himself to be what he is not. And therefore
setting out wrong, the farther he goes, the more he wanders out of the way.

12. Every enthusiast then is properly a madman. Yet his is not an ordinary,
but a religious madness. By religious, I do not mean, that it is any part of
religion. Quite the reverse: Religion is, the spirit of a sound mind, and
consequently stands in direct opposition to madness of every kind. But I mean,
it has religion for its object; it is conversant about religion. And so the
enthusiast is generally talking of religion, of God or of the things of God;
but talking in such a manner that every reasonable christian may discern the
disorder of his mind. enthusiasm in general may then be described in some such
manner as this: a religious madness arising from some falsely imagined
influence or inspiration of God: at least, from imputing something to God which
ought not to be imputed to him, or expecting something from God which ought not
to be expected from him.

13. There are innumerable sorts of enthusiasm. Those which are most common and
for that reason most dangerous, I shall endeavor to reduce under a few general
heads, that they may be more easily understood and avoided.

The first sort of enthusiasm which I shall mention, is that of those who
imagine they have the grace which they have not. Thus some imagine, when it is
not so, that they have redemption through Christ, even the forgiveness of sin.
These are usually such as have no root in themselves; no deep repentance, or
thorough conviction. Therefore they receive the word with joy. And because they
have no deepness of earth, no deep work in their heart, therefore the seed
immediately springs up. There is immediately a superficial change, which
together with that light joy, striking in with the pride of their unbroken
heart, and with their inerdinate self-love, easily persuades them, they have
already tasted the good word of God, and the powers of the world to come.

14. This is properly an instance of the first sort of enthusiasm: It is a kind
of madness, arising from the imagination, that they have that grace which in
truth they have not: So that they only deceive their own souls. Madness it may
justly be termed: For the reasonings of these poor men are right, were their
premises good: But as those are a mere creature of their own imagination, so
all that is built on them falls to the ground. The foundation of all their
reveries is this: (...) themselves to have faith in Christ (...) had this, they
would be Kings and Priests to God, possessed of a kingdom which cannot be moved.
But they have it not. Consequently, all their following behavior, is as wide
of truth and soberness, as that of the ordinary madman, who fancying himself an
earthly king, speaks and acts in that character.

15. There are many other enthusiasts of this sort. Such, for instance, is the
fiery zealot for religion; or (more probably) for the opinions and modes of
worship, which he dignifies with that name. This man also strongly imagines
himself to be a believer in Jesus, yea, that he is a champion for the faith,
which was once delivered to the saints. Accordingly all his conduct is formed,
upon that vain imagination. And allowing his supposition to be just, he would
have some tolerable plea for his behavior: Whereas now it is evidently the
effect of a distempered brain as well as a distempered heart.

16. But the most common of all the enthusiasts of this kind, are those who
imagine themselves Christians, and are not. These abound not only in all parts
of our land, but in most parts of the habitable earth. That they are not
Christians is clear and undeniable, if we believe the oracles of God. For
Christians are holy; these are unholy: Christians love God; these love the
world. Christians are humble; these are proud: Christians are gentle; these are
passionate. Christians have the mind which was in Christ; these are at the
utmost distance from it. Consequently they are no more Christians, than they
are Archangels. Yet they imagine themselves so to be; and they can give several
reasons for it. For they have been called so ever since they can remember: They
were christened many years ago: They embrace the Christian opinions, vulgarly
termed, The Christian or Catholic faith. They use the Christian Modes of
Worship, as their fathers did before them. They live what is called a good,
Christian life, as the rest of their neighbors do. And who shall presume to
think or say, that these men are not Christians? Though without one grain of true
faith in Christ, or of real, inward holiness! without ever having tasted the
love of God, or been made partakers of the Holy Ghost.

17. Ah poor self-deceivers! Christians ye are not. But you are enthusiasts in
an high degree. Physicians, heal yourselves. But first, know your disease: Your
whole life is enthusiasm: As being all suitable to the imagination, that you
have received that grace of God which you have not. In consequence of this
grand mistake, you blunder on, day by day, speaking and acting under a
character, which does in no wise belong to you. Hence arises that palpable,
glaring inconsistency, that runs through your whole behavior: Which is an
awkward mixture of real heathenism and imaginary Christianity. Yet still, as
you have so vast a majority on your side, you will always carry it by mere dint
of numbers, "That you are the only men in your senses, and all are lunatics who
are not as you are." But this alters not the nature of things. In the sight of
God and his holy angels, yea, and all the children of God upon earth, you are
mere madmen, mere enthusiasts all. Are you not? Are you not walking in a vain
shadow, a shadow of religion, a shadow of happiness? Are you not still
^squieting yourselves in vain? With misfortunes as imaginary as your happiness
or religion? Do you not fancy yourselves great or good? Very knowing, and very
wise! How long? perhaps till death brings you back to your senses; to be wail
your folly for ever and ever!

18. A second sort of enthusiasm, is that of those, who imagine they have such
gifts from God as they have not. Thus some have imagined themselves to be
endued with a power of working miracles, of healing the sick by a word or a
touch, of restoring sight to the blind; yea, even of raising the dead, a
notorious instance of which is still fresh in our own history. Others have
undertaken to prophesy, to foretell things to come, and that with the utmost
certainty and exactness. But a little time usually convinces these enthusiasts.
When pla^n facts run counter to their predictions, experience performs what
reason could not, and sinks them down into their senses.

19. To the same class belong those, who in preaching or prayer, imagine
themselves to be so influenced by the spirit of God as in fact they are not. I
am sensible indeed, that without him we can do nothing; more especially in our
public ministry: That all our preaching is utterly vain, unless it be attended
with his power; and all our prayer, unless his spirit therein help our
infirmities. I know, if we do not both preach and pray by the spirit, it is all
but lost labor: Seeing the help that is done upon earth, he does it himself,
who works all in all. But this does not affect the case before us. Though
there is a real influence of the spirit of God, there is also an imaginary one;
and many there are who mistake the one for the other. Many suppose themselves
to be under that influence, when they are not, when it is far from them. And
many others suppose, they are more under that influence than they really are.
Of this number, I fear, are all they who imagine, that God dictates the very
words they speak: And that consequently it is impossible they should speak any
thing amiss, either as to the matter or manner of it. It is well known, how
many enthusiasts of this sort also, have appeared during the present century:
Some of whom speak in a far more authoritative manner than either St. Paul or
any of the Apostles.

20. The same sort of enthusiasm, though in a lower degree, is frequently found
in men of a private character. They may likewise imagine themselves to be
influenced or directed by the spirit when they are not. I allow, if any man
have not the spirit of Christ, he is none of his: And that if ever we either
think, speak, or act aright, it is through the assistance of that blessed
spirit. But how many impute things to him, or expect things from him, without
any rational or scriptural ground? such are they who imagine, they either do or
shall receive particular directions from God, not only in points of importance,
but in things of no moment, in the most trifling circumstances of life. Whereas
in these cases God has given us our own reason for a guide: Though never
excluding the secret assistance of his Spirit.

21. To this kind of enthusiasm they are peculiarly exposed, who expect to be
directed of God, either in spiritual things or in common life, in what is
justly called, an extraordinary manner. I mean, by visions or dreams, by strong
impressions or sudden impulses on the mind. I do not deny, that God has of old
times manifested his will in this manner. Or, that he can do so now. Nay, I
believe, he does, in some very rare instances. But how frequently do men
mistake herein? How are they misled by pride and a warm imagination, to ascribe
such impulses or impressions, dreams or visions to God, as are utterly unworthy
of him? Now this is all pure enthusiasm, all as wide of religion, as it is of
truth and soberness.

22. Perhaps some may ask, "Ought we not then to inquire, what is the will of
God in all things? And ought not his will to be the rule of our practice?"
Unquestionably it ought. But how is a sober Christian to make this inquiry? To
know, what is the will of God? Not by waiting for supernatural dreams. Not by
expecting God to reveal it in visions. Not by looking for any particular
impressions, or sudden impulses on his mind. No: But by consulting the oracles
of God. To the law and to the testimony. This is the general method of knowing
what i^ the holy and acceptable will of God.

23. "But how shall I know what is the will of God, in such and such a
particular case? The thing proposed is in itself of an indifferent nature, and
so lest undetermined in Scripture." I answer, the Scripture itself gives you a
general rule, applicable to all particular cases. The will of God is our
sanctification. It is his will that we should be inwardly and outwardly holy;
that we should be good and do good in every kind, and in the highest degree
whereof we are capable. Thus far we tread upon firm ground. This is as clear as
the shining of the sun. In order therefore to know, what is the will of God, in
a particular case, we have only to apply this general rule.

24. Suppose, for instance, it were proposed to a reasonable man, to marry, or
to enter into a new business: In order to know, whether this is the will of
God, being assured, "It is the will of God, concerning me, that I should be as
holy and do as much good as I can," he has only to inquire, "In which of these
states can I be most holy, and do the most good?" And this is to be determined,
partly by reason, and partly by experience. Experience tells him what
advantages he has in his present state, either for being or doing good: And
reason is to show, what he certainly or probably will have in the state
proposed. By comparing these, he is to judge, which of the two may most conduce
to his being and doing good: And as far as he knows this, so far he is certain,
what is the will of God.

25. Mean time, the assistance of his spirit is supposed, during the whole
process of the inquiry. Indeed it is not easy to say, in how many ways, that
assistance is conveyed. He may bring many circumstances to our remembrance, may
place others in a stronger and clearer light; may insensibly sensibly open our
mind to receive conviction, and fix that conviction upon our heart. And to a
concurrence of many circumstances of this kind, in favor of what is acceptable
in his sight, he may superadd such an unutterable peace of mind, and so
uncommon a measure of his love, as will leave us no possibility of doubting,
that this, even this, is his will concerning us.

26. This is the plain, scriptural, rational way to know, what is the will of
God in a particular case. But considering how seldom this way is taken, and
what a flood of enthusiasm must needs break in, on those who endeavor to know
the will of God, by unscriptural, irrational ways: It were to be wished, that
the expression itself, were far more sparingly used. The using it, as some do,
on the most trivial occasions, is a plain breach of the third commandment. It
is a gross way of taking the name of God in vain, and betrays great irreverence
toward him. Would it not be far better then, to use other expressions, which
are not liable to such objections? For example -- Instead of saying, on any
particular occasion, "I want to know what is the will of God." Would it not be
better to say, "I want to know, what will be most for my improvement: And, what
will make me most useful." This way of speaking is clear and unexceptionable.
It is putting the matter on a plain, scriptural issue, and that without any
danger of enthusiasm.

27. A third very common sort of enthusiasm (if it does not coincide with the
former) is that of those who think to attain the end without using the means,
by the immediate power of God. If indeed those means were providentially
withheld, they would not fall under this charge. God can, and sometimes does,
in cases of this nature, exert his own immediate power. But they who expect
this when they have those means, and will not use them, are proper enthusiasts.
Such as they who expect to understand the holy scriptures, without reading them
and meditating thereon: Yea, without using all such helps as are in their
power, and may probably conduce to that end. Such are they who designedly speak
in the public assembly, without any premeditation. I say designedly: Because
there may be such circumstances, as at some times make it unavoidable. But
whoever despises that great means of speaking profitably, is so far an
enthusiast.

28. It may be expected that I should mention what some have accounted, a
fourth sort of enthusiasm, namely, The imagining those things to be owing to
the providence of God, which are not owing thereto. But I doubt. I know not
what things they are, which are not owing to the providence of God: In
ordering, or, at least, in governing of which, this is not either directly or
remotely concerned. I except nothing but sin: And even in the sins of others, I
see the providence of God to me. I do not say, his general Providence; for this
I take to be a sounding word, which means just nothing. And if there be a
particular Providence; it must extend to all persons and all things. So our
Lord understood it, or he could never have said, Even the hairs of your head
are all numbered. And, Not a sparrow falls to the ground, without the will of
your Father which is in Heaven. But if it be so, if God presides universis
tanquem singulis, et singulus tanquam universis; over the whole universe as
over every single person, over every single person as over the whole universe:
What is it (except only our own sins) which we are not to ascribe to the
providence of God? So that I cannot apprehend, there is any room here, for the
charge of enthusiasm.

29. If it be said, The charge lies here: "When you impute this to Providence,
you imagine yourself the peculiar favorite of heaven." I answer, you have
forgot some of the last words I spoke, Praesidet universis tanquam singulis.
His Providence is over all men in the universe, as much as over any single
person. Don't you see, that he who believing this, imputes any thing which
befalls him to Providence, does not therein make himself any more the favorite
of heaven, than he supposes every man under heaven to be? Therefore you have no
pretense, upon this ground, to charge him with enthusiasm.

30. Against every sort of this, it behooves us to guard, with the utmost
diligence: Considering the dreadful effects it has so often produced, and which
indeed naturally result from it. Its immediate offspring is pride; it
continually increases this source from whence it flows, and hereby it alienates
us more and more, from the favor and from the life of God. It dries up the
very springs of faith and love: of righteousness and true holiness: Seeing all
these flow from grace. But God resists the proud and gives grace only to the
humble.

31. Together with pride there will naturally arise an unadvisable and
unconvincible Spirit. So that into whatever error or fault the enthusiast
falls, there is small hope of his recovery. For reason will have little weight
with him (as has been justly and frequently observed) who imagines he is led by
an higher guide, by the immediate wisdom of God. And as he grows in pride, so
he must grow in unadvisableness and in stubbornness also. He must be less and
less capable of being convinced, less susceptible of persuasion; more and more
attached to his own judgment and his own will, 'till he is altogether fixed and
immovable.

32. Being thus fortified both against the grace of God, and against all advice
and help from man, he is wholly left to the guidance of his own heart, and of
the king of the children of pride. No marvel then that he is daily more rooted
and grounded in contempt of all mankind, in furious anger, in every unkind
disposition, in every earthly and devilish temper. Neither can we wonder at the
terrible outward effects, which have flowed from such dispositions in all ages:
Even all manner of wickedness, all the works of darkness, committed by those
who call themselves christians, while they wrought with greediness such things,
as were hardly named even among the heathens.

Such is the nature, such the dreadful effects, of that many-headed monster
enthusiasm! From the consideration of which, we may now draw some plain
inferences, with regard to our own practice.

33. And, First, if enthusiasm be a term, though so frequently used, yet so
rarely understood, take you care, not to talk of you know not what, not to use
the word, till you understand it. As in all other points, so likewise in this,
learn to think before you speak. First, know the meaning of this hard word; and
then use it, if need require.

34. But if so few, even among men of education and learning, much more among
the common sort of men, understand this dark, ambiguous word, or have any fixed
notion of what it means: Then, Secondly, beware of judging or calling any man
an enthusiast upon common report. This is by no means a sufficient ground, for
giving any name of reproach to any man: Least of all is it a sufficient ground
for so black a term of reproach as this. The more evil it contains, the more
cautious you should be, how you apply it to any one: To bring so heavy an
accusation without full proof, being neither consistent with justice nor mercy.

35. But if enthusiasm be so great an evil, beware you are not entangled
therewith yourself. Watch and pray that you fall not into the temptation. It
easily besets those who fear or love God. O beware you do not think of yourself
more highly than you ought to think. Do not imagine you have attained that
grace of God to which you have not attained. You may have much joy: You may
have a measure of love, and yet not have living faith. Cry unto God that he
would not suffer you, blind as you are, to go out of the way: That you may
never fancy yourself a believer in Christ, till Christ is revealed in you, and
till his spirit witnesses with your spirit, that you are a child of God.

36. Beware you are not a fiery, persecuting enthusiast. Do not imagine that
God has called you, (just contrary to the spirit of him you style your master)
to destroy men's lives, and not to save them. Never dream of forcing men into
the ways of God. Think yourself, and let think. Use no constraint in matters of
religion. Even those who are farthest out of the way, never compel to come in,
by any other means, than reason, truth and love.

37. Beware you do not run with the common herd of enthusiasts, fancying you
are a Christian when you are not Presume not to assume that venerable name,
unless you have a clear, scriptural title thereto: Unless you have the mind
which was in Christ, and walk as he also walked.

38. Beware you do not fall into the second sort of enthusiasm, fancying you
have those gifts from God which you have not. Trust not in visions or dreams;
in sudden impressions, or strong impulses of any kind. Remember, it is not by
these you are to know, what is the will of God on any particular occasion; but
by applying the plain scriptural rule, with the help of experience and reason,
and the ordinary assistance of the spirit of God. Do not lightly take the name
of God in your mouth: Do not talk of the will of God on every trifling
occasion. But let your words as well as your actions be all tempered with
reverence and godly fear.

39. Beware, lastly, of imagining you shall obtain the end, without using the
means conducive to it. God can give the end, without any means at all: But you
have no reason to think he will. Therefore constantly and carefully use all
these means, which he has appointed to be the ordinary channels of his grace.
Use every means which either reason or scripture recommends, as conducive
(through the free love of God in Christ) either to the obtaining, or increasing
any of the gifts of God. Thus expect a daily growth in that pure and holy
religion, which the world always did, and always will call enthusiasm: But
which, to all who are saved from real enthusiasm, from merely nominal
christianity, is the wisdom of God and the power of God, the glorious image of
the most High: Righteousness and peace: A fountain of living water, springing
up into everlasting life!

A CAUTION against BIGOTRY. A SERMON
ON MARK ix. 38, 39. And John answered him saying, Master, we saw one casting
out devils in thy name, and we forbade him, because he follows not us.

And Jesus said, Forbid him not.


1. IN the prec^eding verses we read, That after the twelve had been disputing,
which of them should be the greatest, Jesus took a little child, and set him in
the midst of them, and taking him in his arms, said unto them, whosoever shall
receive one of these little children in my name, receives me: And whosoever
receives me, receives not me only) but him that sent me. Then John answered
(that is, said with reference to what our Lord had spoken just before) Master,
we saw one casting out devils in thy name, and we forbade him, because he
follows not us. As if he had said, "Ought we to have received him? In
receiving him should we have received thee? Ought we not rather to have
forbidden him? Did not we do well therein? But Jesus said, Forbid him not.

2. The same passage is recited by St. Luke, and almost in the same words. But
it may be asked, what is this to us? Seeing no man now casts out devils. Has
not the power of doing this been withdrawn from the church, for twelve or
fourteen hundred years? How then are we concerned in the case here proposed, or
in our Lord's decision of it?

3. Perhaps more nearly than is commonly imagined, the case proposed being no
uncommon case. That we may reap our full advantage from it I design to show,
First, In what sense men may and do now cast out devils: Secondly, What we may
understand by, He follows not us. I shall, Thirdly, explain our Lord's
direction, Forbid him not, and conclude with an inference from the whole.

I. 1. I am, in the first place to show, in what sense men may, and do now cast
out devils.

In order to have the clearest view of this, we should remember, that
(according to the scriptural account) as God dwells and works in the children
of light, so the devil dwells and works in the children of darkness. As the
holy spirit possesses the souls of good men, so the evil spirit possesses the
souls of the wicked. Hence it is that the apostle terms him, The god of this
world: From the uncontrolled power he has over worldly men. Hence our blessed
Lord styles him the prince of this world: so absolute is his dominion over it.
And hence St. John, We know that we are of God, and all who are not of God, the
whole world, (...). Not, lies in wickedness: but lies in the wicked one;
lives and moves in him, as they who are not of the world, do in God.

2. For the devil is not to be considered only as a roaring lion, going about
seeking whom he may devour: nor barely as a subtle enemy, who comes unawares
upon poor souls and leads them captive at his will: But as he who dwells in
them and walks in them; who rules the darkness or wickedness of this world,
of worldly men and all their dark designs and actions, by keeping possession of
their hearts, setting up his throne there, and bringing every thought into
obedience to himself. Thus the strong one armed keeps his house; and if this
unclean spirit sometimes go out of a man, yet he often returns with seven
spirits worse than himself, and they enter in and dwell there. Nor can he be
idle in his dwelling. He is continually working in these children of
disobedience. He works in them with power, with mighty energy, transforming
them into his own likeness, effacing all the remains of the image of God, and
preparing them for every evil word or work.

3. It is therefore an unquestionable truth, that the god and prince of this
world, still possesses all who know not God. Only the manner wherein he
possesses them now, differs from that wherein he did it of old time. Then he
frequently tormented their bodies, as well as souls, and that openly, without
any disguise. Now he forments their souls only, (unless in some rare cases) and
that as covertly as possible. The reason of this difference is plain. It was
then his aim to drive mankind into superstition. Therefore he wrought as openly
as he could. But it is his aim to drive us into infidelity. Therefore he works
as privately as he can; for the more secret he is, the more he prevails.

4. Yet, if we may credit historians, there are countries even now, where he
works as openly as aforetime. "But why in savage and barbarous countries only?
Why not in Italy, France or England?" For a very plain reason: He knows his
men. And he knows what he has to do with each. To Laplanders, he appears
barefaced: because he is to fix them in superstition and gross idolatry. But
with you he is pursuing a different point. He is to make you idolize
yourselves: to make you wiser in your own eyes than God himself, than all the
oracles of God. Now in order to this, he must not appear in his own shape: that
would frustrate his design. No: he uses all his art, to make you deny his
being, till he has you safe in his own place.

5. He reigns therefore, although in a different way, yet as absolute in one land
as in the other. He has the gay Italian infidel in his teeth, as sure as the
wild Tartar. But he is fast asleep in the mouth of the lion, who is too wise to
wake him out of sleep. So he only plays with him for the present, and when he
pleases swallows him up.

The god of this world holds his English worshippers full as fast as those in
Lapland. But it is not his business to affright them, lest they should ^ly to
the God of heaven. The prince of darkness therefore does not appear, while he
rules over these his willing subjects. The conqueror holds his captives so much
the safer, because they imagine themselves at liberty. Thus the strong one
armed keeps his house, and his goods are in peace: Neither the deist nor
nominal christian suspects he is there; so he and they are perfectly at peace
with each other.

6. All this while he works with energy in them. He blinds the eyes of their
understanding, so that the light of the glorious gospel of Christ, cannot shine
upon them. He chains their souls down to earth and hell, with the chains of
their own vile affections. He binds them down to the earth, by love of the
world, love of money, of pleasure, of praise. And by pride, envy, anger, hate,
revenge, he causes their souls to draw nigh unto hell: acting the more secure
and uncontrolled, because they know not that he acts at all.

7. But how easily may we know the cause from its effects! These are sometimes
gross and palpable. So they were in the most refined of the heathen nations. Go
no farther than the admired, the virtuous Romans. And you will find these, when
at the height of their learning and glory, filled with all unrighteousness:
fornication, wickedness, covetousness, maliciousness; full of envy, murder,
debate, deceit, malignity: whisperers backbiters, despiteful, proud boasters,
disobedient to parents: covenant breakers, without natural affection;
implacable, unmerciful.

8. The strongest parts of this description are confirmed by one, whom some may
think a more unexceptionable witness. I mean, their brother heathen, Dion
C^ssius: who observes, that before Cesar's return from Gaul, not only gluttony
and lewdness of every kind, were open and barefaced; not only falsehood,
injustice and unmercifulness abounded, in public courts as well as private
families: but the most outrageous robberies, rapine and murders, were so
frequent in all parts of Rome, that few men went out of doors without making
their wills, as not knowing if they should return alive.

9. As gross and palpable are the works of the devil, among many (if not all)
the modern heathens. The natural religion of the Creeks, Cherikees, Chicasaws
and all other Indians, bordering on our southern settlements (not of a few
single men, but of entire nations) is, to torture all their prisoners from
morning to night, till at length they roast them to death; and upon the
slightest undesigned provocation, to come behind and shoot any of their own
countrymen. Yea, it is a common thing among them, for the son, if he thinks his
father lives too long, to knock out his brains: And for a mother, if she is
tired of her children, to fasten stones about their necks, and throw three or
four of them into the river, one after another.

10. It were to be wished that none but heathens had practiced such gross,
palpable works of the devil. But we dare not say so. Even in cruelty and
bloodshed, how little have the christians come behind them? And not the
Spaniards or Portuguese alone, butchering thousands in South-America. Not the
Dutch only in the East Indies, or the French in North America, following the
Spaniards step by step. Our own countrymen too have wantoned in blood, and
exterminated whole nations: plainly proving thereby, what spirit it is, that
dwells and works in the children of disobedience.

11. These monsters might almost make us overlook the works of the devil that
are wrought in our own country. But alas! We cannot open our eyes even here,
without seeing them on every side. Is it a small proof of his power, that
common swearers, drunkards, whoremongers, adulterers, thieves, robbers,
sodomites, murderers, are still found in every part of our land? How triumphant
does the prince of this world reign, in all these children of disobedience?

12. He less openly, but no less effectually works in dissemblers, talebearers,
liars, slanderers: In oppressors and extortioners: in the perjured, the seller
of his friend, his honuor, his conscience, his country. And yet these may talk
of religion or conscience still, of honor, virtue, and public spirit. But they
can no more deceive satan than they can God. He likewise knows those that are
his: And a great multitude they are out of every nation and people of whom he
has full possession at this day.

13. If you consider this, you cannot but see in what sense, men may now also
cast out devils: Yea, and every minister of Christ does cast them out, if his
Lord's work prosper in his hand.

By the power of God attending his word, he brings these sinners to repentance:
An entire inward as well as outward change, from all evil to all good. And this
is, in a sound sense, to cast out devils, out of the souls wherein they had
hitherto dwelt. The strong one can no longer keep his house. A stronger than he
is come upon him, and has cast him out, and taken possession for himself, and
made it an habitation of God through his Spirit. Here then the energy of satan
ends, and the Son of God destroys the works of the devil. The understanding of
the sinner is now enlightened, and his heart sweetly drawn to God. His desires
are refined, his affections purified: And being filled with the Holy Ghost, he
grows in grace till he is not only holy in heart, but in all manner of
conversation.

14. All this is indeed the work of God. It is God alone who can cast out
satan. But he is generally pleased to do this by man, as an instrument in his
hand; who is then said, to cast out devils in his name, by his power and
authority. And he sends whom he will send upon this great work: but usually
such as man would never have thought of. For his ways are not as our ways,
neither his thoughts as our thoughts. Accordingly he chooses the weak to
confound the mighty, the foolish, to confound the wise: For this plain reason,
that he may secure the glory to himself; that no flesh may glory in his sight.

II. 1. But shall we not forbid one who thus casts out devils, if he
follows not us? This it seems was both the judgment and practice of the
apostle, till he referred the case to his master. We forbade him, says he,
because he follows not us, which he supposed to be a very sufficient reason.
What we may understand by this expression, He follows not us, is the next
point to be considered.

The lowest circumstance we can understand thereby, is, he has no outward
connection with us. We do not labor in conjunction with each other. He is not
our fellow-helper in the gospel. And indeed whenever our Lord is pleased, to
send many laborers into his harvest, they cannot all act, in subordination to,
or connection with each other. Nay, they cannot all have personal acquaintance
with, nor be so much as known to one another. Many there will necessarily be in
different parts of the harvest, so far from having any mutual intercourse, that
they will be as absolute strangers to each other, as if they had lived in
different ages. And concerning any of these whom we know not, we may doubtless
say, He follows not us.

2. A second meaning of this expression may be, He is not of our party. It has
long been matter of melancholy consideration, to all who pray for the peace of
Jerusalem, that so many several parties are still subsisting, among those who
are all styled christians. This has been particularly observable in our own
countrymen, who have been continually dividing from each other, upon points of
no moment, and many times such as religion had no concern in. The most trifling
circumstances have given rise to different parties, which have continued for
many generations. And each of these would be ready to object to one who was on
the oath sider, He follows not us.

3. That expression may mean, thirdly, He differs from us, in our religious
opinions. There was a time, when all christians were of one mind, as well as of
one heart. So great grace was upon them all, when they were first filled with
the Holy Ghost. But how short a space did this blessing continue? How soon was
that unanimity lost, and difference of opinion ^^ang up again, even in the
church of Christ. And that not in nominal, but in real christians: Nay in the
very chief of them, the apostles themselves? Nor does it appear, That the
difference which then began, was ever entirely removed. We do not find, that
even those pillars in the temple of God, so long as they remained upon earth,
were ever brought to think alike, to be of one mind, particularly with regard
to the ceremonial law. It Is therefore no way surprising, that infinite
varieties of opinion should now be found in the christian church. A very
probable consequence of this is, that whenever we see any casting out devils,
he will be one that, in this sense, follows not us: that is not of our
opinion. It Is scarce to be imagined he will be of our mind, in all points, even
of religion. He may very probably think in a different manner from us, even on
several subjects of importance: such as, the nature and use of the moral law,
the eternal decrees of God, the sufficiency and efficacy of his grace, and the
perseverance of his children.

4. He may differ from us, fourthly, not only in opinion, but likewise in some
points of practice. He may not approve of that manner of worshipping God, which
is practiced in our congregation: And may judge that to be more profitable for
his soul, which took its rise from Mr. Calvin, or Martin Luther. He may have
many objections to that liturgy, which we approve of, beyond all others: Many
doubts concerning that form of church government, which we esteem both
apostolical and scriptural. Perhaps he may go farther from us yet: He may, from
a principle of conscience, refrain from several of those, which we believe to
be the ordinances of Christ. Or if we both agree, That they are ordained of
God, there may still remain a difference between us, either as to the manner of
administering those ordinances, or the persons to whom they should be
administered. Now the unavoidable consequences of any of these differences, will
be, that he who thus differs from us, must separate himself, with regard to
those points, from our society. In this respect therefore he follows not us:
He is not (as we phrase it) of our church.

5. But in a far stronger sense, he follows not us, who is not only of a
different church, but of such a church as we account to be in many respects
antiscriptural and antichristian: A church which we believe to be utterly false
and erroneous in her doctrines, as well as very dangerously wrong in her
practice, guilty of gross superstition as well as idolatry. A church that has
added many articles to the faith, which was once delivered to the saints; that
has dropped one whole commandment of God, and made void several of the rest by
her traditions: And that pretending the highest veneration for, and strictest
conformity to the ancient church, has nevertheless brought in numberless
innovations, without any warrant either from antiquity or scripture. Now most
certainly he follows not us, who stands at so great a distance from us.

6. And yet there may be a still wider difference than this. He who differs
from us in judgment or practice, may possibly stand at a greater distance from
us, in affection than in judgment. And this indeed is a very natural and a very
common effect of the other. The differences which begin in points of opinion,
seldom terminate there. They generally spread into the affections, and then
separate chief friends. Nor are any animosities so deep and irreconcilable, as
those that spring from disagreement in religion. For this cause the bitterest
enemies of a man, are those of his own household. For this the father rises
against his own children, and the children against the father; and perhaps
persecute each other even to the death, thinking all the time they are doing
God a service. It is therefore nothing more than we may expect, if those who
differ from us either in religious opinions or practice, soon contract a
sharpness, yea bitterness toward us; if they are more and more prejudiced
against us, till they conceive as ill an opinion of our persons as of our
principles. An almost necessary consequence of this will be, they will speak in
the same manner as they think of us. They will set themselves in opposition to
us, and as far as they are able hinder our work: seeing it does not appear to
them to be the work of God, but either of man or of the devil. He that thinks,
speaks and acts in such a manner as this, in the highest sense, follows not
us.

7. I do not indeed conceive, That the person of whom the apostle speaks in the
text (although we have no particular account of him, either in the context, or in
any other part of Holy Writ) went so far as this. We have no ground to suppose,
That there was any material difference between him and the apostles; much less
that he had any prejudice either against them or their master. It seems we may
gather thus much from our Lord's own words, which immediately follow the text,
There is no man which shall do a miracle in my name, that can lightly speak
evil of me. But I purposely put the case in the strongest light, adding all the
circumstances which can well be conceived: That being forewarned of the
temptation in its full strength, we may in no case yield to it, and fight
against God.

III. 1. Suppose then a man have no intercourse with us, suppose he be not of
our party, suppose he separates from our church, yea and widely differ from us,
both in judgment, practice, and affection: Yet if we see even this man casting
out devils, Jesus says, forbid him not. This important direction of our Lord,
I am, in the third place, to explain.

2. If we see this man casting out devils -- But it is well, if in such case, we
would believe even what we saw with our eyes, if we did not give the lie to our
own senses. He must be little acquainted with human nature, who does not
immediately perceive, how extremely unready we should be, to believe that any
man does cast out devils, who follows not us, in all or most of the senses
above recited. I had almost said, in any of them: Seeing we may easily learn
even from what passes in our own breasts, how unwilling men are, to allow any
thing good in those, who do not in all things agree with themselves.

3. "But what is a sufficient, reasonable proof that a man does (in the sense
above) cast out devils?" The answer is easy. Is there full proof, 1. That a
person before us was a gross, open sinner? secondly, that he is not so now;
that he has broke off his sins, and lives a christian life? And, thirdly, that
his change was wrought by his hearing this man preach? If these three points be
plain and undeniable, then you have sufficient, reasonable proof, such as you
cannot resist without wilful sin, That this man casts out devils.

4. Then forbid him not. Beware how you attempt to hinder him, either by your
authority or arguments or persuasions. Do not in any wise strive to prevent his
using all the power which God has given him. If you have authority with him, do
not use that authority, to stop the work of God. Do not furnish him with
reasons, why he ought not any more to speak in the name of Jesus. Satan will
not fail to supply him with these, if you do not second him therein. Persuade
him not, to depart from the work. If he should give place to the devil and you,
many souls might perish in their iniquity, but their blood would God require at
your hands.

5. "But what if he be only a layman who casts out devils? Ought I not to
forbid him then?"

Is the fact allowed? Is there reasonable proof, That this man has or does cast
out devils? If there is, forbid him not: No, not at the peril of your soul.
Shall not God work by whom he will work? No man can do these works unless God
is with him, unless God has sent him for this very thing. But if God has sent
him, will you call him back? Will you forbid him to go?

6. "But I do not know, That he is sent of God." Now herein is a mavelous
thing (may any of the seals of his mission say, any whom he has brought from
satan to God) that ye know not whence this man is, and behold he has opened
mine eyes! If this man were not of God, he could do nothing. If you doubt the
fact, send for the parents of the man: Send for his brethren, friends,
acquaintance. But if you cannot doubt this, if you must needs acknowledge, that
a notable miracle has been wrought, then with what conscience, with what face
can you charge him whom God has sent, not to speak any more in his name?

7. I allow, that it is highly expedient, whoever preaches in his name, should
have an outward as well as an inward call. But that it is absolutely necessary
I deny.

"Nay, is not the scripture express? No man takes this honor unto himself,
but he that is called of God, as was Aaron?" Heb. v. 4.

Numberless times has this text been quoted on the occasion, as containing the
very strength of the cause. But surely never was so unhappy a quotation. For
first, Aaron was not called to preach at all He was called to offer gifts and
sacrifice for sin. That was his peculiar employment. Secondly, these men do not
offer sacrifice at all; but only preach, which Aaron did not. Therefore it is
not possible to find one text in all the bible, which is more wide of the point
than this.

8. "But what was the practice of the apostolic age?" You may easily see in the
acts of the apostles. In the 8th chapter we read, There was a great persecution
against the church which was at Jerusalem: And they were all scattered abroad
thoughout the regions of Judea and Samaria, except the apostles. ver. 1.
Therefore they that were scattered abroad, went everywhere preaching the word.
ver. 4. Now were all these outwardly called to preach? No man in his senses can
think so. Here then is an undeniable proof, what was the practice of the
apostolic age. Here you see not one, but a multitude of lay-preachers, men that
were only sent of God.

9. Indeed so far is the practice of the apostolic age, from inclining us to
think it was unlawful, for a man to preach before he was ordained, that we have
reason to think, it was then accounted necessary. Certainly the practice and
the direction of the apostle Paul was, to prove a man before he was ordained at
all. Let these, the deacons) says he, first he proved; then let them use the
office of a deacon -- 1 Timothy iii. 10. Proved? How? By setting them to construe
a sentence of of greek? And asking them a sew commonplace questions? O amazing
proof of a minister of Christ! Nay: but by making a clear, open trial ^^s is
still done by most of the protestant churches in Europe) not only whether their
lives be holy and unblameable, but whether they have such gifts as are
absolutely and indispensably necessary, in order to edify the church of Christ.

10. "But what if man has these? And has brought sinners to repentance? And yet
the bishop will not ordain him?" Then the bishop does forbid him to cast out
devils. But I dare not forbid him. I have published my reasons to all the
world. Yet it is still insisted, I ought to do it. You who insist upon it,
answer those reasons. I know not that any have done this yet, or even made an
attempt of doing it. Only some have spoken of them as very weak and trifling.
And this was prudent enough. For it is far easier to despise, at least, seem to
despise an argument than to answer it. Yet till this is done I must say, when I
have reasonable proof that any man does cast out devils, whatever others do, I
dare not forbid him, lest I be found even to fight against God.

11. And whosoever thou art that fear God, forbid him not, either directly
or indirectly. There are many ways of doing this. You indirectly forbid him, if
you either wholly deny, or despise and make little account of the work which
God has wrought by his hands. You indirectly forbid him, when you discourage
him in his work, by drawing him into disputes concerning it, by raising
objections against it, or frighting him with consequences, which very possibly
will never be. You forbid him, when you show any unkindness toward him, either
in language or behavior: And much more, when you speak of him to others,
either in an unkind or a contemptuous manner: When you endeavor to represent
him to any, either in an odious or a despicable light. You are forbidding him
all the time you are speaking evil of him, or making no account of his labors.
O forbid him not in any of these ways: Nor by forbidding others to hear him, by
discouraging sinners from hearing that word, which is able to save their souls.

12. Yea, if you would observe our Lord's directions in its full meaning and
extent, then remember his word, He that is not for us, is against as; and he
that gathers not with me, scatters. He that gathers not men into the
kingdom of God, assuredly scatters them from it. For there can be no neuter in
this war. Every one is either on God's side or on Satan's. Are you on God's
side? Then you will not only not forbid any man that casts out devils, but you
will labor to the uttermost of your power, to forward him in the work. You
will readily acknowledge the work of God, and confess the greatness of it. You
will remove all difficulties and objections, as far as may be out of his way.
You will strengthen his hands by speaking honorably of him before all men, and
avowing the things which you have seen and heard. You will encourage others to
attend upon his word, to hear him whom God has sent. And you will omit no
actual proof of tender love, which God gives you an opportunity of showing him.

IV. 1. If we willingly fail in any of these points, if we either directly or
indirectly forbid him, because he follows not us, then we are bigots. This is
the inference I draw from what has been said. But the term bigotry, I fear, as
frequently as it is used, is almost as little understood as enthusiasm. It is,
too strong an attachment to, or fondness for, our own party, opinion, church
and religion. Therefore he is a bigot, who is so fond of any of these, so
strongly attached to them, as to forbid any who cast out devils, because he
differs from himself, in any or all these particulars.

2. Do you beware of this. Take care, 1. That you do not convict yourself of
bigotry, by your unreadiness to believe, that any man does cast out devils, who
differs from you. And if you are clear thus far, if you acknowledge the fact,
then examine yourself, secondly, Am I not convicted of bigotry in this, in
forbidding him, directly or indirectly? Do I not directly forbid him on this
ground, because he is not of my party? Because he does not fall in with my
opinions? Or because he does not worship God according to that scheme of
religion, which I have received from my fathers?

3. Examine yourself, Do I not indirectly at least forbid him, on any of these
grounds! Am I not sorry, that God should thus own and bless a man that holds
such erroneous opinions? Do I not discourage him, because he is not of my
church? By disputing with him concerning it, by raising objections, and by
perplexing his mind with distant consequences? Do I show no anger, contempt or
unkindness of any sort, either in my words or actions? Do I not mention behind
his back, his (real or supposed) faults? His defects or infirmities? Do not I
hinder sinners from hearing his word? If you do any of these things, you are a
bigot to this day.

4. Search me, O Lord, and prove me. Try out my reins and my heart! Look well
if there be any way of bigotry in me, and lead me in the way everlasting. In
order to examine ourselves thoroughly, let the case be proposed in the
strongest manner. What if I were to see a Papist, an Arian, a Socinian casting
out devils? If I did, I could not forbid even him, without convicting myself of
bigotry. Yea, If it could be supposed, that I should see a Jew, a Deist or a
Turk doing the same, were I to forbid him either directly or indirectly, I
should be no better than a bigot still.

5. O stand clear of this. But be not content with not forbidding any that
casts out devils. It Is well, to go thus far, but do not stop here. If you will
avoid all bigotry, go on. In every instance of this kind, whatever the
instrument be, acknowledge the finger of God. And not only acknowledge, but
rejoice in his work and praise his name with thanksgiving. Encourage whomsoever
God is pleased to employ, to give himself wholly up thereto. Speak well of him
wheresoever you are: Defend his character and his mission. Enlarge as far as
you can his sphere of action. Show him all kindness in word and deed. And cease
not to cry to God in his behalf, that he may save both himself and them that
hear him.

6. I need add but one caution. Think not, the bigotry of another, is any
excuse for your own. It Is not impossible, that one who casts out devils
himself, may yet forbid you so to do. You may observe, this is the very case
mentioned in the text. The apostles forbade another to do what they did
themselves. But beware of retorting. It is not your part, to return evil for
evil. Another's not observing the direction of our Lord, is no reason why you
should neglect it. Nay, but let him have all the bigotry to himself. If he
forbids you, do not you forbid him. Rather labor and watch and pray the more,
to confirm your love toward him. If he speaks all manner of Evil of you, speak
all manner of good (that is true) of him. Imitate herein that glorious saying
of a great man (O that he had always breathed the same spirit!) "Let Luther
call me an hundred devils: I will still reverence him as a messenger of God."

CATHOLIC SPIRIT. A SERMON
ON 2. KINGS, x. 15. And when he was departed thence, he lighted on Jehonadab
the son of Rechab, coming to meet him. And he saluted him and said, is thine
heart right as my heart is with thy heart? And Jehonadab answered, it is. If it
be, give me thine hand.


1. IT is allowed even by those who do not pay this great debt, that love is
due to all mankind: The royal law, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thyself,
carrying its own evidence to all that hear it. And that, nothing according to
the miserable construction put upon it by the zealots of old times, Thou shall
love thy neighbor, thy relation, acquaintance, friend, and hate thine enemy:
Not so. I say unto you, says our Lord, Love your enemies, bless them that
curse you: Do good to them that hate you, and pray for them that despitefully
use you and persecute you: That ye may be the children, may appear so to all
mankind, of your Father which is in heaven, who makes his sun to rise on the
evil and on the good, and sends rain on the just and on the unjust.

2. But it is sure, there is a peculiar love which we owe to those that love
God. So David, "All my delight is upon the saints that are in the earth and
upon such as excel in virtue. And so a greater than he, "A new commandment I
give unto you, that ye love one another: As I have loved you, that ye also love
another. By this shall all men know that ye are my disciples, if ye have love
one to another." John xiii. 34, 35. This is that love on which the apostle John
so frequently and strongly insists. This, says he, is the message that ye
heard from the beginning, that we should love one another, 1 John chap. iii.
11. Hereby perceive we the love of God, because he laid down his life for us.
And we ought, if love should call us thereto, to lay down our lives for the
brethren, ver. 16. And again, Beloved, let us love one another, for love is of
God. he that loves not, knows not God: For God is love, chap. iv. 7, 8. Not
that we loved God, but that he loved us, and sent his son to be the
propitiation for our sins. Beloved, if God so loved us, we ought also to love
one another, ver. 10, 11.

3. All men approve of this. But do all men practice it? Daily experience shows
the contrary. Where are even the Christians who love one another, as He has
given us commandment? How many hindrances lie in the way? The two grand,
general hindrances are, first, that they cannot all think alike: and, in
consequence of this, secondly, they cannot all walk alike: But in several
smaller points their practice must differ, in proportion to the difference of
their sentiments.

4. But although a difference in opinions or modes of worship, may prevent an
entire external union, yet need it prevent our union in affection? Though we
cannot think alike, may we not love alike? May we not be of one heart, though we
are not of one opinion? Without all doubt we may. Herein all the children of
God may unite, notwithstanding these smaller differences. These remaining as
they are, they may forward one another, in love and in good works.

5. Surely in this respect, the example of Jehu himself, as mixed a character as
he was of, is well worthy both the attention and imitation, of every serious
christian. And when he was departed thence, he lighted on Jehonadab the son of
Rechab coming to meet him. And he saluted him and said, Is thine heart right,
as my heart is with thy heart? And Jehonadab answered, It is. If it be, give me
thine hand.

The text naturally divides itself into two parts, first, A question proposed
by Jehu to Jehonadab, Is thine heart right, as my heart is with thy heart?
secondly, An offer made on Jehonadab's answering, It is. If it be, give me
thine hand.

I. 1. And, first, let us consider the question proposed by Jehu to Jehonadab,
Is thine heart right, as my heart is with thy heart?

The very first thing we may observe in these words, is that here is no enquiry
concerning Jehonadab's opinions. And yet it is certain, he held some which were
very uncommon, indeed quite peculiar to himself: And some ^^ich had a close
influence upon practice; on which likewise he laid so great a stress, as to
entail them upon his children's children, to their latest posterity. This is
evidence from the account given by Jeremiah, many years after his death. I took
Jaazaniah and his brethren, and all his sons, and the whole house of the
Rechabites -- and set before them pots full of wine and cups, and said unto
them, drink ye wine. But they said, we will drink no wine; For Jonadab (or
Jehonadab) the son of Rechab our father (it would be less ambiguous if the
words were placed thus, Jehonadab our father the son of Rechab: Out of love and
reverence to whom he probably desired his descendants might be called by his
name) "commanded us, saying, ye shall drink no wine, neither ye nor your sons
for ever. Neither shall ye build house, no^ sow seed, nor plant vineyard, nor
have any; but all your days ye shall dwell in tents -- and we have obeyed and
done according to all that Jonadab our father commanded us, Jer. xxxv. 3 -- 10."

2. And yet Jehu (although it seems to have been his manner, both in things
secular and religious, to drive furiously) does not concern himself at all with
any of these things, but lets Jehonadab abound in his own sense. And neither of
them appears to have given the other the least disturbance, touching the
opinions which he maintained

3. It is very possible, that many good men now also may entertain peculiar
opinions: And some of them may be as singular herein; as even Jehonadab was.
And it is certain, so long as we know but in part, that all men will not see all
things alike. It is an unavoidable consequence of the present weakness and
shortness of human understanding, that several men will be of several minds, in
religion as well as in common life. So it has been from the beginning of the
world, and so it will be till the restitution of all things.

4. Nay farther: Although every man necessarily believes, that every particular
opinion which he holds is true (for, to believe any opinions is not true, is
the same thing as, not to hold it:) yet can no man be assured, that all his own
opinions taken together, are true. Nay every thinking man is assured, they are
not: Seeing humanum est errare et nescire. To be ignorant of many things, and
to mistake in some, is the necessary condition of humanity. This, therefore, he
is sensible is his own case. He knows in the general, that he himself is
mistaken. Although in what particulars he mistakes, he does not, perhaps he
cannot know.

5. I say, perhaps he cannot know. For who can tell how far invincible
ignorance may extend? Or (that comes to the same thing) invincible prejudice:
Which is so often fixed in tender minds, that it is afterward impossible to
tear up what has taken so deep a root. And who can say, unless he knew every
circumstance attending it, how far any mistake is culpable? Seeing all guilt
must suppose some concurrence of the will: Of which he only can judge who
searches the heart.

6. Every wise man therefore will allow others the same liberty of thinking,
which he desires they should allow him: And will no more insist on their
embracing his opinions, than he would have them to insist on his embracing
theirs. He bears with those who differ from him, and only ask him, with whom he
desires to unite in love, that single question, Is thine heart right, as my
heart is with thy heart?

7. We may, secondly, observe, That here is no enquiry made concerning
Jehonadah's mode of worship: Although it is highly probably, there was in this
respect also, a very wide difference between them. For we may well believe
Jehonadab as well as all his posterity, worshipped God at Jerusalem: Whereas
Jehu did not; he had more regard to state policy than religion. And therefore
although he stew the worshippers of Baal, and destroyed Baal out of Israel: Yet
from the convenient sin of Jereboam, the worship of the golden calves, he
departed not. 2 Kings x. 29.

8. But even among men of an upright heart, men who desire to have a conscience
void of offense, it must needs be, that as long as there are various opinions,
there will be various ways of worshipping God: seeing a variety of opinions
necessarily implies a variety of practice. And as in all ages, men have
differed in nothing more than in their opinions concerning the Supreme Being,
so in nothing have they more differed from each other, than in the manner of
worshipping him. Had this been only in the heathen world, it would not have
been at all surprising. For we know these by their wisdom knew not God; nor
therefore could they know how to worship him. But is it not strange, that even
in the christian world, although they all agree in the general, God is a
Spirit, and they that worship him must worship him in spirit and in truth: Yet
the particular modes of worshipping God, are almost as various as among the
heathens?

9. And how shall we choose, among so much variety? No man can choose for, or
prescribe to another. But every one must follow the dictates of his own
conscience, in simplicity and godly sincerity. He must be fully persuaded in
his own mind, and then act according to the best light he has. Nor has any
creature power to constrain another to walk by his own rule. God has given no
right to any of the children of men, thus to lord it over the conscience of his
brethren. But every man must judge for himself, as every man must give an
account of himself to God.

10. Although therefore every follower of Christ is obliged by the very nature of
the Christian institution, to be a member of some particular congregation or
other, some church, as it is usually termed: (which implies a particular manner
of worshipping God; for two cannot walk together unless they be agreed:) Yet
none can be obliged by any power on earth, but that of his own conscience, to
prefer this or that congregation to another, this or that particular manner of
worship. I know it is commonly supposed, that the place of our birth, fixes the
church to which we ought to belong: That one, for instance, who is born in
England ought to be a member of that which is styled the church of England, and
consequently to worship God in the particular manner which is prescribed by
that church. I was once a zealous maintainer of this: But I find many reasons
to abate of this zeal. I fear, it is attended with such difficulties, that no
reasonable man can get over. Not the least of which is, that if this rule had
took place, there could have been no reformation from popery: Seeing it
entirely destroys the right of private judgment, on which that whole
reformation stands.

11. I dare not therefore presume to impose my mode of worship on any other. I
believe it is truly primitive and apostolical. But my belief is no rule for
another. I ask not therefore of him with whom I would unite in love. "Are you
of ^y church? of my congregation? Do you receive the same form of
church government, and allow the same church officers with me? Do you join in
the same form of prayer, werein I worship God?" I enquire not, Do you receive
the supper of the Lord, in the same posture and manner that I do? Nor, whether
in the administration of baptism, you agree with me, in admitting sureties for
the baptized? In the manner of administering it? Or the age of these to whom it
should be administered? Nay, I ask not of you (as clear as I am in my own mind)
whether you allow baptism and the Lord's supper at all? Let all these things
stand by: We will talk of them, if need be, at a more convenient season. My
only question at present is this, Is thine heart right, as my heart is with thy
heart?

12. But what is properly implied in the question? I do not mean what did Jehu
imply therein? But what should a follower of Christ understand thereby, when he
proposes it to any of his brethren?

The first thing implied in this: Is thy heart right with God? Do thou
believe his being, and his perfections? his eternity, immensity, wisdom, power:
His justice, mercy and truth? Do thou believe, that he now upholdeth all
things, by the word of his Power? And that he governs even the most minute,
even the most noxious, to his own glory, and the good of them that love him?
Have thou a divine evidence, supernatural conviction, of the things of God?
Do thou walk by faith not by sight? Looking not at temporal things but things
eternal?

13. Do thou believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, God over all, blessed for
ever? Is he revealed in thy soul? Do thou know Jesus Christ and him
crucified? Does he dwell in thee, and thou in him? Is he formed in thy heart by
faith? Having absolutely disclaimed all thy own works, thy own righteousness,
have thou submitted thyself unto the righteousness of God, which is by faith in
Christ Jesus? Art thou found in him, not having thy own righteousness, but the
righteousness which is by faith? And art thou, through him, fighting the good
fight of faith, and laying hold of eternal life?

14. Is thy faith (...). Filled with the energy of love? Do thou love God? I
do not say above all things; for it is both an unscriptural and an ambiguous
expression: But with all thy heart, and with all thy mind, and with all thy
soul, and with all thy strength? Do thou seek all thy happiness in him alone?
And do thou find what thou seek? Does thy soul continually magnify (...)
Lord and thy spirit rejoice in God thy Savior? Having learned in every thing
to give thanks, do thou find, it is a joyful and a pleasant thing to be
thankful? Is God the (...) of thy soul? The sum of all thy desires? Art thou
accordingly laying up thy treasure in heaven, and counting all things else dung
and dross? Has the love of God cast the love of the world out of thy soul?
Then thou art crucified to the World. Thou art dead to all below and thy life
is hid with Christ in God.

15. Art thou employed in doing not thy own will, but the will of him that sent
thee? Of him that sent thee down to sojourn here a while, to spend a few days
in a strange land, till having finished the work he has given thee to do, thou
return to thy Father's house? Is it thy meat and drink to do the will of thy
Father which is in Heaven? Is thine eye single in all things? Always fixed on
him? Always looking unto Jesus? Do thou point at him in whatsoever thou do?
In all thy labor, thy business, thy conversation? Aiming only at the glory of
God in all? "Whatsoever," thou do, either "in word or deed, doing it all in
the name of the Lord Jesus, giving thanks unto God even the Father through him?"

16. Does the love of God constrain thee to serve him with fear? To rejoice
unto him with reverence? Art thou more afraid of displeasing God than either of
death or hell? Is nothing (...) terrible to thee as the thought of offending
(...) eyes of his glory? Upon this ground do thou hate all evil ways; every
transgression of his holy and perfect law? And herein "exercise thyself, to
have a conscience void of offense ^rd God and toward man?

17. Is thy heart right toward thy neighbor? Do thou love as thyself, all
mankind (...) exception? "If you love those only that love you, what thank have
you?" Do you love your enemies? Is your soul full of good will, of tender
affection toward them? Do you love even the enemies of God? The unthankful and
unholy? Do your bowels yearn over them? Could you wish yourself (temporally)
accursed for their sake? And do you show this, by "blessing them that curse you,
and praying for those that despitefully use you and persecute you?"

18. Do you show your love by your works? While you have time, as you have
opportunity, do you in fact do good to all men, neighbors or strangers,
friends, or enemies, good or bad? Do you do them all the good you can?
endeavoring to supply all their wants, assisting them both in body and soul,
to the uttermost of your power? If thou art thus minded, may every christian
say, yea, if thou art but sincerely desirous of it, and following on till thou
attain, then "thy heart is right, as my heart is with thy heart."

II. 1. "If it be, give me thine hand. I do not mean, "Be of my opinion," You
need not. I do not expect or desire it. Neither do I mean, "I will be of your
opinion." I cannot. It does not depend on my choice: I can no more think, than
I can see or hear as I will. Keep you your opinion, I mine: And that as
steadily as ever. You need not even endeavor to come over to me, or bring me
over to you. I do not desire you to dispute those points, or to hear (...)
speak one word concerning them. Let all opinions alone on one side and the
other. Only "Give me thine Hand."

2. I do not mean, "Embrace my modes of worship; or, I will embrace yours."
This also is a thing which does not depend either on your choice or mine. We
must both act, as each is fully persuaded in his own mind. Hold you fast that
which you believe is most acceptable to God, and I will do the same. I believe
the Episcopal form of church government to be scriptural and apostolical. If
you think the Presbyterian or Independent is better, think so still and act
accordingly. I believe infants ought to be baptized, and that this may be done
either by dipping or sprinkling. If you are otherwise persuaded, be so still,
and follow your own persuasion. It appears to me, That forms of prayer are of
excellent use, particularly in the great congregation. If you judge extemporary
prayer to be of more use, act suitable to your own judgment. My sentiment is,
That I ought not to forbid water, wherein persons may be baptized: And, That I
ought to eat bread and drink wine, as a memorial of my dying Master. However,
if you are not convinced of this, act according to the light you have. I have
no desire to dispute with you one moment, upon a^^^ of the preceding heads. Let
all these smalle^ points stand aside. Let them never come into sight. "If thine
heart is as my heart," if thou love God and all mankind, I ask no ^ore: Give
me thine hand.

3. I mean, first, love me. An^ at not only as thou love all mankind: not
only as thou love thine enemies, or the enemies of God, those that hate thee,
that despitefully use thee and persecute thee: Not only as a stranger, as one
of whom thou know neither good nor evil. I am not satisfied with this. No:
"If thine heart be right, as mine with thy heart, then love me with a very
tender affection, as a friend that is closer than a brother: As a brother in
Christ, a fellow-citizen of the new Jerusalem, a fellow-soldier engaged in the
same warfare, under the same captain of our salvation. Love me as a companion
in the kingdom and patience of Jesus, and a joint heir of his glory.

4. Love me (but in a higher degree, than thou do the bulk of mankind) with
the love that is long-suffering and kind, that is patient, if I am ignorant or
out of the way, bearing and not increasing my burden, and is tender, soft and
compassionate still: That envieth not, if at any time it please God, to prosper
me in this work even more than thee. Love me with the love that is not provoked
either at my follies or infirmities: or even at my acting (if it should
sometimes so appear to thee) not according to the will of God. Love me so as to
think no evil of me, to put away all jealousy and evil surmising. Love (...)
with the love that covers all things, that ^ver reveals either my faults or
infirmities: that believes all things, is always willing to think the best, to
put the fairest construction on all my word ^^d actions: That hops all
things: either (...) thing related was never done; or not (...) such
circumstances as are related: Or at least, that it was done with a good
intention: (...) in sudden stress of temptation. And hope to the end, that
whatever is amiss, will by the grace of God be corrected, and whatever is
wanting supplied, through the riches of his mercy in Christ Jesus.

5. I mean, Secondly, commend me to God in all thy prayers, wrestle with him in
my behalf, that he would speedily correct what he sees amiss, and supply what
is wanting in me. In thy nearest access to the throne of grace, beg of him who
is then very present with thee, That my heart, may be more as thy heart, more
right both toward God and toward man: That I may have a fuller conviction of
things not seen, and a stronger view of the love of God in Christ Jesus: May
more steadily walk by faith, not by sight, and more earnestly grasp eternal
life. (...) that the love of God and of all mankind, (...) be more largely
poured into my heart; (...) may be more fervent and active in doing the will of
(...) which is in heaven; more zealous of good works, and more careful to
abstain from all appearance of evil.

6. I mean, Thirdly, Provoke me to love and to good works. Second thy prayer as
thou have opportunity, by speaking to me in love whatsoever thou believe to
be for my soul's health* Quicken me in the work which God has (...) me to do,
and instruct me how to do it most perfectly. Yea smite me friendly and reprove
me, wherein soever I appear to thee, (...) be the doing rather my own will,
than the will (...) ^im that sent me. O speak and spare not, whatever thou
believe may conduce, either (...) the amending my faults, the strengthening
m^ weakness, the building me up in love, or the making me more fit in any kind
for the master's use.

7. I mean, Lastly, Love me not in word only, but in deed and in truth. So far
as in conscience thou can (retaining still thy own opinions, and thy own
manner of worshipping God) join with me in the work of God, and let us go on
hand in hand. And thus far, it is certain, thou may go. Speak honorably
wherever, thou art, of the work of God by whomsoever he works, and kindly of
his messengers. And if it be in thy power, not only sympashize with them when
they are in any difficulty or distress, but give them a cheerful and e^^^ctual
assistance, that they may glorify God on my behalf.

8. Two things should be observed, with regard to what has been spoken under
this last head. The one, that whatsoever love, whatsoever offices of love,
whatsoever spiritual or temporal assistance, I claim from him whose heart is
right, as my heart is with his: The same I am ready, by the grace of God,
according to my measure, to give him. The other, that I have not made this
claim, in behalf of myself only, but of all whose heart is right toward God and
man, that we may all love one another, as Christ has loved us.

III. (...) inference we may make from what h^^ ^een said. We may learn from
hence, what is a catholic spirit.

There is scarce any expression which has been more grossly misunderstood, and
more dangerously misapplied than this. But i^ will be easy for any who calmly
consider the preceding observations, to correct any such misapprehensions of
it, and to prevent any such misapplication.

For from hence we may learn, First, That a catholic spirit, is not speculative
latitudinarianism. It is not an indifference to all opinions. This is the spawn
of hell, not the offspring of heaven. This unsettledness of thought, this being
"driven to and fro and tossed about with every wind of doctrine," is a great
curse not a blessing; an irreconcilable enemy not a friend to true
catholicism. A man of a truly catholic spirit, has not now his religion to
seek. He is fixed as the sun in his judgment concerning the main branches of
christian doctrine. It Is true, he is always ready to hear and weigh, whatsoever
can be offered against his principles. But as this does not show any wavering
in his own mind, so neither does it occasion any. He does not halt between two
opinions, nor vainly endeavor to blend them into one. Observe this, you who
know not what spirit ye are of: who call yourselves men of a catholic spirit,
only because you are of a muddy understanding: because your mind is all in a
mist: because you have no settled, consistent principles, but are for jumbling
all opinions together. Be convinced, that you have quite missed your way: you
know not where you are. You think you are got into the very spirit of Christ;
when in truth you are nearer the spirit of a^^^ ^^rist. Go first and learn the
first elements of (...) gospel of Christ, and then shall you learn to be of a
truly catholic spirit.

2. From what has been said we may learn, Secondly, That a catholic spirit is
not any kind of practical latitudinarianism. It is not indifference as to
public worship, or as to the outward manner of performing it. This likewise
would not be a blessing but a curse. Far from being an help thereto, it would
so long as it remained be an unspeakable hinderance to the worshipping of God
in spirit and in truth. But the man of a truly catholic spirit, having weighed
all things in the balance of the sanctuary, has no doubt, no scruple at all
concerning that particular mode of worship wherein he joins. He is clearly
convinced, that this manner of worshipping of God is both scriptural and
rational. He knows none in the world, which is more scriptural, none which is
more rational. Therefore without rambling hither and thither, he cleaves close
thereto, and praises God for the opportuninity of so doing.

3. Hence we may, Thirdly, learn, That a catholic spirit is not indifference to
all congregations. This is another sort of latitudinarianism no less absurd and
unscriptural than the former. But it is far from a man of a truly catholic
spirit. He is fixed in his congregation as well as his principles. He is united
to one, not only in spirit, but by all the outward ties of christian
fellowship. There he partakes of all the ordinances of God. There he receives
the Supper (...) ^he Lord. There he pours out his soul in ^^^^ic prayer, and
joins in public praise and thanksgiving. There he rejoices to hear the word of
reconciliation, the gospel of the grace of God. With these his nearest, his
best beloved brethren, on solemn occasions he seeks God by fasting. These
particularly he watches over in love, as they do over his soul, admonishing,
exhorting, comforting, reproving, and every way building up each other in the
faith. These he regards as his own household, and therefore according to the
ability God has given him, naturally cares for them, and provides that they may
have all the things that are needful for life and godliness.

4. But while he is steadily fixed in his religious principles, in what he
believes to be the truth as it is in Jesus; while he firmly adheres to that
worship of God, which he judges to be most acceptable in his sight, and while
he is united by the tenderest and closest ties, to one particular congregation:
his heart is enlarged toward all mankind, those he knows and those he does not:
he embraces with strong and cordial affection, neighbors and strangers,
friends and enemies. This is catholic or universal love. And he that has this,
is of a catholic spirit. For love alone gives the title to this character.
Catholic love is a catholic spirit.

5. But if we take this word in the strictest sense, a man of a catholic
spirit, is one who in the manner above mentioned, gives his hand to all whose
hearts are right with his heart. One who knows how to value and praise God, for
all the advantages he enjoys; with ^^^rd to the knowledge of the things of God,
the true scriptural manner of worshipping him; and above all, his union with a
congregation, fearing God and working righteousness. One who retaining these
blessings with the strictest care, keeping them as the apple of his eye, at the
same time love as friends, as brethren in the Lord, as members of Christ and
children of God, as joint partakers now of the present kingdom of God, and
fellow heirs of his eternal kingdom, all of whatever opinion or worship or
congregation, who believe in the Lord Jesus Christ; who love God and man; who
rejoice to please and fearing to offend God, are careful to abstain from evil
and zealous of good works. He is the man of a truly catholic spirit, who bears
all these continually upon his heart, who having an unspeakable tenderness for
their persons, and longing for their welfare, does not cease to commend them to
God in prayer, as well as to plead their cause before men; who speaks
comfortably to them, and labors by all his words to strengthen their hands, in
God. He assists them to the uttermost of his power in all things, spiritual and
temporal. He is ready "To spend and be spent for them; yea, to lay down his
life for their sake."

6. Thou, O man of God, think on these things. If thou art already in this way,
go on. If thou have heretofore mistook the path, bless God who has brought
thee back. And now run the race which is set before thee, in the royal ^^y of
universal love. Take heed, lest thou be ^^ther ^^^ering in thy judgment, or
straitened in thy bowels. But keep an even pace, rooted in the faith once
delivered to the saints, and grounded in love, in true catholic love, till ^^o^
art swallowed up in love for ever and ever.

CHRISTIAN PERFECTION. A SERMON
ON PHILIPPIANS iii. 12. Not as though I had already attained, either were
already perfect.


1. THERE is scarce any expression in holy writ, which has given more offense
than this. The word perfect is what many cannot bear. The very sound of it is
an abomination to them. And whosoever pr^^ches perfection (as the phrase is) i.
e. asserts that it is attainable in this life, runs great hazard of being
accounted by them, worse than a heathen man or a publican.

2. And hence some have advised; wholly to lay aside the use of those
expressions; "because they have given so great offense." But are they not found
in the oracles of God? If so, by what authority, can any messenger of God lay
them aside, even though all men should be offended? We have not so learned
Christ; neither may we thus give place to the devil. Whatsoever God has
spoken, that will we speak, ^^^ther (...) will hear, or whether they will
forbear: Knowing that then alone can any minister of Christ be part from the
blood of all men, when he has not shunned to declare unto them all the counsel
of God.

3. We may not therefore lay these expressions aside, seeing they are the words
of God, and not of man. But we may, and ought to explain the meaning of them;
that those who are sincere of heart, may not err to the right hand or to the
left, from the mark of the prize of their high calling. And this is the more
needful to be done, because in the verse already repeated, the apostle speaks
of himself as not perfect: Not, says he, as though I were already perfect. And
yet immediately after, in the fifteenth verse, he speaks of himself, yea and
many others, as perfect. Let us, says he, as many as be perfect, be thus
minded.

4. In order therefore to remove the difficulty arising from this seeming
contradiction, as well as to give light to them who are pressing forward to the
mark, and that those who are lame be not turned out of the way, I shall
endeavor to show, First, In what sense christians are not, and, Secondly, In
what sense they are perfect.


I. 1. In the first place I shall endeavor to show, in what sense christians
are not perfect. And both from experience and scripture it appears, first, that
they are not perfect in knowledge: They are not so perfect in this life, as to
be free from ignorance. They know, it may be in common with other men, many
things re^^^ing to the present world: And they know, with regard to the world
to come, the general truths which God has revealed. They know likewise (what
the natural man receives not; for these things are spiritually discerned)
"What manner of love it is, wherewith the Father has loved them, that they
should be called the sons of God;" They know the mighty working of his spirit
in their hearts, and the wisdom of his providence, directing all their paths,
and causing all things to work together for their good. Yea, they know in every
circumstance of life, what the Lord requires of them, and how "to keep a
conscience void of offense both toward God and toward man."

2. But innumerable are the things which they know not. "Touching the Almighty
himself, they cannot search him out to perfection. Lo, these are but a part of
his ways; but the thunder of his power, who can understand?" They cannot
understand, I will not say, "how there are three that bear record in heaven,
the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit, and these three are one;" Or how the
eternal Son of God "took upon himself the form of a servant:" But not any one
attribute, not any one circumstance of Divine Nature. Neither is it for them to
know the times and seasons, when God will work his great works upon the earth;
no note ven those which he has in part revealed, by his servants and prophets,
since the world began. Much less do they know, when God having "accomplished
the number of his elect will hasten his kingdom: When the heavens shall pass
away with a great noise, and the elements shall melt with fervent heat."

3. They know not the reasons even of many of his present dispensations with
the sons of men: But are constrained to rest here, though "Clouds and darkness
are round about him, righteousness and judgment are the habitation of his
feat." Yea, often with regard to his dealings with themselves does their Lord
say unto them, "What I do, thou know not now; but thou shall know
hereafter." And how little do they know, of what is ever before them, of even
the visible works of his hands? How "he spreads the north over the empty
place, and hangs the earth upon nothing?" How he unites all the parts of this
vast machine by a secret chain which cannot be broken? So great is the
ignorance, so very little the knowledge of even the best of men.

II. 4. No one then is so perfect in this life, as to be free from ignorance.
Nor, secondly, from mistake, which indeed is almost an unavoidable consequence
of it: seeing those who know but in part, are ever liable to err, touching the
things which they know not. It Is true, the children of God do not mistake, as
to the things essential to salvation. They do not "put darkness for light, or
light for darkness," neither "seek death in the error of their life." For they
are taught of God, and the way which he teaches them, the way of holiness is
so plain, that "the wayfaring man though a fool, need not err, therein." But in
things unessential to salvation, they do err, and that frequently. The best and
wisest of men are frequently mistaken, even with regard to facts: believing
those things not to have been, which really were, or those to have been done,
which were not. Or suppose they are not mistaken as to the fact itself, they
may be, with regard to its circumstances; believing them, or many of them, to
have been quite different, from what in truth they were. And hence cannot but
arise many farther mistakes. Hence they may believe either past or present
actions, which were, or are evil, to be good; and such as were, or are good, to
be evil. Hence also they may judge, not according to truth, with regard to the
characters of men: And that not only by supposing good men to be better, or
wicked men to be worse than they are; but by believing them to have been, or to
be good men, who were, or are very wicked: Or, perhaps, those to have been, or
to be wicked men, who were, or are holy and unreproveable.

5. Nay, with regard to the holy scriptures themselves, as careful as they are
to avoid it, the best of men are liable to mistake, and do mistake day by day:
Especially, with respect to those parts-thereof, which less immediately relate
to practice. Hence even the children of God are not agreed, as to the
interpretation of many places in holy writ: Nor i^ their difference of opinion
any proof that they are not the children of God on either side. But it is a
proof, that we are no more to expect any living man, to be infallible than to
be omniscient.

6. If it be objected to what has been observed under this and the preceding
head, that St. John speaking to his brethren in the faith, says, Ye, have an
unction from the holy one, and know all things, 1. John ii. 20. The answer is
plain, "Ye know all things that are needful for your soul's health." That the
apostle never de^^^^d to extend this farther, that he could not speak ^t in an
absolute sense, is clear first from hence, that otherwise he would describe the
disciple as (...) his Master; seeing Christ himself, as man, knew not all
things. -- Of that hour, says he, knows no man, no not the Son, but the
Father only. It is clear, secondly, from the apostle's own words that follow:
"These things have I written unto you concerning them that deceive you:" As
well as from his frequently repeated caution, let no man deceive you; which had
been altogether needless, had not those very persons, who had that unction from
the holy one been liable not to ignorance only; but to mistake also.

7. Even christians therefore are not so perfect, as to be free either from
ignorance or error. We may, thirdly, add; nor from infirmities. Only let us
take care to understand this word aright. Only let us not give that soft title
to known sins, as the manner of some is. So, one man tells us, Every man has
his infirmity, and mine is drunkenness: Another has the infirmity of
uncleanness; another of taking God's holy name in vain. And yet another has the
infirmity of calling his brother, thou fool, or returning railing for railing.
It is plain, that all you who thus speak, if ye repent not, shall with your
infirmities, go quick into hell. But I mean hereby, not only those which are
properly termed bodily infirmities, but all those inward or outward
imperfections, which are not of a moral nature. Such are weakness or slowness
of understanding, dullness or confusedness of apprehension, incoherency of
thought, irregular quickness or heaviness of imagination. Such (to ^^^tion no
more of this kind) is the want of a ready or retentive memory. Such in another
kind are, those commonly in some measure consequent upon these: Namely,
slowness of speech, impropriety of language, ungracefulness of pronunciation;
to which one might add a thousand nameless defects, either in conversation or
behavior. These are the infirmities which are found in the best of men, in a
larger or smaller proportion. And from these none can hope to be perfectly
freed, till the spirit returns to God that gave it.

8. Nor can we expect till then, to be wholly free from temptation. Such
perfection belongs not to this life. It is true, there are those who being
given up to work all uncleanness with greediness, scarce perceive the
temptations which they resist not, and so seem to be without temptation. There
are also many whom the wise enemy of souls seeing to be fast asleep in the dead
form of godliness, will not tempt to gross sin, lest they should awake, before
they drop into everlasting burnings. I know, there are also children of God who
being now justified freely, having found redemption in the blood of Christ, for
the present feel no temptation. God has said to their enemies, "Touch not mine
anointed, and do my children no harm." And for this season, it may be for weeks
or months, he causes them to ride on high places, be bears them as on eagles
wings, above all the fiery darts of the wicked one. But this state will not
last always, as we may learn from that single consideration, that the Son of
God himself, in the days of his flesh was tempted even to the end of his life.
Therefore so let his servant expect to be; for it is enough that he be as his
master.

9. Christian perfection therefore does not imply (as some men seem to have
imagined an exemption either from ignorance or mistake, or infirmities or
temptations. Indeed it is only another term for holiness. They are two names
for the same thing. Thus, every one that is holy, is in the scripture sense,
perfect. Yet we may, lastly, observe, that neither in this respect is there any
absolute perfection on earth. There is no Perfection of degrees, as it is
termed; none which does not admit of a continual increase. So that how much
soever any man has attained, or in how high a degree soever he is perfect, he
has still need to grow in grace, and daily to advance in the knowledge and
love of God his Savior.

II. 1. In what sense then are christians perfect? This is what I shall
endeavor, in the second place to show. But it should be premised, that there
are several stages in christian life as in natural: Some of the children of God
being but new born babes; others having attained to more maturity. And
accordingly St. John, in his first epistle (chap. ii. 12, etc.) applies himself
severally, to those he terms little children, those he styles young men, and
those whom he entitles fathers. "I write unto you, little children," says the
apostle, "because your sins are forgiven you:" Because thus far you have
attained, being "justified freely you have peace with God, through Jesus Christ.
I write unto you, young men, because ye have overcome the wicked one; or (as he
afterward adds) because ye are strong, and the word of God abides in you."
Ye have quenched the fiery darts of the wicked one, the doubts and fears,
wherewith he disturbed your first peace; and the witness of God that your sins
are forgiven, now abides in your heart. "I write unto you, fathers, because ye
have known him that is from the beginning." Ye have known both the Father and
the Son, and the Spirit of Christ in your inmost soul Ye are "perfect men,
being grown up to the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ."

2. It is of these chiefly I speak in the latter part of this discourse. For
these only are perfect christians. But even babes in Christ are in such a sense
perfect, or born of God (an expression taken also in diverse senses) as first,
Not to commit sin. If any doubt of this privilege of the sons of God, the
question is not to be decided by abstract reasonings, which may be drawn out
into an endless length, and leave the point just as it was before. Neither is
it to be determined by the experience of this or that particular person. Many
may suppose they do not commit sin, when they do; but this proves nothing
either way. "To the law and to the testimony," we appeal. "Let God be true, and
every man a liar." By his word will we abide, and that alone. Hereby we ought
to be judged.

3. Now the word of God plainly declares, that even those who are justified,
who are born again in the lowest sense, do not continue in sin; that they
cannot "live any longer therein (Romans vi. 1, 2.) that they are planted together
in the likeness of the death of Christ (ver. 5.) That their old man is
crucified with him, the body of sin being destroyed, so that thenceforth they
do not serve sin: that being dead with Christ, they are freed from sin," (ver.
6, 7.) that they are dead unto sin, and alive unto God (ver. 11.) That "sin
has no more dominion over them, who are not under the law, but under grace;
but that these being free from sin, are become the servants of righteousness,"
verses 14, 18.

4. The very least which can be implied in these words, is, that the persons
spoken of therein, namely, all real christians or believers in Christ, are made
free from outward sin. And the same freedom which St Paul here expresses in
such variety of phrases, St. Peter expresses in that one (1 Pet. iv. 1, 2.)
"(...) that has suffered in the flesh, has ceased from sin, -- that he no
longer should live -- to the desires of men, but to the will of God." For this
ceasing from sin, if it be interpreted in the lowest sense, as regarding only
the outward behavior, must denote the ceasing from the outward act, from any
outward transgression of the law.

5. But most express are the well known words of St. John, in the third chapter
of his first epistle, verse the eighth, etc. "He that commiteth sin is of the
devil; for the devil sins from the beginning. For this purpose the son of
God was manifested, that he might destroy the works of the devil. Whosoever is
born of God, does not commit sin. For his seed remains in him, and he cannot
sin, because he is born of God." And those in the fifth, chap. verse 18. "We
know that whosoever is born of God sins not. But he that is begotten of God
keeps himself, and that wicked one touches him not."

6. Indeed it is said, this means only, he sins not wilfully; or he does not
commit sin habitually; or, not as other men do; or, not as he did before. But
by whom is this said? By St. John? No. There is no such word in the text: Nor
in the whole chapter; nor in all this epistle; nor in any part of his writings
whatsoever. Why then, the best way to answer a bold assertion is, simply to
deny it. And if any man can prove it from the word of God, let him bring forth
his strong reasons.

7. And a sort of reason there is, which has been frequently brought to support
these strange assertions, drawn from the examples recorded in the word of God,
"What, say they, did not Ahraham himself commit sin, prevaricating and denying
his wife? Did not Moses commit sin, when he provoked God, at the waters of
strife? Nay, to produce one for all, did not even David the man after God's own
heart, commit sin, in the matter of Uriah the Hittite, even murder and
adultery?" It is most sure he did. All this is true. But what is it you would
infer from hence? It may be granted, first, that David, in the general course
of his life, was one of the holiest men among the Jews. And, secondly, that the
holiest men among the Jews did sometimes commit sin. But if you would hence
infer, that all christians do, and must commit sin, as long as they live: This
consequence we utterly deny. It will never follow from those premises.

8. Those who argue thus, seem never to have considered that declaration of our
Lord ( Matthew. xi. 11.) "Verily I say unto you, among them that are born of
women, there has not risen a greater than John the Baptist. Notwithstanding,
he that is least in the kingdom of heaven is greater than he." I fear indeed
there are some who have imagined the kingdom of heaven here, to mean the
kingdom of glory: As if the Son of God had just discovered to us, that the
least glorified saint in heaven is greater than any man upon earth! To mention
this is sufficiently to refute it. There can therefore no doubt be made but the
kingdom of heaven here, (as in the following verse, where it is said to be
taken by force) or, the kingdom of God, as St. Luke expresses it, is that
kingdom of God on earth, whereunto all true believers in Christ, all real
christians belong. In these words then our Lord declares two things. First,
That before his coming in the flesh among all the children of men, there had
not been one greater than John the Baptist: Whence it evidently follows, that
neither Abraham, David, nor any Jew was greater than John. Our Lord, secondly,
declares, that he which is least in the kingdom of God (in that kingdom which
he came to set up on earth, and which, the voilent now began to take by force)
is greater than he. Not a greater prophet (as some have interpreted the word)
for this is palpably false in fact. But greater in the grace of God, and the
knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ. Therefore we cannot measure the privileges
of real christians, by those formerly given to the Jews. Their ministration (or
dispensation) we allow was glorious; but ours exceed in glory. So that
whosoever would bring down the christian dispensation to the Jewish standard,
whosoever gleans up the examples of weakness, recorded in the law and the
prophets, and thence infers, that they who have put on Christ, are endued with
no greater strength, does "greatly err, neither knowing the scriptures, not the
power of God."

9. But are there not assertions in scripture which prove the same thing, if it
cannot be inferred from those examples? Does not the scripture say expressly,
Even a just man sins seven times a day? I answer, No. The scripture says no
such thing. There is no such text in all the bible. That which seems to be
intended is the sixteenth verse of the twenty fourth chapter of the Proverbs:
The words of which are these. "A just man falls seven times, and rises up
again," But this is quite another thing. For, first, the words, a day, are not
in the text. So that if a just man falls seven times in his life, it is as much
as is affirmed here. Secondly, Here is no mention of falling into sin at all;
what is here mentioned is, falling into temporal affliction. This plainly
appears from the verse before, the words of which are these: "Lay not wait, O
wicked man, against the dwelling of the righteous; spoil not his resting
place." It follows, "For a just man falls seven times, and rises up again:
But the wicked shall fall into mischief." As if he had said, "God will deliver
him out of his trouble. But when thou fallest, there shall be none to deliver
thee."

10. But however in other places, continue the objectors, Solomon does assert
plainly, "There is no man that sins not (1 Kings viii. 46. 2 Chronicles. vi. 36.)
yea, there is not a just man upon earth that does good, and sins not"
Eccles. vii. 20.) I answer, without doubt, thus it was in the days of Solomon.
Yea, thus it was, from Adam to Moses, from Moses to Solomon, and from Solomon
to Christ. There was then no man that sinned not. Even from the day that sin
entered into the world, there was not a just man upon earth that did good, and
sinned not, until the Son of God was manifested to take away our sins. It is
unquestionably true, that "the heir, as long as he is a child, differs
nothing from a servant." And that even so they (all the holy men of old, who
were under the Jewish dispensation) were during that infant state of the
church, "in bondage under the elements of the world. But when the fullness of
the time was come, God sent forth his Son, made under the law, to redeem them
that were under the law, that they might receive the adoption of sons; that
they might receive that grace which is now made manifest by the appearing of
our Savior, Jesus Christ, who has abolished death, and brought life and
immortality to light through the gospel," (2. Tim. i. 10.) Now therefore they
are no more servants, but sons. So that whatsoever was the case of those under
the law, we may safely affirm with St. John, that since the gospel was given,
"He that is born of God, sins not."

11. It is of great importance to observe, and that more carefully than is
commonly done, the wide difference that is between the Jewish and the Christian
dispensation: And that ground of it which the same apostle assigns in the
seventh chapter of his gospel, verse 38, etc. After he had there related those
words of our blessed Lord, "He that believes on me, as the scripture has
said, out of his belly shall flow rivers of living water," he immediately
subjoins, "This spoke he of the Spirit, (...), which they who should believe on
him, were afterward to receive. For the Holy Ghost was not yet given, because
that Jesus was not yet glorified." Now the apostle cannot mean here (as some
have taught) that the miracle working power of the Holy Ghost was not yet
given. For this was given: our Lord had given it to all his apostles, when he
first sent them forth to preach the gospel. He then gave them Power over
unclean spirits to cast them out; Power to heal the sick, yea, to raise the
dead. But the Holy Ghost was not yet given in his sanctifying graces, as he was
after Jesus was glorified. "It was then when he ascended up on high, and led
captivity captive, that he received those gifts for man, yea, even for the
rebellious, that the Lord God might dwell among them. And when the day of
pentecost was fully come, then first it was, that they who waited for the
promise of the Father, were made more than conquerors over sin, by the Holy
Ghost given unto them.

12. That this great salvation from sin was not given till Jesus was glorified,
St. Peter also plainly testifies; where speaking of his brethren in the flesh,
as now receiving the end of their faith, the salvation of their souls, he adds
(1. Pet. i. 9.10, etc.) "Of which salvation the prophets have enquired and
searched diligently, who prophesied of the grace (i. e. the gracious
dispensation) that should come unto you: searching what, or what manner of time
the Spirit of Christ which was in them did signify, when it testified before
hand the sufferings of Christ and the glory (the glorious salvation) that
should follow. Unto whom it was revealed, that not unto themselves, but unto us
they did minister, the things which are now reported unto you by them that have
preached the gospel unto you, with the Holy Ghost sent down from heaven (viz.
at the day of pentecost, and so unto all generations, into the hearts of all
true believers.) On this ground even the grace which was brought unto them by
the revelation of Jesus Christ, the apostle might well build that strong
exhortation, "Wherefore girding up the loins of your mind, -- as he which has
called you is holy, so be ye holy in all manner of conversation.

13. Those who have duly considered these things must allow, that the
privileges of christians, are in no wise to be measured by what the old
testament records concerning those who were under the Jewish dispensation:
seeing the fullness of times is now come; the Holy Ghost is now given: The great
salvation of God is brought unto men, by the revelation of Jesus Christ. The
kingdom of heaven is now set up on earth; concerning which the Spirit of God
declared of old (so far is David from being the pattern or standard of
christian perfection) "He that is feeble among them at that day, shall be as
David: And the house of David shall be as God, as the angel of the Lord before
them." (Zech. xii. 8.)

14. If therefore you would prove that the apostle's words, he that is born of
God sins not, are not be understood, according to there plain, natural,
obvious meaning, it is from the new testament you are to bring your proofs:
else you will fight as one that beats the air. And the first of these which
is usually brought, is taken from the examples recorded in the new testament.
"The apostles themselves (it is said) committed sin: Nay the greatest of them,
Peter and Paul: St. Paul, by his sharp contention with Barnabas, and St. Peter,
by his dissimulation at Antioch." Well; suppose both Peter and Paul did then
commit sin: What is it you would infer from hence? That all the other apostles
committed sin sometimes? There is no shadow of proof of this. Or, would you
thence infer, that all the other christians of the apostolic age committed sin?
Worse and worse; this is such an inference as one would imagine a man in his
senses could never have thought of. Or, will you argue thus; "If two of the
apostles did once commit sin, then all other christians, in all ages, do, and
will commit sin as long as they live." Alas, my brother! a child of common
understanding, would be ashamed of such reasoning as this. Least of all can you
with any color of argument infer, "That any man must commit sin at all." No;
God forbid we should thus speak. No necessity of sinning was laid upon them.
The grace of God was surely sufficient for them. And it is sufficient for us at
this day. With the temptation which fell on them, there was a way to escape; as
there is to every soul of man in every temptation. So that whosoever is tempted
to any sin, need not yield; for no man is tempted above that he is able to bear.

15. "But St. Paul besought the Lord thrice, and yet he could not escape from
his temptation." Let us consider his own words literally translated. "There was
given to me, a thorn to the flesh, an angel, or messenger of satan, to busset
me. Touching this I besought the Lord thrice, that it or he might depart from
me. And he said unto me, my grace is sufficient for thee. For my strength is
made perfect in weakness. Most gladly therefore will I rather glory in these my
weaknesses, that the strength of Christ may rest upon me. Therefore I take
pleasure in weaknesses, -- for when I am weak, then am I strong."

16. As this scripture is one of the strong holds of the patrons of sin, it may
be proper to weigh it thoroughly. Let it be observed then, first, It does by no
means appear, That this thorn, whatsoever it was, occasioned St. Paul to commit
sin: Much less laid him under any necessity of doing so. Therefore, from hence
it can never be proved that any christian must commit sin. Secondly, The
ancient fathers inform us, it was bodily pain: A violent headache, says
Tertullian, (de pudic) to which both Chrysostom and St. Jerome agree. St.
Cyprian * De mortalitate.
expresses it a little more generally in those terms, Many and grievous
torments of the flesh and of the body. Carnis and corporis multa a gravia
tormenta.
Thirdly, To this exactly agree the apostles own words, "A thorn to the flesh,
to smite, beat, or buffet me. My strength is made perfect in weakness." Which
same word occurs no less than four times in these two verses only. But
fourthly, Whatsoever it was, it could not be either inward or outward fin. It
could no more be inward stirrings, than outward expressions, of pride, anger,
or lust. This is manifest beyond all possible exception, from the words that
immediately follow, "Most gladly will I glory in these my weaknesses, that the
strength of Christ may rest upon me. What? Did he glory in pride, in anger, in
lust? Was it through these weaknesses, that the strength of Christ rested upon
him? He goes on; Therefore I take pleasure in weaknesses; for when I am weak,
then am I strong; i. e. When I am weak in body, then am I strong in spirit. But
will any man dare to say, when I am weak by pride or lust, then am I strong in
spirit? I call you all to record this day, who find the strength of Christ
resting upon you, can you glory in anger, or pride, or lust? can you take
pleasure in these Infirmities? Do these weaknesses make you strong? would you
not leap into hell, were it possible, to escape them? Even by yourselves then
judge, whether the apostle could glory, and take pleasure in them? Let it be,
lastly, observed, that this thorn was given to St. Paul above fourteen years
before he wrote this epistle: Which itself was wrote several years before he
finished his course. So that he had after this a long course to run, many
battles to fight, many victories to gain, and great increase to receive in all
the gifts of God, and the knowledge of Jesus Christ. Therefore from any
spiritual weakness (if such had been) which he at that time felt, we could by
no means infer, that he was never made strong, that Paul, the aged, the father
in Christ, still labored under the same weaknesses: That he was in no higher
state till the day of his death. From all which it appears, that this instance
of St. Paul is quite foreign to the question, and does in no wise clash with
the affection of St. John, He that is born of God sins not.

17. "But does not St. James, directly contradict this? His words are, In many
things we offend all, chap. iii. ver, 2. And is not offending the same as
committing sin?" In this place I allow it is. I allow the persons here spoken
of did commit sin, yea, that they all committed many sins. But who are the
persons here spoken of? Why, those many masters or teachers, whom God had not
sent (probably the same vain men who taught that faith without works, which is
so sharply reproved in the preceding chapter.) Not the apostle himself, nor any
real christian. That in the word we (used by a figure of speech, common in all
other, as well as the inspired writings) the apostle could not possibly include
himself, or any other true believer, appears evidently, first, from the same
word, in the ninth verse; Therewith (says he) bless we God, and therewith
curse we men. Out of the same mouth proceeds blessing and cursing. True; but
not out of the mouth of the apostle, nor of any one who is in Christ a new
creature. Secondly, from the verse immediately preceding the text, and
manifestly connected with it. My brethren, be not many masters (or teachers)
knowing that we shall receive the greater condemnation: For in many things we
offend all: We! Who? Not the apostles, nor true believers; but they who knew
they should receive the greater condemnation, because of those many offenses.
But this could not be spoken of the apostle himself, or of any who trod in his
steps; seeing there is no condemnation for them, who walk not after the (...),
but after the spirit. Nay, thirdly, the very verse itself proves, that we
offend all, cannot be spoken, either of all men, or of all christians; for in
it there immediately follows the mention of a man who offends not, as the we
first mentioned did: from whom therefore he is professedly contradistinguished,
and pronounced, a perfect man.

18. So clearly does St. James, explain himself, and fix the meaning of his own
words. Yet lest any one should still remain in doubt, St. John, writing many
years after St. James, puts the matter entirely out of dispute, by the express
declarations above recited. But here a fresh difficulty may arise. How shall we
reconcile St. John with himself? In one place he declares, "Whosoever is born
of God, does not commit sin." And again, "We know that he which is born of God,
sins not." And yet in another he says, "If we say that we have no sin, we
deceive ourselves, and the truth is not in us." And again, "If we say that we
have not sinned, we make him a liar, and his word is not in us."

19. As great a difficulty as this may at first appear, it vanishes away if we
observe, first, That the tenth verse fixes the sense of the eighth: If we say
we have to sin, in the former, being explained by, If we say we have not
sinned, in the latter verse. Secondly, That the point under present
consideration is not whether we have or have not sinned heretofore; and neither
of these verses assert, that we do sin, or commit sin now. Thirdly, That the
ninth verse explains both the eighth and tenth; "If we confess our sins, he is
faithful and just to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from all
unrighteousness: as if he had said, I have before affirmed, the blood of Jesus
Christ cleanses us from all sin. But let no man say, I need it not: I have no
sin to be cleansed from. If we say that we have no sin, that we have not
sinned, we deceive ourselves and make God a liar. But if we confess our fins,
he is faithful and just, not only to forgive our sins, but also to cleanse us
from all unrighteousness, that we may go and fin no more."

20. St. John therefore is well consistent with himself, as well as with the
other holy writers: As will yet more evidently appear, if we place all his
assertions touching this matter in one view. He declares, First, The blood of
Jesus Christ cleanses us from all sin. Secondly, No man can say, I have not
sinned. I have no sin to be cleansed from. Thirdly, but God is ready both to
forgive our past sins, and to save us from them for the time to come. Fourthly,
"These things I write unto you," says the apostle, "that you may not sin: but
if any man should sin," or have sinned (as the word might be rendered) he need
not continue in sin, seeing "we have an advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ
the righteous." Thus far all is clear. But lest any doubt should remain, in a
point of so vast importance, the apostle resumes this subject in the third
chapter, and largely explains his own meaning. Little children, says he, let
no man deceive you (as though I had given any encouragement to those that
continue in sin.) "He that does righteousness, is righteous even as he is
righteous. He that commits sin is of the devil: for the devil sins from
the beginning. For this purpose the son of God was manifested, that he might
destroy the works of the devil. Whosoever is born of God does not commit sin:
for his seed remains in him, and he cannot sin, because he is born of God. In
this the children of God are manifest, and the children of the devil." (verses
7, -- 10.) Here the point, which till then might possibly have admitted of some
doubt in weak minds, is purposely settled by the last of the inspired writers,
and decided in the clearest manner. In conformity therefore both to the
doctrine of St. John, and to the whole tenor of the new testament, we fix this
conclusion, "A christian is so far perfect, as not to commit sin."

21. This is the glorious privilege of every christian, yea, though he be but a
babe in Christ. But it is only of those who are strong in the Lord, and have
overcome the wicked one, or rather of those who have known him that is from the
beginning, that it can be affirmed they are in such a sense perfect; as,
Secondly, to be freed from evil thoughts, and evil tempers. First, from evil or
sinful thoughts. But here let it be observed, that thoughts concerning evil,
are not always evil thoughts: that a thought concerning sin, and a sinful
thought, are widely different. A man, for instance, may think of a murder which
another has committed, and yet this is no evil or sinful thought. So our
blessed Lord himself, doubtless thought of, or understood the thing spoken by
the devil, when he said, "All this will I give thee, if thou will fall down and
worship me." Yet had he no evil or sinful thought, nor indeed was capable of
having any. And even hence it follows, that neither have real christians. For
"every one that is perfect is as his master," (Luke vi. 40.) Therefore, if he
was free from evil or sinful thoughts, so are they likewise.

22. And indeed, whence should evil thoughts proceed, in the servant who is as
his master? Out of the heart of man (if at all) proceed evil thoughts, (Mark
vii. 21.) If therefore his heart be no longer evil, then evil thoughts can no
longer proceed out of it. If the tree were corrupt, so would be the fruit; but
the tree is good. The fruit therefore is good also, (Matthew. xii. 38.) Our Lord
himself bearing witness, "Every good tree brings forth good fruit. A good
tree cannot bring forth evil fruit, as a corrupt tree cannot bring forth good
fruit," Matt. vii. 17, 18.

23. The same happy privilege of real christians, St. Paul asserts from his own
experience. "The weapons of our warfare," says he, "are not carnal, but mighty
through God to the pulling down of strong holds: Casting down imaginations,"
(or reasonings rather, for so the word (...)signifies; all the reasonings of
pride and unbelief against the declarations, promises or gifts of God) "and
every high thing that exalts itself against the knowledge of God; and
bringing into captivity every thought to the obedience of Christ," 2 Cor. ^. 5,
etc.

24. And as christians indeed, are freed from evil thoughts, so are they,
Secondly, from evil tempers. This is evident from the above mentioned
declaration of our Lord himself: "The disciple is not above his master; but
every one that is perfect shall be as his master." He had been delivering just
before some of the sublimest doctrines of Christianity, and some of the most
grievous to flesh and blood. "I say unto you, love your enemies, do good to
them which hate you: and unto him that smites thee on the one cheek, offer
also the other." Now these he well knew the world would not receive; and
therefore immediately adds, "Can the blind lead the blind? Will they not both
fall into the ditch?" As if he had said, "Do not confer with flesh and blood
touching these things, with men void of spiritual discernment, the eyes of
whose understanding God has not opened, lest they and you perish together." In
the next verse he removes the two grand objections, with which these wise fools
meet us at every turn, "These things are too grievous to be borne," or, "They
are too high to be attained:" Saying, "The disciple is not above his master:"
therefore, if I have suffered, be content to tread in my steps. And doubt ye
not then, but I will fulfill my word: "For every one that is perfect, shall be
as his master." But his master was free from all finful tempers. So therefore
is his disciple, even every real christian.

25. Every one of these can say with St. Paul, "I am crucified with Christ.
Nevertheless I live; Yet not I, but Christ lives in me:" Words that manifestly
describe a deliverance from inward, as well as from outward sin. This is
expressed both negatively, I live not: my evil nature, the body of sin is
destroyed: and positively, Christ lives in me, and therefore all that is holy,
and just, and good. Indeed both these, Christ lives in me, and I live not, are
inseparably connected. For "What communion has light with darkness, or Christ
with belial?"

26. He therefore who lives in true believers, has "purified their hearts by
faith:" Insomuch that "every one that has Christ in him, the hope of glory,
purifieth himself even as he is pure (1 John iii. 3.) He is purified from
pride; for Christ was lowly of heart. He is pure from self-will, or desire; for
Christ desired only to do the will of his Father, and to finish his work. And
he is pure from anger, in the common sense of the word; for Christ was meek and
gentle, patient and long-suffering. I say, in the common sense of the word; for
all anger is not evil. We read of our Lord himself (Mark iii. 5.) that he once
looked round with anger. But with what kind of anger? The next word shows;
(...), being at the same time grieved for the hardness of their hearts. So then
he was angry at the sin, and in the same moment grieved for the sinners. Angry
or displeased at the offense; but sorry for the offenders. With anger, yea,
hatred, he looked upon the thing; with grief and love upon the persons. Go thou
that art perfect, and do likewise. Be thus angry, and thou sinnest not: Feeling
a displacency at every offense against God; but only love and tender compassion
to the offender.

27. Thus does Jesus save his people from their sins: And not only from outward
sins, but also from the sins of their hearts; from evil thoughts and from evil
tempers. True, say some; we shall thus be saved from our sins; but not till
death, not in this world. But how are we to reconcile this with the express
words of St. John? "Herein is our love made perfect, that we may have boldness
in the day of judgment, because as he is, so are we in this world." The apostle
here beyond all contradiction speaks of himself and other living christians, of
whom (as though he had foreseen this very evasion, and set himself to overturn
it from the foundation) he flatly affirms, that not only at, or after death,
but in this world, they are as their master, 1 John iv. 17.

28. Exactly agreeable to this are his words in the first chapter of this
epistle (verse 6, etc.) "God is light, and in him is no darkness at all. If we
walk in the light, we have fellowship one with another, and the blood of Jesus
Christ his Son cleanses us from all sin." And again, "If we confess our sins,
he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from all
unrighteousness." Now it is evident, the apostle here also speaks of a
deliverance wrought in this world. For he says not, "the blood of Christ will
cleanse," (at the hour of death, or in the day of judgment) but it cleanses
(at the time present) us (living christians) from all sin. And it is equally
evident, that if any sin remain, we are not cleansed from all sin: if any
unrighteousness remain in the soul, it is not cleansed from all
unrighteousness. Neither let any sinner against his own foul say, that this
relates to justification only, or the cleansing us from the guilt of sin;
First, Because this is confounding together what the apostle clearly
distinguishes; who mentions first, to forgive us our sins, and then "to cleanse
us from all unrighteousness." Secondly, Because this is asserting justification
by works in the strongest sense possible: it is making all inward, as well as
outward holiness, necessarily previous to justification. For if the cleansing
here spoken of is no other than the cleansing us from the guilt of sin, then we
are not cleansed from guilt; i. e. are not justified, unless on condition of
"walking in the light, as he is in the light." It remains then, that christians
are saved in this world from all sin; from all unrighteousness: that they are
now in such a sense perfect, as not to commit sin, and to be freed from evil
thoughts and evil tempers.

29. Thus has the Lord fulfilled the things he spoke by his holy prophets,
which have been since the world began: by Moses in particular, saying (Deuteronomy.
xxx. 6.) "I will circumcise thine heart, and the heart of thy seed, to love the
Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul;" by David crying out,
"Create in me a clean heart, and renew a right spirit within me:" And most
remarkably by Ezekiel, in those words, "Then will I sprinkle clean water upon
you, and ye shall be clean; from all your filthiness, and from all your idols
will I cleanse you. A new heart also will I give you, and a new spirit will I
put within you, and cause you to walk in my statutes, and he shall keep my
judgments and do them. -- Ye shall be my people, and I will be your God. I will
also ^^ve you from all your uncleanness. -- Thus says the Lord your God, in
the day that I shall have cleansed you from all your iniquities -- the heathen
shall know that I the Lord build the ruined places, -- I the Lord have spoken
it, -- and I will do it, Ezekiel. xxxvi. 25, etc.

30. Having therefore these promises dearly beloved, both in the law and in the
prophets, and having the prophetic word confirmed unto us in the gospel, by our
blessed Lord and his apostles: "Let us cleanse ourselves from all filthiness of
flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of God." Let us fear lest so
many promises being made us of "entering into his rest (which he that has
entered into, is ceased from his own works) any (...) should come short of it.
This one thing (...) do; forgeting those things which are behind, and reaching
forth unto those things which are before, let us press toward the mark for the
prize of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus:" Crying unto him day and
night, 'till we also are "delivered from the bondage of corruption into the
glorious liberty of the sons of God."

THE Promise of Sanctification. EZEKIEL xxxvi. 25, (...)
By the REV. MR. CHARLES WESLEY.
I.
GOD of all Power, and Truth and Grace,
Which shall from age to age endure;
Whose Word, when heaven and earth shall pass
Remains, and stands for ever sure:
II.
Calmly to thee my soul looks up,
And waits thy promises to prove;
The object of my steadfast hope,
The seal of thine eternal love.
III.
That I thy mercy may proclaim,
That all mankind thy truth may see,
Hallow thy great and glorious name,
And perfect holiness in me.
IV.
Chose from the world if now I stand
Adorned in Righteousness divine,
If brought unto the promised land,
I justly call the Savior mine;
V.
Perform the work thou have begun,
My inmost soul to thee convert:
Love me, for ever, love thine own,
And sprinkle with thy blood my heart.
VI.
Thy sanctifying spirit pour,
To quench my thirst, and wash me clean;
Now, Father, let the gracious shower
Descend, and make me pure from sin.
VII.
Purge me from every sinful blot;
My idols all be cast aside:
Cleanse me from every evil thought;
From all the filth of self and pride.
VIII.
Give me a new, a perfect heart,
From doubt, and fear, and sorrow free;
The mind which was in Christ impart,
And let my spirit cleave to thee.
IX.
O take this heart of stone away,
(Thy rule it does not, cannot own)
In me no longer let it stay:
O take away this heart of stone.
X.
The hatred of my carnal mind
Out of my flesh at once remove;
Give me a tender heart, resigned,
And pure, and filled with faith and love.
XI.
Within me thy good Spirit place,
Spirit of health, and love, and power;
Plant in me thy victorious grace,
And sin shall never enter more.
XII.
Cause me to walk in Christ my way,
And I thy statutes shall fulfill;
In every point thy law obey,
And perfectly perform thy will.
XIII.
Have thou not said, who can no^ lie,
That I thy law shall keep and do?
Lord, I believe, though men deny:
They all are false, but thou art true.
XIV.
O that that I now, from sin released,
Thy word might to the utmost prove!
Enter into the promised rest,
The Canaan of thy perfect love!
XV.
There let me ever, ever dwell;
Be thou my God, and I will be
Thy servant: O set to thy seal;
Give me eternal life in thee.
XVI.
From all remaining filth within,
Let me in thee salvation have:
From actual, and from inbred sin,
My ransomed soul persist to save.
XVII.
Wash out my old original stain:
Tell me no more, It cannot be,
Demons or men! the Lamb was slain,
His blood was all poured out for me.
XVIII.
Sprinkle it, Jesu, on my heart!
One drop of thy all-cleansing blood
Shall make my sinfulness depart,
And fill me with the life of God.
XIX.
Father, supply my every need:
Sustain the life thyself have given;
Call for the corn, the living bread,
The manna that comes down from heaven.
XX.
Thy gracious fruits of righteousness,
Thy blessing's unexhausted store,
In me abundantly increase;
Nor let me ever hunger more.
XXI.
Let me no more in deep complaint
"My leanness, O my leanness," cry!
Alone consumed with pining want,
Of all my Father's children I!
XXII.
The painful thirst, the fond desire,
Thy joyous presence shall remove,
While my full soul does still require
Thy whole eternity of Love.
XXIII.
Holy, and true, and righteous Lord,
I wait to prove thy perfect will:
Be mindful of thy gracious word,
And stamp me with thy Spirit's seal.
XXIV.
Thy faithful mercies let me find,
In which thou causest the to trust;
Give me thy meek and lowly mind,
And lay my spirit in the dust.
XXV.
Show me how foul my heart has been
When all renewed by grace I am;
When thou have emptied me of sin,
Show me the fullness of my shame.
XXVI.
Open my faith's interior eye,
Display thy glory from above;
And all I am shall sink and die,
Lost in astonishment and love.
XXVII.
Confound, o'erpower me with thy grace,
I would be by myself abhorred,
(All might, all majesty, all praise,
All glory be to Christ my Lord!)
XXVIII.
Now let me gain perfection's height!
Now let me into nothing fall!
Be less than nothing, in thy sight,
And feel that Christ is all in all!
Wandering Thoughts. A SERMON
On 2 CORINTHIANS x. 4. Bringing into captivity every thought to the obedience
of Christ.


1. BUT will God so bring every thought into captivity to the obedience of
Christ, that no wandering thought will find a place in the mind, even while we
remain in the body? so some have vehemently maintained: Yea, have affirmed,
that none are perfected in love, unless they are so far perfected in
understanding, that all wandering thoughts are done away: unless not only every
affection and temper, be holy, and just, and good, but every individual thought
which arises in the mind, be wise and regular.

2. This is a question of no small importance. For how many of those who fear
God, yea and love him, perhaps with all their heart, have been greatly distressed
on this account? How many, by not understanding it right, have not only been
distressed, but greatly hurt in their souls? cast into unprofitable, yea,
mischievous reasonings, such as slackened their motion toward God, and
weakened them in running the race set before them. Nay many, through
misapprehensions of this very thing, have cast away the precious gift of God.
They have been induced first to doubt of, and then to deny the work God had
wrought in their fouls; and hereby have grieved the Spirit of God, 'till he
withdrew and left them in utter darkness.

3. How is it then, that amidst the abundance of books which have been lately
published almost on all subjects, we should have none upon wandering Thoughts?
At least none that will at all satisfy a calm and serious mind? in order to do
this in some degree, I purpose to enquire, I. What are the several sorts of
wandering thoughts? II. What are the general occasions of them? III. Which of
them are sinful, and which not? IV. Which of them we may expect and pray to be
delivered from?


I. 1. I purpose to enquire, first, what are the several sorts of wandering
thoughts? The particular sorts are innumerable; but in general, they are of two
sorts, thoughts that wander from God, and thoughts that wander from the
particular point we have in hand.

2. With regard to the former, all our thoughts are naturally of this kind. For
they are continually wandering from God: we think nothing about him. God is not
in all our thoughts: we are, one and all, as the apostle observes, without God
in the world. We think of what we love: but we do not love God: Therefore we
think not of him. Or if we are now and then constrained to think of him for a
time, yet as we have no pleasure therein, nay rather, as these thoughts are not
only insipid, but distasteful and irksome to us, we drive them out as soon as
we can, and return to what we love to think of. So that the world and the
things of the world, what we shall eat, what we shall drink, what we shall put
on: what we shall see, what we shall hear, what we shall gain: how we shall
please our senses or our imagination, takes up all our time, and engrosses all
our thoughts. So long therefore as we love the world, that is, so long as we
are in our natural state, all our thoughts, from morning to evening, and from
evening to morning, are no other than wandering thoughts.

3. But many times we are not only without God in the world, but also fighting
against him: As there is in every man by nature a carnal mind which is enmity
against God; no wonder therefore that men abound with unbelieving thoughts:
Either saying in their hearts there is no God, or questioning, if not denying
his power or wisdom, his mercy, or justice, or holiness. No wonder, that they
so often doubt of his providence, at least, of its extending to all events: Or
that even though they allow it, they still entertain murmuring or repining
thoughts. Nearly related to these and frequently connected with them, are proud
and vain imaginations. Again: sometimes they are taken up with angry, malicious
or revengeful thoughts: At other times, with airy scenes of pleasure, whether
of sense or imagination: whereby the earthy sensual mind, becomes more earthy
and sensual still. Now by all these they make flat war with God; these are
wandering thoughts of the highest kind.

4. Widely different from these are the other sort of wandering thoughts: In
which the heart does not wander from God, but the understanding wanders from
the particular point it had then in view. For instance: I sit down to consider
those words in the verse preceding the text, "The weapons of our warfare are
not carnal, but mighty through God." I think, "this ought to be the case with
all that are called christians." But how far is it otherwise? Look round into
almost every part of what is termed the christian world! what manner of weapons
are these using? In what kind of warfare are they engaged, "While men, like
fiends, each other tear
In all the hellish rage of war?"
See how these christians love one another! Wherein are they preferable to
Turks and Pagans? What abomination can be found among Mahometans or Heathens,
which is not found among christians also?" And thus my mind runs off, before I
am aware, from one circumstance to another. Now all these are in some sense
wandering thoughts. For although they do not wander from God, much less fight
against him, yet they do wander from the particular point I had in view.

II. Such is the nature, such are the sorts (to speak rather usefully, than
philosophically) of wandering thoughts. But what are the general occasions of
them? This we are, in the second place to consider.

1. And it is easy to observe, that the occasion of the former sort of thoughts
which oppose or wander from God, are in general, sinful tempers. For instance.
Why is not God in all the thoughts, in any of the thoughts of a natural man?
For a plain reason: be he rich or poor, learned or unlearned, he is an atheist;
(though not vulgarly so called) he neither knows nor loves God. Why are his
thoughts continually wandering after the world? Because he is an idolater. He
does not indeed worship an image, or bow down to the stock of a tree: yet he is
sunk into equally damnable idolatry: he loves, that is, worships the world. He
seeks happiness in things that are seen, in the pleasures that perish in the
using. Why is it that his thoughts are perpetually wandering from the very end
of his being, the knowledge of God in Christ? Because he is an unbeliever;
because he has no faith, or at least, no more than a devil. So all these
wandering thoughts easily and naturally spring from that evil root of unbelief.

2. The case is the same in other instances: pride, anger, revenge, vanity,
lust, covetousness, every one of them occasion thoughts suitable to their own
nature. And so does every sinful temper, of which the human mind is capable.
The particulars it is hardly possible, nor is it needful to enumerate. It
suffices to observe, that as many evil tempers as find a place in any soul, so
many ways that soul will depart from God, by the worst kind of wandering
thoughts.

3. The occasions of the latter kind of wandering thoughts, are exceeding
various. Multitudes of them are occasioned, by the natural union between the
soul and body. How immediately and how deeply is the understanding affected by
a diseased body! Let but the blood move irregularly in the brain, and all
regular thinking is at an end. Raging madness ensues, and then farewell to all
evenness of thought. Yea, let only the spirits be hurried or agitated to a
certain degree, and a temporary madness, a delirium prevents all settled
thought. And is not the same irregularity of thought in a measure occasioned by
every nervous disorder? So does "the corruptible body press down the soul, and
cause it to muse about many things."

4. But does it only cause this in the time of sickness, of preternatural
disorder? Nay, but more or less, at all times, even in a state of perfect
health. Let a man be ever so healthy, he will be more or less delirious, every
four-and-twenty hours. For does he not sleep? And while he sleeps, is he not
liable to dream? And who then is master of his own thoughts, or able to
preserve the order and consistency of them? Who can then keep them fixed to any
one point, or prevent their wandering from pole to pole?

5. But suppose we are awake, are we always so awake, that we can steadily
govern our thoughts? Are we not unavoidably exposed to contrary extremes, by
the very nature of this machine, the body? Sometimes we are too heavy, too dull
and languid, to pursue any chain of thought. Sometimes, on the other hand, we
are too lively. The imagination, without leave, starts to and fro, and carries
us away, hither and thither, whether we will or no: and all this, from the
merely natural motion of the spirits, or vibration of the nerves.

6. Farther. How many wanderings of thought may arise, from those various
associations of our ideas, which are made entirely without our knowledge, and
independently on our choice? How these connexions are formed we cannot tell:
But they are formed in a thousand different manners. Nor is it in the power of
the wisest or holiest of men, to break those associations, or to prevent what
is the necessary consequence of them, and matter of daily observation. Let the
fire but touch one end of the train, and it immediately runs on to the other.

7. Once more. Let us fix our attention as studiously as we are able on any
subject, yet let either pleasure or pain arise, especially if it be intense,
and it will demand our immediate attention, and attach our thought to itself.
It will interrupt the steadiest contemplation, and divert the mind from its
favorite subject.

8. These occasions of wandering thoughts lie within, are wrought into our very
nature. But they will likewise naturally and necessarily arise, from the
various impulse of outward objects. Whatever strikes upon the organ of sense,
the eye or ear, will raise a perception in the mind. And accordingly, whatever
we see or hear, will break in upon our former train of thought. Every man
therefore that does any thing in our fight, or speaks any thing in our hearing,
occasions our mind to wander more or less from the point it was thinking of
before.

9. And there is no question but those evil spirits, who are continually
seeking whom they may devour, make use of all the foregoing occasions, to hurry
and distract our minds. Sometimes by one, sometimes by another of these means,
they will harrass and perplex us, and so far as God permits, interrupt our
thoughts, particularly when they are engaged on the best subjects. Nor is this
at all strange: they well understand the very springs of thought, and know on
which of the bodily organs, the imagination, the understanding, and every other
faculty of the mind more immediately depends. And hereby they know, how by
affecting those organs, to affect the operations dependent on them. Add to
this, that they can inject a thousand thoughts, without any of the preceding
means: it being as natural for spirit to act upon spirit, as for matter to act
upon matter. These things being considered, we cannot wonder, that our thoughts
so often wander from any point which we have in view.

III. 1. What kind of wandering thoughts are sinful, and what not, is the third
thing to be enquired into. And first, all those thoughts which wander from God,
which leave him no room in our minds, are undoubtedly sinful. For all these
imply practical atheism, and by these we are without God in the world. And so
much more are all those which are contrary to God, which imply opposition or
enmity to him. Such are all murmuring discontented thoughts, which say in
effect, we will not have thee to rule over us: all unbelieving thoughts,
whether with regard to his being, his attributes, or his providence. I mean his
particular providence over all things as well as all persons in the universe:
That without which not a sparrow falls to the ground, by which the hairs of our
head are all numbered. For as to a general Providence (vulgarly so called)
co^^ra distinguished from a particular, it is only a decent, well-sounding
word, which means just nothing.

2. Again. All thoughts which spring from sinful tempers, are undoubtedly
sinful. Such, for instance, are those that spring from a revengeful temper,
from pride, or lust, or vanity. "An evil tree cannot bring forth good fruit."
Therefore if the tree be evil, so must the fruit be also.

3. And so must those be, which either produce or seed any sinful temper: Those
which either give rise to pride or vanity, to anger or love of the world, or
confirm and increase these or any other unholy temper, passion, or affection.
For not only whatever flows from evil is evil, but also whatever leads to it;
whatever tends to alienate the soul from God, and to make or keep it earthly,
sensual, and devilish.

4. Hence even those thoughts which are occasioned by weakness or disease, by
the natural mechanism of the body, or by the laws of vital union, however
innocent they may be in themselves, do nevertheless become sinful, when they
either produce or cherish and increase in us any sinful temper: suppose the
desire of the flesh, the desire of the eye, or the pride of life. In like
manner the wandering thoughts which are occasioned, by the words or actions of
other men, if they cause or feed any wrong disposition, then commence sinful.
And the same we may observe of those which are suggested or injected by the
devil. When they minister to any earthly or devilish temper (which they do,
whenever we give place to them, and thereby make them our own) then they are
equally sinful, with the tempers, to which they minister.

5. But abstracting from these cases, wandering thoughts, in the latter sense
of the word, that is, thoughts wherein our understanding wanders, from the
point it has in view, are no more sinful than the motion of blood in our veins,
or of the spirits in our brain, if they arise from an infirm constitution, or
from some accidental weakness or distemper, they are as innocent as it is to
have a weak constitution, or a distempered body. And surely no one doubts but a
bad state of nerves, a fever of any kind, and either a transient or a lasting
delirium, may consist with perfect innocence. And if they should arise in a
soul which is united to an healthful body, either from the natural union
between the body and the soul, or from any of ten thousand changes, which may
occur in those organs of the body, that minister to thought; In any of these
cases they are as perfectly innocent as the causes from which they spring. And
so they are when they spring from the casual, involuntary associations of our
ideas.

6. If our thoughts wander from the point we had in view, by means of other
men, variously affecting our senses, they are equally innocent still: For it is
no more a sin, to understand what I see and hear, and in many cases cannot help
seeing, hearing, and understanding, than it is to have eyes and ears. "But if
the devil injects wandering thoughts, are not those thoughts evil?" They are
troublesome, and in that sense evil; but they are not sinful. I do not know
that he spoke to our Lord with an audible voice; perhaps he spoke to his heart
only, when he said, "All these things will I give thee, if thou will fall down
and worship me." But whether he spoke inwardly or outwardly, our Lord doubtless
understood what he said. He had therefore a thought correspondent to those
words. But was it a sinful thought? We know it was not. In him was no sin,
either in action, or word, or thought. Nor is there any sin in a thousand
thoughts of the same kind, which satan may inject into any of our Lord's
followers.

7. It follows, that none of these wandering thoughts (whatever unwary persons
have affirmed, thereby grieving whom the Lord had not grieved) are inconsistent
with perfect love. Indeed if they were, then not only sharp pain, but sleep
itself would be inconsistent with it: sharp pain, for whenever this supervenes,
whatever we were before thinking of, it will interrupt our thinking, and of
course draw our thoughts into another channel: Yea, and sleep itself, as it is
a state of insensibility and stupidity: And such as is generally mixed with
thoughts wandering over the earth, loose, wild and incoherent. Yet certainly
these are consistent with perfect love: So then are all wandering thoughts of
this kind.

IV. 1. From what has been observed, it is easy to give a clear answer to the
last question, What kind of wandering thoughts we may expect and pray to be
delivered from?

From the former sort of wandering thoughts, those wherein the heart wanders
from God; from all that are contrary to his will, or that leave us without God
in the world, every one that is perfected in love, is unquestionably delivered.
This deliverance therefore we may expect: This we may, we ought to pray for.
Wandering thoughts of this kind imply unbelief, if not enmity against God. But
both of these he will destroy, will being utterly to an end. And indeed, from
all sinful wandering thoughts we shall be absolutely delivered. All that are
perfected in love are delivered from these; else they were not saved from sin.
Men and devils will tempt them all manner of ways. But they cannot prevail over
them.

2. With regard to the latter sort of wandering thoughts, the case is widely
different. 'Till the cause is removed, we cannot in reason expect the effect
should cease. But the causes or occasions of these will remain, as long as we
remain in the body. So long therefore we have all reason to believe, the
effects will remain also.

3. To be more particular. Suppose a soul, however holy, to dwell in a
distempered body. Suppose the brain be so thoroughly disordered, as that raging
madness follows: Will not all the thoughts be wild and unconnected, as long as
that disorder continues? Suppose a fever occasions that temporary madness,
which we term a delirium, can there be any just connection of thought, 'till
that delirium is removed? Yea, suppose what is called a nervous disorder, to
rise to so high a degree, as to occasion at least a partial madness, will there
not be a thousand wandering thoughts? And must not these irregular thoughts
continue, as long as the disorder which occasions them?

4. Will not the case be the same, with regard to those thoughts that
necessarily arise from violent pain? They will, more or less, continue while
that pain continues, by the inviolable order of nature. This order likewise
will obtain, where the thoughts are disturbed, broken or interrupted, by any
defect of the apprehensions, judgment or imagination, flowing from the natural
constitution of the body. And how many interruptions may spring from the
unaccountable and involuntary association of our ideas? Now all these are
directly or indirectly caused by the corruptible body pressing down the mind.
Nor therefore can we expect them to be removed, 'till "this corruptible shall
put on incorruption."

5. And then only, when we lie down in the dust, shall we be delivered from
those wandering thoughts which are occasioned by what we see and hear, among
those by whom we are now surrounded. To avoid these we must go out of the
world. For as long as we remain therein, as long as there are men and women
round about us, and we have eyes to see and ears to hear, the things which we
daily see and hear, will certainly affect our mind, and will more or less,
break in upon and interrupt our preceding thoughts.

6. And as long as evil spirits roam to and fro in a miserable, disordered
world, so long they will assault (whether they can prevail or no) every
inhabitant of flesh and blood. They will trouble even those whom they cannot
destroy: They will attack if they cannot conquer. And from these attack of our
restless, unwearied enemies, we must not look for an entire deliverance, till
we are lodged "Where the wicked cease from troubling, and where the weary are
at rest."

7. To sum up the whole. To expect deliverance from those wandering thoughts
which are occasioned by evil spirits, is to expect that the devil should die or
fall asleep; or at least should no more go about as a roaring lion. To expect
deliverance from those which are occasioned by other men, is to expect either
that men should cease from the earth; or that we should be absolutely secluded
from them, and have no intercourse with them: or that having eyes we should not
see, neither hear with our ears, but be as senseless as stocks or stones. And
to pray for deliverance from those which are occasioned by the body, is in
effect to pray that we may leave the body. Otherwise it is praying for
impossibilities, and absurdities; praying that God would reconcile
contradictions, by continuing our union with a corruptible body, without the
natural, necessary consequences of that union. It is as if we should pray to be
angels and men, mortal and immortal at the same time. Nay, but when that which
is immortal is come, mortality is done away.

8. Rather let us pray, both with the spirit and with the understanding, that
all these things may work together for our good: That we may suffer all
infirmities of our nature, all the interruptions of men, all the assaults and
suggestions of evil spirits, and in all be more than conquerors. Let us pray,
that we may be delivered from all sin, that both root and branch may be
destroyed; that we may be "cleansed from all pollution of flesh and spirit,"
from every evil temper and word-and wor^: That we may "love the Lord our God
with all our heart, with all our mind, and with all our soul, and with all our
strength:" That all the fruit of the Spirit may be found in us; not only love,
joy, peace; but also long-suffering, gentleness, goodness, fidelity, meekness,
temperance. Pray that all these things may flourish and abound, may increase in
you more and more, 'till an abundant entrance be ministered unto you, into the
everlasting kingdom of our Lord Jesus Christ!

A SERMON
ON 2 COR. ii. 11. We are not ignorant of his Devices.


THE devices whereby the wise god of this world, labors to destroy the
children of God, or at least to torment whom he cannot destroy, to perplex and
hinder them in running the race which is set before them, are numberless as the
stars of heaven, or the sand upon the seashore. But it is of one of them only
that I now propose to speak, (although exerted in various ways) whereby he
endeavors to divide the gospel against itself, and by one part of it to
overthrow the other.

2. The inward kingdom of heaven, which is set up in the heart of all that
repent and believe the gospel, is no other than "righteousness and peace and
joy in the Holy Ghost." Every babe in Christ knows we are made partakers of
these, the very hour that we believe in Jesus. But these are only the first
fruits of his Spirit: the harvest is not yet. Although these blessings are
inconceivably great, yet we trust to see grea^er than these. We trust to love
the Lord our God, not only as we do now, with a weak though sincere affection,
but "w^ all our heart, with all our mind, with all our soul, and with all our
strength." We look for power to "rejoice evermore, to pray without ceasing and
in every thing to give thanks;" knowing "this is the will of God concerning us
in Christ Jesus."

3. We expect to be made perfect in love, in that love which casts out all
painful fear, and all desire but that of glorifying him we love, of loving and
serving him more and more. We look for such an increase in the experimental
knowledge and love of God our Savior, as will enable us always to walk in the
light, as he is in the light. We believe the whole mind will be in us which was
also in Christ Jesus: That we shall love every man so as to be ready to lay
down our life for his sake: So as by this love to be freed from anger and
pride, and from every unkind affection. We expect to be cleansed from all our
idols, from all filthiness whether of flesh or spirit; to be saved from all our
uncleanness, inward or outward, to be purified as he is pure.

4. We trust in his promise who cannot lie, that the time will surely come,
when in every word and work we shall do his blessed will on earth as it is done
in heaven. When all our conversation shall be seasoned with salt, all meet to
minister grace to the hearers: When "whether we eat or drink or whatever we
do," it shall be done "to the glory of God:" when all our words and deeds shall
be "in the name of the Lord Jesus, giving thanks unto God, even to God the
Father through him."

5. Now this is the grand device of satan, to destroy the first work of God in
the soul, or at least, to hinder its increase, by our expectation of that
greater work. It is therefore my present design, First, to point out the
several ways whereby he endeavors this: and, Secondly, To observe how we may
retort these fiery darts of the wicked one: How we may rise the higher by what
he intends for an occasion of our falling.

I. 1. I am, first, to point out the several ways wereby Satan endeavors to
destroy the first work of God in the soul, or at least, to hinder its increase,
by our expectation of that greater work. And first. He endeavors to damp our
joy in the Lord, by the consideration of our own vileness, sinfulness,
unworthiness, added to this, that there must be a far greater change than is
yet, or we cannot see the Lord. If we knew we must remain as we are, even to
the day of our death, we might possibly draw a kind of comfort, poor as it was,
from that necessity. But as we know, we need not remain in this state, as we
are assured, there is a greater change to come, and that unles^ sin be done
away in this life, we cannot see God in glory: that subtle adversary often
damps the joy we should otherwise feel in what we have already attained, by a
perverse representation of what we have not attained, and the absolute
necessity of attaining it. So that we cannot rejoice in what we have, because
there is more which we have not. We cannot rightly taste the goodness of God,
who has done so great things for us, because there are so much greater things,
which as yet he has not done. Likewise the deeper conviction God works in us
of our present unholiness, and the more vehement desire we feel in our heart,
of the entire holiness he has promised, the more are we tempted to think
lightly of the present gifts of God, and to undervalue what we have already
received, because of what we have not received.

2. If he can prevail thus far, if he can damp our joy, he will soon attack our
peace also. He will suggest, "Are you fit to see God? He is of purer eyes than
to behold iniquity. How then can you flatter yourself, so as to imagine he
beholds you with approbation? God is holy: You are unholy. What communion has
light with darkness? How is it possible that you, unclean as you are, should be
in a state of acceptance with God? You see indeed the mark, the prize of your
high calling. But do you not see, it afar off? How can you presume then to
think, that all your sins are already blotted out? How can this be, until you
are brought nearer to God, until you bear more resemblance to him?" Thus will
he endeavor, not only to shake your peace, but even to overturn the very
foundation of it: to bring you back by insensible degrees, to the point from
whence you set out first: Even to seek for justification by works, or by your
own righteousness; to make something in you the ground of your acceptance, or
at least necessarily previous to it.

3. Or if we hold fast, other foundation can no man lay than that which is
laid, even Jesus Christ; and I am justified freely by God's grace, through the
redemption which is in Jesus: Yet he will not cease to urge, "But the tree is
known by its fruits. And have you the fruits of justification? Is that mind in
you which was in Christ Jesus? Are you dead unto sin and alive unto
righteousness? Are you made conformable to the death of Christ, and do you know
the power of his resurrection?" And then, comparing the small fruits we feel in
our souls, with the fullness of the promises, we shall be ready to conclude,
surely God has not said, that my sins are forgiven me! Surely I have not
received the remission of my sins; for what lot have I among them that are
sanctified?"

4. More especially in the time of sickness and pain, he will press this with
all his might. "Is it not the word of him that cannot lie, without holiness no
man shall see the Lord? But you are not holy. You know it well; you know
^oliness is the full image of God. And how far is this above, out of your
sight? You cannot attain unto it. Therefore all your labor has been in vain.
All these things you have suffered in vain. You have spent your strength for
naught. You are yet in your sins and must therefore perish at last." And thus,
if your eye be not steadily fixed on him who has borne all your sins, he will
bring you again under that fear of death, whereby you was so long subject unto
bondage: And by this means impair, if not wholly destroy, your peace as well as
joy in the Lord.

5. But his masterpiece of subtilty is still behind. Not content to strike at
your peace and joy, he will carry his attempts farther yet: He will level his
assault against your righteousness also. He will endeavor to shake, yea, if it
be possible, to destroy the holiness you have already received by your very
expectation of receiving more, of attaining all the image of God.

6. The manner wherein he attempts this, may partly appear from what has been
already observed. For, First, By striking at our joy in the Lord, he strikes
likewise at our holiness: seeing joy in the Holy Ghost is a precious means of
promoting every holy temper; a choice instrument of God whereby he carries on
much of his work in a believing soul. And it is a considerable help not only to
inward, but also to outward holiness. It strengthens our hands to go on in the
work of faith and in the labor of love; manfully to "fight the good fight of
faith, and to lay hold on eternal life." It is peculiarly designed of God to be
a balance both against inward and outward sufferings: To "lift up the hands
that hang down and confirm the feeble knees." Consequently, whatever damps our
joy in the Lord, proportionably obstructs our holiness. And therefore so far as
satan shakes our joy, he hinders our holiness also.

7. The same effect will ensure, if he can by any means either destroy or shake
our peace. For the peace of God is another precious means of advancing the
image of God in us. There is scarce a greater help to holiness than this, a
continual tranquillity of spirit, the evenness of a mind stayed upon God; a calm
repose in the blood of Jesus. And without this, it is scarce possible to grow
in grace, and in the vital knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ. For all fear
(unless the tender, filial fear) freezes and be numbs the soul. It binds all
the springs of spiritual life, and stops all motion of the heart toward God.
And doubt, as it were, bemires the soul, so that it sticks fast in the deep
clay. Therefore in the same proportion as either of these prevail, our growth
in holiness is hindered.

8. At the same time that our wise adversary endeavors, to make our conviction
of the necessity of perfect love, an occasion of shaking our peace by doubts
and fears, he endeavors to weaken, if not destroy our faith. Indeed these are
inseparably connected, so that they must stand or fall together. So long as
faith subsists, we remain in peace; our heart stands fast, while it believes in
the Lord. But if we let go our faith, our filial confidence in a loving
pardoning God, our peace is at an end, the very foundation on which it stood
being overthrown. And this is the only foundation of holiness as well as of
peace. Consequently whatever strikes at this, strikes at the very root of all
holiness. For without this faith, without an abiding sense, that Christ loved
me and gave himself for me, without a continuing conviction, that God for
Christ's sake is merciful to me a sinner, it is impossible that I should love
God. "We love him because he first loved us;" and in proportion to the strength
and clearness of our conviction, that he has loved us and accepted us in his
Son. And unless we love God, it is not possible that we should love our
neighbor as ourselves: Nor consequently, that we should have any right
affections, either toward God or toward man. It evidently follows, that
whatever weakens our faith, must in the same degree obstruct our holiness. And
this is not only the most effectual, but also the most compendious way of
destroying all holiness. Seeing it does not effect any one christian temper,
any single grace or fruit of the spirit, but so far as it succeeds, tears up
the very root of the whole work of God.

9. No marvel therefore, that the ruler of the darkness of this world, should
here put forth all his strength. And so we find by experience. For it is far
easier to conceive than it is to express the unspeakable violence, wherewith
this temptation is frequently urged on them, who hunger and thirst after
righteousness. When they see in a strong and clear light, on the one hand, the
desperate wickedness of their own hearts; on the other hand, the unspotted
holiness to which they are called in Christ Jesus: on the one hand, the depth
of their own corruption, of their total alienation from God; on the other, the
height of the Glory of God, that Image of the Holy One wherein they are to be
renewed: There is many times no spirit left in them; they could almost cry out,
with God this is impossible. They are ready to give up both faith and hope, to
cast away that very confidence, whereby they are to overcome all things, and
all things through Christ strengthening them; whereby, after they have done the
will of God, they are to receive the promise.

10. And if they "hold fast the beginning of their confidence steadfast unto the
end," they shall undoubtedly receive the promise of God, reaching through both
time and eternity. But here is another snare laid for our feet. While we
earnestly pant for that part of the promise which is to be accomplished here,
"for the glorious liberty of the children of God," we may be led unawares, from
the consideration of the glory which shall hereafter be revealed. Our eye may
be insensibly turned aside from that "crown which the righteous Judge," has
promised to "give at that day, to all that love his appearing:" And we may be
drawn away from the view of that incorruptible inheritance which is reserved in
heaven for us. But this also would be a loss to our fouls, and an obstruction
to our holiness. For to walk in the continual sight of our goal, is a needful
help in our running the race that is set before us. This it was, the having
"respect unto the recompense of reward," which of old time encouraged Moses,
rather "to suffer affliction with the people of God, than to enjoy the
pleasures of sin for a season: esteeming the reproach of Christ, greater riches
than the treasures of Egypt." Nay, it is expressly said of a greater than him,
That "for the joy that was set before him, he endured the cross and despised
the shame," 'till he "sat down at the right hand of the throne of God." Whence
we may easily infer, how much more needful for us, is the view of that joy set
before us, that we may endure whatever cross the wisdom of God lays upon us,
and press on through holiness to glory.

11. But while we are reaching to this, as well as to that glorious liberty
which is preparatory to it, we may be in danger of falling into another snare
of the devil, whereby he labors to entangle the children of God. We may take
too much "thought for tomorrow," so as to neglect the improvement of today.
We may so expect perfect love, as not to use that, which is already shed abroad
in our hearts. There have not been wanting instances of those, who have greatly
suffered hereby. They were so taken up with what they were to receive
hereafter, as utterly to neglect what they had already received. In expectation
of having five talents more, they buried their one talent in the earth. At
least they did not improve it as they might have done, to the glory of God and
the good of their own souls.

12. Thus does the subtle adversary of God and man, endeavor to make void the
counsel of God, by dividing the gospel against itself, and making one part of
it overthrow the other: while the first work of God in the soul is destroyed by
the expectation of his perfect work. We have seen several of the ways wherein
he attempts this, by cutting off, as it were, the springs of holiness. But this
he likewise does more directly, by making that blessed hope an occasion of
unholy tempers.

13. Thus, whenever our heart is eagerly athirst for all the great and precious
promises, when we pant after the fullness of God, as the heart after the
water-brook, when our soul breaks out in fervent desire, "Why are his
chariot-wheels so long a coming?" He will not neglect the opportunity, of
tempting us to murmur against God. He will use all his wisdom and all his
strength, if happily in an unguarded hour, we may be influenced to repine at our
Lord, for thus delaying his coming. At least, he will labor to excite some
degree of fr^tfulness or impatience: and perhaps of envy at those, whom we
believe to have already attained the prize of our high calling. He well knows,
that by giving way to any of these tempers, we are pulling down the very thing
we would build up. By thus following after perfect holiness, we become more
unholy than before. Yea, there is great danger that our last state should be
worse than the first: Like them of whom the Apostle speaks, in those dreadful
words, "It had been better they had never known the way of righteousness, than
after they had known it, to turn back from the holy commandment delivered to
them."

14. And from hence he hopes to reap another advantage, even to bring up an
evil report of the good way. He is sensible, how few are able to distinguish
(and too many are not willing so to do) between the accidental abuse and the
natural tendency of a doctrine. These therefore, will he continually blend
together, with regard to the doctrine of christian perfection: in order to
prejudice the minds of unwary men against the glorious promises of God. And how
frequently, how generally, I had almost said, how universally has he prevailed
herein? For who is there that observes any of these accidental ill effects of
this doctrine, and does not immediately conclude, this is its natural tendency?
And does not readily cry out, "See, these are the fruits (meaning the natural,
necessary fruits) of such doctrine!" Not so. They are fruits which may
accidentally spring from the abuse of a great and precious truth. But the abuse
of this, or any other scriptural doctrine, does by no means destroy its use.
Neither can the unfaithfulness of man, perverting his right way, "make the
promise of God of none effect." No: let God be true and every man a liar. The
word of the Lord it shall stand. "Faithful is he that has promised: he also
will do it." Let us not then be "removed from the hope of the gospel." Rather
let us observe, which was the second thing proposed, how we may retort these
fiery darts of the wicked one: how we may rise the higher, by what he intends
for an occasion of our falling.

II. 1. And, first, Does satan endeavor to damp your joy in the Lord, by the
consideration of your sinfulness, added to this, that without entire, universal
"holiness no man can see the Lord?" You may cast back this dart upon his own
head, while through the grace of God, the more you feel of your own vileness,
the more you rejoice in confident hope, that all this shall be done away. While
you hold fast this hope, every evil temper you feel, though you hate it with a
perfect hatred, may be a means, not of lessening your humble joy, but rather of
increasing it. "This and this, may you say, shall likewise perish from the
presence of the Lord. Like as the wax melts at the fire, so shall this melt
away before his face." By this means the greater that change is, which remains
to be wrought in your soul, the more may you triumph in the Lord and rejoice in
the God of your salvation: Who has done so great things for you already, and
will do so much greater things than these.

2. Secondly, The more vehemently he assaults your peace with that suggestion,
"God is holy, you are unholy. You are immensely distant from that holiness,
without which you cannot see God: how then can you be in the favor of God? How
can you fancy you are justified?" Take the more earnest heed to hold fast that,
Not by works of righteousness which I have done. I am found in him: I am
accepted in the beloved; not having my own righteousness (as the cause either
in whole or in part of our justification before God) but that which is by faith
in Christ, the righteousness which is of God by faith. O bind this about your
neck: write it upon the table of thy heart. Wear it as a bracelet upon thy arm,
as frontlets between thine eyes: I am justified freely by his grace, through
the redemption that is in Jesus Christ. Value and esteem more and more that
precious truth, by grace we are saved through faith. Admire more and more the
free grace of God, in so loving the world as to give his only Son, that
whosoever believes on him might not perish but have everlasting life. So shall
the sense of the sinfulness you feel on the one hand, and of the holiness you
expect on the other, both contribute to establish your peace and to make it
flow as a river. So shall that peace flow on with an even stream, in spite of
all those mountains of ungodliness, which shall become a plain in the day when
the Lord comes, to take full possession of your heart. Neither will sickness
or pain, or the approach of death, occasion any doubt or fear. You know a day,
an hour, a moment with God is as a thousand years. He cannot be streightened
for time, wherein to work whatever remains to be done in your soul. And God's
time is always the best time. Therefore be thou careful for nothing. Only make
thy request known unto him, and that not without doubt or fear, but
thanksgiving. As being previously assured, he cannot withhold from thee any
manner of thing that is good.

3. Thirdly, The more you are tempted to give up your shield, to cast away your
faith, your confidence in his love, so much the more take heed that you hold
fast that, whereunto you have attained. So much the more labor to stir up the
gift of God which is in you. Never let that slip, I have an Advocate with the
Father, Jesus Christ the righteous: And the life I now live, I live by faith in
the Son of God, who loved me and gave himself for me. Be this thy glory and
crown of rejoicing. And see that no one take thy crown. Hold that fast, I know
that my Redeemer lives, and shall stand at the latter day upon the earth. And
I now have redemption in his blood, even the forgiveness of sins. Thus, being
filled with all peace and joy in believing, press on in the peace and joy of
faith to the renewal of thy whole soul, in the image of him that created thee.
Mean while cry continually to God, that thou may see that prize of thy high
calling, not as satan represents it, in a horrid dreadful shape, but in its
genuine native beauty: Not as something that must be, or thou will go to hell,
but as what may be, to lead thee to heaven. Look upon it as the most desirable
gift, which is in all the stores of the rich mercies of God. Beholding it in
the true point of light, thou will hunger after it more and more: Thy whole
soul will be athirst for God, and for this glorious conformity to his likeness.
And having received a good hope of this, and strong consolation through grace,
thou will no more be weary or faint in thy mind, but wilt follow on till thou
attainest.

4. In the same power of faith, press on to glory. Indeed this is the same
prospect still. God has joined from the beginning pardon, holiness, heaven.
And why should man put them asunder? O! beware of this. Let not one link of the
golden chain be broken. God for Christ's sake has forgiven me. He is now
renewing me in his own image. Shortly he will make me meet for himself, and
take me to stand before his face. I whom he has justified through the blood of
his Son, being thoroughly sanctified by his Spirit, shall quickly ascend to the
"New Jerusalem, the city of the living God." Yet a little while and I shall
"Come to the general assembly and church of the firstborn, and to God the
Judge of all, and to Jesus the Mediator of the new covenant." How soon will
these shadows flee away, and the day of eternity dawn upon me! How soon shall I
drink of "the river of the water of life, going out of the throne of God and of
the Lamb? There all his servants shall praise him and shall see his face, and
his name shall be upon their foreheads. And no night shall be there; and they
have no need of a candle or the light of the sun. For the Lord God enlighteneth
them, and they shall reign for ever and ever.

5. And if you thus taste of the good word and the powers of the world to come,
you will not murmur against God, because you are not yet meet for the
inheritance of the saints in light. Instead of repining at your not being
wholly delivered, you will praise God for thus far delivering you. You will
magnify God for what he has done, and take it as an earnest of what he will
do. You will not fret against him, because you are not yet renewed, but bless
him because you shall be; and because now is your salvation from all sin,
nearer than when you first believed. Instead of uselesly tormenting yourself
because the time is not fully come, you will calmly and quietly wait for it,
knowing that it will come and will not tarry. You may therefore the more
cheerfully endure as yet, the burden of sin that still remains in you, because
it will not always remain. Yet a little while and it shall be clean gone. Only
"tarry thou the Lord's leisure: be strong and he shall comfort thy heart, and
put thou thy trust in the Lord.

6. And if you see any who appear (so far as man can judge, but God alone
searches the hearts) to be already partakers of their hope, already "made
perfect in love:" Far from envying the grace of God in them, let it rejoice and
comfort your heart. Glorify God for their sake. "If one member is honored,"
shall not "all the members rejoice with it?" Instead of jealousy or evil
surmising concerning them, praise God for the consolation. Rejoice in having a
fresh proof of the faithfulness of God in fulfilling all his promises. And stir
yourself up the more to "apprehend that for which you also are apprehended of
Christ Jesus."

7. In order to this, redeem the time. Improve the present moment. Buy up every
opportunity of growing in grace, or of doing good. Let not the thought of
receiving more grace tomorrow, make you negligent of today. You have one
talent now. If you expect five more, so much the rather improve that you have.
And the more you expect to receive hereafter, the more labor for God now.
Sufficient for the day is the grace thereof. God is now pouring his benefits
upon you. Now approve yourself a faithful steward, of the present grace of God.
Whatever may be tomorrow, give all diligence today, to "add to your faith
courage, temperance, patience, brotherly kindness and the fear of God," 'till
you attain that pure and perfect love. Let these things be now in you and
abound. Be not now slothful or unfruitful. So shall an entrance be ministered
"into the everlasting kingdom of our Lord Jesus Christ."

8. Lastly, If in time past you have abused this blessed hope of being holy as
he is holy, yet do not therefore cast it away. Let the abuse cease, the use
remain. Use it now to the more abundant glory of God and profit of your own
soul. In steadfast faith, in calm tranquillity of spirit, in full assurance of
hope, rejoicing evermore for what God has done, "press ye on unto perfection."
Daily growing in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ, and going on from
strength to strength, in resignation, in patience, in humble thankfulness for
what ye have attained, and for what ye shall, run the race set before you,
looking unto Jesus, 'till through perfect love ye enter into his glory!

ORIGINAL SIN. A SERMON
On GENESIS, vi. 5. And God saw that the wickedness of man was great in the
earth, and that every imagination of the thoughts of his heart was only evil
continually.


1. HOW widely different is this from the fair pictures of human nature, which
men have drawn in all ages! The writings of many of the ancients abound with
gay descriptions of the dignity of man: whom some of them paint as having all
virtue and happiness in his composition, or at least, entirely in his power,
without being beholden to any other being: yea, as self-sufficient, able to
live on his own stock, and little inferior to God himself.

2. Nor have heathens alone, men who were guided in their researches by little
more than the dim light of reason, but many likewise of them that bear the name
of Christ, and to whom are entrusted the oracles of God, spoke as magnificently
concerning the nature of man, as if it were all innocence and perfection.
Accounts of this kind have particularly abounded in the present century; and
perhaps in no part of the world more than in our own country. Here not a few
persons of strong understanding, as well as extensive learning, have employed
their utmost abilities to show what they termed, "The fair side of human
nature." And it must be acknowledged, That if their accounts of him be just,
man is still but a little lower than the angels, or (as the words may be more
literally rendered) a little less than God.

3. Is it any wonder, that these accounts are very readily received by the
generality of men? For who is not easily persuaded to think favorably of
himself; Accordingly writers of this kind are almost universally read, admired,
applauded. And innumerable are the converts they have made, not only in the
gay, but the learned world. So that it is now quite unfashionable to talk
otherwise, to say any thing to the disparagement of human nature: which is
generally allowed, notwithstanding a few infirmities, to be very innocent and
wise and virtuous.

4. But in the mean time, what must we do with our bibles; for they will never
agree with this. These accounts, however pleasing to flesh and blood, are
utterly irreconcilable with the scriptural. The scripture avers, that by "one
man's disobedience, all men were constituted sinners:" that in Adam all died,
spiritually died, lost the life and the image of God: that fallen, sinful Adam
then begat a son in his own likeness: nor was it possible he should beget him
in any other: for who can bring a clean thing out of an unclean? That
consequently we as well as other men "were by nature dead in trespasses and
sins, without hope, without God in the world," and therefore children of wrath:
That every man may say, "I was shapen in wickedness, and in sin did my mother
conceive me:" that "there is no difference, in that all have sinned and come
short of the glory of God:" Of that glorious image of God, wherein man was
originally created And hence, when "the Lord looked down from heaven upon the
children of men, he saw that they were all gone out of the way," they were
"altogether become abominable: there was none righteous, no not one," none that
truly sought after God: just agreeable this, to what is declared by the Holy
Ghost, in the words above recited, God saw when he looked down from heaven
before, "that the wickedness of man was great in the earth:" so great, that
"every imagination of the thoughts of his heart was only evil continually."

This is God's account of man: from which I shall take occasion, First, To show
what men were before the flood; Secondly, To enquire, whether they are not the
same now? and thirdly to add some inferences.

I. 1. I am, First, By opening the words of the text to show, What men were
before the flood. And we may fully depend on the account here given. For God
saw it, and he cannot be deceived. He "saw that the wickedness of man was
great." Not of this or that man; not of a few men only; not barely of the
greater part, but of man in general, of men universally. The word includes the
whole human race, every partaker of human nature. And it is not easy for us to
compute their numbers, to tell how many thousands and millions they were. The
earth then retained much of its primeval beauty and original fruitfulness. The
face of the globe was not rent and torn, as it is now: and spring and summer
went hand in hand. It Is therefore probable, it afforded sustenance for far more
inhabitants, than it is now capable of sustaining: and these must be immensely
multiplied, while men begat sons and daughters for seven or eight hundred years
together. Yet among all this inconceivable number, only Noah found favor with
God. He alone (perhaps including part of his household) was an exception from
the universal wickedness, which by the just judgment of God, in a short time
after brought on universal destruction. All the rest were partakers in the same
guilt, as they were in the same punishment.

2. God saw all the imaginations of the thoughts of his heart -- Of his soul,
his inward man, the spirit within him, the principle of all his inward and
outward motions. He saw all the imaginations. It is not possible to find a word
of a more extensive signification. It includes whatever is formed, made,
fabricated within; all that is, or passes in the foul; every inclination,
affection, passion, appetite; every temper, design, thought. It must of
consequence include every word and action, as naturally flowing from those
fountains: and being either good or evil, according to the fountain from which
they severally flow.

3. Now God saw that all this, the whole thereof was evil, contrary to moral
rectitude; contrary to the nature of God, which necessarily includes all good;
contrary to the divine will, the eternal standard of good and evil: contrary to
the pure, holy image of God, wherein man was originally created, and wherein he
stood when God surveying the works of his hands, saw them all to be very good:
contrary to justice, mercy and truth, and to the essential relations which each
man bore to his Creator, and his fellow creatures.

4. But was there not good mingled with the evil? Was there not light
intermixed with the darkness? No; none at all: God saw that the whole
imagination of the heart of man was only evil. It cannot indeed be denied, but
many of them, perhaps all, had good motions put into their hearts. For the
Spirit of God did then also strive with man, if happily he might repent: more
especially during that gracious reprieve, the hundred and twenty years, while
the ark was preparing. But still in his flesh dwelt no good thing: all his
nature was purely evil. It was wholly consistent with itself, and unmixt with
any thing of an opposite nature.

5. However, it may still be a matter of enquiry, "Was there no intermission of
this evil? Were there no lucid intervals, wherein something good might be found
in the heart of man?" We are not here to consider, what the grace of God might
occasionally work in his soul. And abstracting from this, we have no reason to
believe, there was any intermission of that evil. For God who saw the whole
imagination of the thoughts of his heart to be only evil, saw likewise, that it
was always the same, that it was only evil continually; every year, every day,
every hour, every moment. He never deviated into good.

II. Such is the authentic account of the whole race of mankind, which he, who
knows what is in man, who searches the heart and tries the reins, has left
upon record for our instruction. Such were all men, before God brought the
flood upon the earth. We are Secondly, to enquire whether they are the same now?

1. And this is certain, the scripture gives us no reason, to think any
otherwise of them. On the contrary, all the above cited passages of scripture
refer to those, who lived after the flood. It was above a thousand years after,
that God declared by David concerning the children of men, "They are all gone
out of the way" of truth and holiness; "there is none righteous, no, not one."
And to this bear all the prophets witness, in their several generations. So
Isaiah, concerning God's peculiar people, (and certainly the heathens were in
no better condition) "The whole head is sick, and the whole heart faint. From
the sole of the foot, even unto the head, there is no soundness, but wounds,
and bruises, and putrefying sores." The same account is given by all the
apostles, yea, by the whole tenor of the oracles of God. From all these we
learn, concerning man in his natural state, unassisted by the grace of God,
that "all the imaginations of the thoughts of his heart" are still "evil, only
evil," and that continually.

2. And this account of the present state of man is confirmed by daily
experience. It is true, the natural man discerns it not: and this is not to be
wondered at. So long as a man born blind, continues so, he is scarce sensible
of his want. Much less, could we suppose a place where all were born without
sight, would they be sensible of the want of it. In like manner, so long as men
remain in their natural blindness of understanding, they are not sensible of
their spiritual wants, and of this in particular. But as soon as God opens the
eyes of their understanding, they see the state they were in before; they are
then deeply convinced, that every man living, themselves especially, are by
nature altogether vanity, that is, folly and ignorance, sin and wickedness.

3. We see, when God opens our eyes, that we were before (...) without God, or
rather, athiests in the world. We had by nature no knowledge of God, no
acquaintance. It is true, as soon as we came to the use of reason, we learned
"the invisible things of God, even his eternal power and godhead, from the
things that are made." From the things that are seen, we inferred the existence
of an eternal, powerful Being, that is not seen. But still, although we
acknowledge, we had no acquaintance with, him. As we know there is an emperor
of China, whom yet we do not know; so we knew, there was a King of all the
earth; yet we know him not. Indeed we could not, by any of our natural
faculties. By none of these could we attain the knowledge of God. We could no
more perceive him by our natural understanding, than we could see him with our
eyes. For "no one knows the Father, but the Son, and he to whom the Son
wills to reveal him. And no one knows the Son, but the Father, and he to
whom the Father reveals him."

4. We read of an ancient king, who, being desirous to know, what was the
natural language of men, in order to bring the matter to a certain issue, made
the following experiment. He ordered two infants, as soon as they were born, to
be conveyed to a place prepared for them, where they were brought up without
any instruction as all, and without ever hearing a human voice. And what was
the event? Why, That when they were at length brought out of their confinement
they spoke no language at all; they uttered only inarticulate sounds, like
those of other animals. Were two infants in like manner to be brought up from
the womb, without being instructed in any religion, there is little room to
doubt, but (unless the grace of God interposed) the event would be just the
same. They would have no religion at all: they would have no more of God, than
the beasts of the field, than the wild ass's colt. Such is natural religion
abstracted from traditional, and from the influences of God's Spirit!

5. And having no knowledge, we can have no love of God: we cannot love him we
know not. Most men talk indeed of loving God, and perhaps imagine they do. At
least, few will acknowledge they do not love him: but the fact is too plain to
be denied. No man loves God by nature, no more than does a stone, or the earth
he treads upon. What we love, we delight in: But no man has naturally any
delight in God. In our natural state, we cannot conceive, how any one should
delight in him. We take no pleasure in him at all: he is utterly tasteless to
us. To love God! It is far above, out of our sight. We cannot naturally attain
unto it.

6. We have by nature not only no love, but no fear of God. It is allowed
indeed, that most men have, sooner or later, a kind of senseless, irrational
fear, properly called superstition, though the blundering Epicureans gave it
the name of religion. Yet even this is not natural, but acquired; chiefly by
conversation, or from example. By nature, God is not in all our thoughts: we
leave him to manage his own affairs, to sit quietly, as we imagine, in heaven,
and leave us on earth to manage ours. So that we have no more of the fear of
God before our eyes, than of the love of God in our hearts.

7. Thus are all men atheists in the world. But atheism itself does not screen
us from idolatry. In his natural state, every man born into the world is a rank
idolater. Perhaps indeed we may not be such in the vulgar sense of the word. We
do not, like the idolatrous heathens, worship molten or graved images. We do
not bow down to the stock of a tree, to the work of our own hands. We do not
pray to the angels or saints in heaven, any more than to the saints that are
upon earth. But what then? We have set up our idols in our hearts; and to these
we bow down, and worship them: we worship ourselves, when we pay that honor to
ourselves, which is due to God only. Therefore all pride is idolatry: it is
ascribing to ourselves, what is due to God alone. And although pride was not
made for man, yet where is the man that is born without it? But hereby we rob
God of his unalienable right, and idolatrously usurp his glory.

8. But pride is not the only sort of idolatry, which we are all by nature
guilty of. Satan has stamped his own image on our heart in self-will also. I
will, said he, before he was cast out of heaven, I will sit upon the sides of
the north. I will do my own will and pleasure, independently on that of my
Creator. the same does every man born in the world say, and that in a thousand
instances. Nay, and avow it too, without ever blushing upon the account,
without either fear or shame. Ask the man, "Why did you do this?" He answers,
"Because I had a mind to it." What is this but, "Because it is my will;" that
is in effect, "Because the devil and I are agreed: because satan and I govern
our actions, by one and the same principle." The will of God, mean time, is not
in his thoughts, is not considered in the least degree; although it be the
supreme rule of every intelligent creature, whether in heaven or earth,
resulting from the essential, unalterable relation, which all creatures bear to
their Creator.

9. So far we bear the image of the devil, and tread in his steps. But at the
next step we leave satan behind; we run into an idolatry, whereof he is not
guilty: I mean, love of the world, which is now as natural to every man, as to
love his own will. What is more natural to us, than to seek happiness in the
creature, instead of the Creator? To seek that satisfaction in the works of his
hands, which can be found in God only? What more natural, than the desire of
the flesh; that is, of the pleasure of sense in every kind? Men indeed talk
magnificently of despising these low pleasures, particularly men of learning
and education. They affect to sit loose to the gratification of those
appetites, wherein they stand on a level with the beasts that perish. But it is
mere affectation; for every man is conscious to himself, that in this respect
he is by nature a very beast. Sensual appetites, even those of the lowest kind,
have, more or less, the do^ over him. They lead him captive; they (...) him to
and fro, in spite of his boasted reason. The man, with all his good breeding
and other accomplishments, has no pre-eminence over the goat. Nay, it is much
to be doubted, whether the beast has not the pre-eminence over him. Certainly
he has, if we may hearken to one of these modern oracles, who very decently
tells us, "Once in a season, beasts too taste of love:
"Only the beast of reason is it is slave,
"And in that folly drudges all the year."
A considerable difference indeed, it must be allowed, there is between man and
man, arising (beside that wrought by preventing grace) from difference of
constitution, and of education. But notwithstanding this, who, that is not
utterly ignorant of himself, can here cast the first stone at another? Who can
abide the test of our blessed Lord's comment on the seventh commandment, "He
that looks on a woman to lust after her, has committed adultery with her
already in his heart?" So that one knows not which to wonder at most, the
ignorance or the insolence of those men, who, speak with such disdain of them,
that are overcome by desires, which every man has felt in his own breast; the
desire of every pleasure of sense, innocent or not, being natural to every
child of man.

10. And so is the desire of the eye, the desire of the pleasures of the
imagination. These arise either from great, or beautiful, or uncommon objects,
if the two former do not coincide with the latter; for perhaps it would appear
upon a diligent enquiry, that neither grand nor beautiful objects please, any
longer than they are new; that when the novelty of them is over, the greatest
part, at least, of the pleasures they give is over; and in the same proportion
as they become familiar, they become flat and insipid. But let us experience
this ever so often, the same desire will remain still. The inbred thirst
continues fixed in the soul: nay, the more it is indulged, the more it
increases, and incites us to follow after another, and yet another object;
although we leave every one with an abortive hope, and deluded expectation.
Yea, "The hoary fool, who many days
"Has struggled with continued sorrow,
"Renews his hope, and fondly lays
"The desperate bet upon tomorrow!
"Tomorrow comes! It Is noon! It Is night!
"This day like all the former flies:
"Yet on he goes, to seek delight
"Tomorrow, 'till tonight he dies!"


11. A third symptom of this fatal disease, the love of the world, which is so
deeply rooted in our nature is, the pride of life, the desire of praise, of the
honor that comes of men. This the greatest admirers of human nature allow to
be strictly natural; as natural as the sight of hearing, or any other of the
external senses. And are they ashamed of it, even men of letters, men of
refined and improved understanding? So far from it, that they glory therein;
they applaud themselves for their love of applause! Yea, eminent Christians, so
called, make no difficulty of adopting the saying of the old, vain heathen,
Animi dissoluti est and nequam, negligere quid de se homines sentiant: "Not to
regard what men think of us, is the mark of a wicked and abandoned mind." So
that to go calm and unmoved through honor and dishonor, through evil report and
good report, is with them a sign of one that is indeed not fit to live; away
with such a fellow from the earth. But would one imagine, that these men had
ever heard of Jesus Christ or his Apostles? Or that they knew who it was that
said, "How can ye believe, who receive honor one of another, and seek not that
honor which comes of God only?" But if this be really so; if it be impossible
to believe, and consequently to please God, so long as we receive or "seek
honor one of another and seek not the honor which comes of God only:" then
in what a condition are all mankind! The christians as well as the heathens!
Since they all seek honor one of another! Since it is as natural for them so
to do, themselves being the judges, as it is to see the light which strikes
upon their eye, or to hear the sound which enters their ear: yea, since they
account it the sign of a virtuous mind, to seek the praise of men; and of a
vicious one, to be content with "the honor which comes of God only!"

III. 1. I proceed to draw a few inferences from what has been said. And,
First, From hence we may learn one grand, fundamental difference between
christianity, considered as a system of doctrines, and the most refined
heathenism. Many of the ancient heathens have largely described the vices of
particular men. They have spoken much against their covetousness and cruelty,
their luxury or prodigality. Some have dared to say, that "no man is born
without vices of one kind or another." But still, as none of them were apprized
of the fall of man, so none of them knew his total corruption. They knew not
that all men were empty of all good, and filled with all manner of evil. They
were wholly ignorant of the entire depravation of the whole human nature, of
every man born into the world, in every faculty of his soul, not so much by
those particular vices, which reign in particular persons, as by the general
flood of atheism and idolatry, of pride, self-will and love of the world. This
therefore, is the first, grand, distinguishing point between heathenism and
christianity. The one acknowledges that many men are insected with many vices,
and even born with a proneness to them; but suppose withal, that in some the
natural good much overbalances the evil. The other declares that all men are
conceived in sin, and shapen in wickedness: that hence there is in every man a
"carnal mind which is enmity against God, which is not, cannot be subject to
his law," and which so infects the whole soul, that there dwells in him, in
his flesh, in his natural state, no good thing; but "all the imagination of the
thoughts of his heart," is evil, only evil, and that continually.

2. Hence we may, Secondly, learn, That all who deny this, call it Original
Sin, or by any other title, are but heathens still, in the fundamental point
which differences heathenism, from christianity. They may indeed allow, that
men have many vices: that they are born with us: and that consequently we are
not born altogether so wise or so virtuous, as we should be: there being few
that will roundly affirm, "We are born with as much propensity to good as to
evil, and that every man is by nature as virtuous and wise, as Adam was at his
creation." But here is the Shibboleth: is man, by nature silled with all manner
of evil? Is he void of all good? is he wholly fallen? Is his soul totally
corrupted? Or, to come back to the text, is "every imagination of the thoughts
of his heart evil continually?" Allow this, and you are so far a christian.
Deny it, and you are but a heathen still.

3. We may learn from hence, in the Third place, What is the proper nature of
religion, of the religion of Jesus Christ. It is (...). God's method of healing
a soul which is thus diseased. Hereby the great physician of souls applies
medicine to heal this sickness; to restore human nature, totally corrupted in
all its faculties. God heals our atheism by the knowledge of himself, and of
Jesus Christ whom he has sent, by giving us faith, a divine evidence and
conviction of God, and of the things of God, in particular of this important
truth, Christ loved me, and gave himself for me. By repentance and lowliness of
heart, the deadly disease of pride is healed; that of self-will by resignation,
a meek and thankful submission to the will of God. And for the love of the
world in all its branches, the love of God is the sovereign remedy. Now this is
properly religion, faith thus working by love, working the genuine, meek
humility, entire deadness to the world, with a loving, thankful acquiescence in
and conformity to the whole will of God.

4. Indeed if man were not thus fallen; there would be no need of all this.
There would be no occasion for this work in the heart, this renewal in the
spirit of our mind." The superfluity of godliness would then be a more proper
expression than the superfluity of naughtiness. For an outside religion without
any godliness at all, would suffice to all rational intents and purposes. It
does accordingly suffice, in the judgment of those who deny this corruption of
our nature. They make very little more of religion, than the famous Mr. Hobbes
did of reason. Accordingly to him, reason is only, "A well ordered train of
words:" according to them, religion is only a well-ordered train of words and
actions. And they speak consistently with themselves: for if the inside be not
full of wickedness, if this be clean already, what remains, but to cleanse the
outside of the cup? Outward reformations, if their supposition be just, is
indeed the one thing needful.

5. But ye have not so learned the oracles of God. Ye know, that he who sees
what is in man gives a far different account both of nature and grace, of our
fall and our recovery. Ye know that the great end of religion is, to renew our
hearts in the image of God, to repair that total loss of righteousness and true
holiness, which we sustained by the sin of our first parent. Ye know that all
religion which does not answer this end, all that stops short of this, the
renewal of our foul in the image of God, after the likeness of him that created
it, is no other than a poor farce, and a mere mockery of God, to the
destruction of our own soul. O beware of all those teachers of ^es, who would
palm this upon you for christianity; regard them not, though they should come
upon you with all the deceivableness of unrighteousness, with all smoothness of
language, all decency, yea beauty and elegance of expression, all professions
of earnest good will to you, and reverence for the holy scriptures. Keep to the
plain old faith, once delivered to the saints, and delivered by the Spirit of
God to your hearts. Know your disease! Know your cure! Ye were born in sin:
therefore ye must be born again, born of God. By nature ye are wholly
corrupted: by grace ye shall be wholly renewed. "In Adam ye all died:" In the
second Adam, "in Christ ye all are made alive." You that are dead in sins has
he quickened: he has already given you a principle of life, even "faith in him
who loved" you, and gave himself for you! Now go on from faith to faith, until
your whole sickness be healed, and all that "mind be in you which was also in
Christ Jesus!"

THE NEW BIRTH. A SERMON
On JOHN iii. 7. Ye must be born again.
1. IF any doctrines within the whole compass of christianity may be properly
termed fundamental, they are doubtless these two, the doctrine of
justification, and that of the new birth: the former relating to that great
work, which God does for us, in forgiving our sins; the latter, to the great
work, which God does in us in renewing our fallen nature. In order of time,
neither of these is before the other: in the moment we are justified by the
grace of God, through the redemption that is in Jesus, we are also born of the
Spirit: but in order of thinking, as it is termed, justification precedes the
new birth. We first conceive his wrath to be turned away, and then his Spirit
to work in our hearts.

2. How great importance then must it be of to every child of man, thoroughly to
understand these fundamental doctrines? From a full conviction of this, many
excellent men have wrote very largely concerning justification, explaining
every point relating thereto, and opening the scriptures which treat upon it.
Many likewise have wrote on the new birth: and some of them largely enough: but
yet not so clearly as might have been defired; nor so deeply and accurately:
having either given a dark, abstruse account of it, or a slight and superficial
one. Therefore a full, and at the same time, a clear account of the new birth
seems to be wanting still: such as may enable us to give a satisfactory answer
to these three questions, First, Why must we be born again? What is the
foundation of this doctrine of the new birth? Secondly, How must we be born
again? What is the nature of the new birth? And Thirdly, wherefore must we be
born again? To what end is it necessary? These questions, by the assistance of
God, I shall briefly and plainly answer, and then subjoin a few instances which
will naturally follow.

I. 1. And First, why must we be born again? What is the foundation of this
doctrine? The foundation of it lies near as deep as the creation of the world:
in the scriptural account whereof we read, * Genesis i. 26, 27.
And God, the three-one God, said, Let us make man in our image, after our
likeness. So God created man in his own image, in the image of God created he
him: not barely in his natural image, a picture of his own immortality, a
spiritual being, endued with understanding, freedom of will, and various
affections: nor merely in his political image, the governor of this lower
world, having dominion ever the fishes of the sea, and ever all the earth: but
chiefly in his moral image? which according to the apostle, is Ephesians. iv. 24.
righteousness and true holiness. In this image of God was man made. God is
love: accordingly man at his creation was full of love: which was the sole
principle of all his tempers, thoughts, words and actions. God is full of
justice, mercy and truth: so was man as he came from the hands of his Creator.
God is spotless purity: and so man was in the beginning pure from every sinful
blot. Otherwise God could not have pronounced him, as well as all the other
works of his hands, Genesis i. 31.
very good. This he could not have been, had he not been pure from sin, and
filled with righteousness and true holiness. For there is no medium: if we
suppose an intelligent creature, not to love God, not to be righteous and holy,
we necessarily suppose him not to be good at all: much less to be very good.

2. But although man was made in the image of God, yet he was not made
immutable. This would have been inconsistent with that state of trial, in which
God was pleased to place him. He was therefore created able to stand, and yet
liable to fall. And this God himself apprized him of, and gave him a solemn
warning against it. Nevertheless man did not abide in honor: he fell from his
high estate. He ate of the tree whereof the Lord had commanded him, thou shall
not eat thereof. By this wilful act of disobedience to his Creator, this flat
rebellion against his sovereign, he openly declared, that he would no longer
have God to rule over him: that he would be governed by his own will, and not
the will of him that created him, and that he would not seek his happiness in
God, but in the world, in the works of his hands. Now God had told him before,
In the day that thou eatest of that fruit thou shall surely die. And the word
of the Lord cannot be broken. Accordingly in that day he did die: he died to
God, the most dreadful of all deaths. He lost the life of God: he was separated
from him, in union with whom his spiritual life consisted. The body dies, when
it is separated from the soul; the soul, when it is separated from God. But
this separation from God, Adam sustained in the day, the hour he are of the
forbidden fruit. And of this he gave immediate proof; presently showing by his
behavior, that the love of God was extinguished in his soul, which was now
alienated from the life of God. Instead of this, he was now under the power of
servile fear, so that he fled from the presence of the Lord. Yea, so little did
he retain even of the knowledge of him, who fills heaven and earth, that he
endeavored to * Genesis iii. 8.
hide himself from the Lord God, among the trees of the garden. So had he lost
both the knowledge and the love of God, without which the image of God could
not subsist. Of this therefore he was deprived at the same time, and became
unholy as well as unhappy. In the room of this, he had sunk into pride and
self-will, the very image of the devil, and into sensual appetites and desires,
the image of the beast, that perish.

3. If it be said, "Nay but that threatening, In the day that thou eatest
thereof thou shall surely die, refers to temporal death and that alone, to the
death of the body only;" the answer is plain; to affirm this, is flatly and
palpably to make God a liar: to aver that the God of truth positively affirmed
a thing contrary to truth. For it is evident, Adam did not die in this sense,
in the day that he ate thereof. He lived in the sense opposite to this death,
above nine hundred years after. So that this cannot possibly be understood of
the death of the body, without impeaching the veracity of God. It must
therefore be understood of spiritual death, the loss of the life and image of
God.

4. And in Adam all died, all human-kind, all the children of men who were then
in Adam's loins. The natural consequence of this is, that every one descended
from him, comes into the world spiritually dead, dead to God, wholly dead in
sin: entirely void of the life of God, void of the image of God, of all that
righteousness and holiness, wherein Adam was created. Instead of this, every
man born into the world, now bears the image of the devil, in pride and
self-will; the image of the beast, in sensual appetites and defires. This then
is the foundation of the new birth, the entire corruption of our nature. Hence
it is, that being born in sin, we must be born again. Hence every one that is
born of a woman, must be born of the Spirit of God.

II. 1. But how must a man be born again? What is the nature of the new birth?
This is the second question. And a question it is, of the highest moment that
can be conceived. We ought not therefore in so weighty a concern, to be content
with a slight enquiry; but to examine it with all possible care, and to ponder
it in our hearts, till we fully understand this important point, and clearly
see, how we are to be born again.

2. Not that we are to expect any minute, philosophical account of the manner
how this is done. Our Lord sufficiently guards us against any such expectation,
by the words immediately following the text: wherein he reminds Nicodemus of as
indisputable a fact, as any in the whole compass of nature: which
notwithstanding the wisest man under the sun is not able fully to explain. The
wind blows where it lists, not by thy power or wisdom, and thou hear the
sound thereof: thou art absolutely assured, beyond all doubt, that it does
blow. But thou can not tell whence it comes, neither whither it goes. The
precise manner how it begins and ends, rises and falls, no man can tell. So is
every one that is born of the Spirit. Thou may be as absolutely assured of
the fact, as of the blowing of the wind: but the precise manner how it is done,
how the Holy Spirit works this in the soul, neither thou nor the wisest of the
children of men is able to explain.

3. However it suffices for every rational and christian purpose, that without
descending into curious, critical enquiries, we can give a plain scriptural
account of the nature of the new birth. This will satisfy every reasonable man,
who desires only the salvation of his soul. The expression, being born again,
was not first used by our Lord in his conversation with Nicodemus. It was well
known before that time, and was in common use among the Jews, when our Savior
appeared among them. When an adult heathen was convinced, that the jewish
religion was of God, and desired to join therein, it was the custom to baptize
him first, before he was admitted to circumcision. And when he was baptized, he
was said to be born again: by which they meant, that he who was before a child
of the devil, was now adopted in the family of God, and accounted one of his
children. This expression, therefore, which Nicodemus being a teacher in
Israel, ought to have understood well, our Lord uses in conversing with him:
only in a stronger sense than he was accustomed to. And this might be the
reason of his asking, how can these things be* They cannot be literally A man
cannot enter a second time into his mother's womb and be born. But they may,
spiritually. A man may be born from above, born of God, born of the Spirit: in
a manner which bears a very near analogy to the natural birth.

4. Before a child is born into the world, he have eyes, but sees not: he has
ears, but does not hear. He has a very imperfect use of any other sense. He has
no knowledge of any of the things of the world, or any natural understanding.
To that manner of existence which he then has, we do not even give the name of
life. It is then only when a man is born, that we say he begins to live. For as
soon as he is born, he begins to see the light, and the various objects with
which he is encompassed. His ears are then opened, and he hears the sounds
which successively strike upon them. At the same time all the other organs of
sense begin to be exercised upon their proper objects. He likewise breathes and
lives in a manner wholly different from what he did before. How exactly does
the parallel hold, in all these instances? While a man is in a mere natural
state, before he is born of God, he has, in a spiritual sense, eyes and sees
not; a thick impeneble veil lies upon them. He has ears, but hears not; he is
utterly deaf to what he is most of all concerned to hear. His other spiritual
senses are all locked up; he is in the same condition as it he had them not.
Hence he has no knowledge of God, no intercourse with him; he is not at all
acquainted with him. He has no true knowledge of the things of God, either of
spiritual or eternal things. Therefore though he is a living man, he is a dead
christian. But as soon as he is born of God, there is a total change in all
these particulars. The eyes of his understanding are opened (such is the
language of the great apostle:) and he, who of old commanded light to shine out
of darkness, shining on his heart, he sees the light of the glory of God, his
glorious love, in the face of Jesus Christ. His ears being opened, he is now
capable of hearing the inward voice of God, saying, be of good cheer thy sins
are forgiven thee: go and sin no more. This is the purport of what God speaks
to his heart: although perhaps not in these very words. He is now ready to hear
whatsoever he that teaches man knowledge is pleased from time to time to
reveal to him. He "feels in his heart (to use the language of our church) the
mighty working of the Spirit of God:" not in a gross, carnal sense, as the men
of the world stupidly and wilfully misunderstand the expression: though they
have been told again and again, we mean thereby neither more nor less than
this: he feels, is inwardly sensible of the graces, which the Spirit of God
works in his heart. He feels he is conscious of a peace which passes all
understanding. He many times feels such a joy in God, as is unspeakable and
full of glory. He feels the love of God shed abroad in his heart by the Holy
Ghost which is given unto him. And all his spiritual senses are then exercised
to discern spiritual good and evil. By the use of these he is daily increasing
in the knowledge of God, of Jesus Christ whom he has sent, and of all the
things pertaining to his inward kingdom. And now he may be properly said to
live: God having quickened him by his Spirit, he is alive to God through Jesus
Christ. He lives a life which the world knows not of, a life which is hid
with Christ in God. God is continually breathing, as it were, upon the soul,
and his soul is breathing unto God. Grace is descending into his heart, and
prayer and praise ascending to heaven. And by this intercourse between God and
man, this fellowship with the Father and the Son, as by a kind of spiritual
respiration, the life of God in the soul is sustained: and the child of God
grows up till he comes to the full measure of the stature of Christ.

5. From hence it manifestly appears, what is the nature of the new birth. It
is that great change which God works in the soul, when he brings it into life;
when he raises it from the death of sin, to the life of righteousness. It is
the change wrought in the whole soul by the Almighty Spirit of God, when it is
created anew in Christ Jesus, when it is renewed after the image of God, in
righteousness and true holiness: when the love of the world is changed into the
love of God, pride into humility, passion into meekness; hatred, envy, malice,
into a sincere, tender, disinterested love for all mankind. In a word, it is
that change whereby the earthly, sensual, devilish mind is turned into the mind
which was in Christ Jesus. This is the nature of the new birth. "So is every
one that is born of the Spirit."

III. 1. It is not difficult for any who has considered these things, to see
the necessity of the new birth, and to answer the third question. Wherefore, to
what end is it necessary that we should be born again? It is very easily
di^^^^ed, that this is necessary, first, in order to holishness. For what is
holiness, according to the oracles of God? Not a bare external religion, a
round of outward duties, how many soever they be, and how exactly soever
performed. No: gospel-holiness is no less than the image of God stamped upon
the heart. It is no other than the whole mind which was in Christ Jesus. It
consists of all heavenly affections and tempers mingled together in one. It
implies such a continual, thankful love, to him who has not withheld from us
his Son, his only Son, as makes it natural and in a manner necessary to us, to
love every child of man; as fills us with bowels of mercies, kindness,
gentleness, long-suffering. It is such a love of God as teaches us to be
blameless in all manner of conversation; as enables us to present our souls and
bodies, all we are, and all we have, all our thoughts, words and actions, a
continual sacrifice to God, acceptable through Christ Jesus. Now this holiness
can have no existence, till we are renewed in the image of our mind. It cannot
commence in the soul, till that change be wrought, till by the power of the
highest overshadowing us we are "brought from darkness to light, from the power
of satan unto God:" that is, till we are born again: which therefore is
absolutely necessary in order to holiness.

2. But without holiness no man shall see the Lord, shall see the face of God
in glory. Of consequence the new birth is absolutely necessary, in order to
eternal salvation. Men may indeed flatter themselves (so desperately wicked and
so deceitful is the heart of man!) that they may live in their sins till they
come to the last gasp, and yet afterward live with God. And thousands do
really believe, that they have found a broad way which leads not to
destruction. What danger, say they, can a woman be in, that is so harmless and
so virtuous? What fear is there that so honest a man, one of so strict
morality, should miss of heaven? Especially, if over and above all this, they
constantly attend on church and sacrament. One of these will ask with all
assurance, "What, shall not I do as well as my neighbors?" Yes, as well as
your unholy neighbors; as well as you neighbors that die in their sins. For
you will all drop into the pit together, into the nethermost hell. You will all
lie together in the lake of fire, the lake of fire burning with brimstone.
Then, at length you will see (but God grant you may see it before!) the
necessity of holiness in order to glory: and consequently, of the new birth,
since none can be holy, except he be born again.

3. For the same reason, except he be born again, none can be happy even in
this world. For it is not possible, in the nature of things, that a man should
be happy, who is not holy. Even the poor, ungodly poet could tell us, Nemo
malus felix: No wicked man is happy. The reason is plain. All unholy tempers
are uneasy tempers. Not only malice, hatred, envy, jealousy, revenge, create a
present hell in the breast, but even the softer passions, if not kept within
due bounds give a thousand times more pain than pleasure. Even hope, when
defered (and how often must this be the case?) makes the heart sick. And every
desire, which is not according to the will of God, is liable to pierce us
through with many forrows. And all those general sources of sin, pride,
self-will and idolatry, are in the same proportion as they prevail, general
sources of misery. Therefore as long as these reign in any soul, happiness has
no place there. But they must reign till the bent of our nature is changed,
that is, 'till we are born again. Consequently the new birth is absolutely
necessary in order to happiness in this world, as well as in the world to come.

IV. I proposed in the last place, to subjoin a few inferences which naturally
follow from the preceding observations.

1. And, First, It follows, that baptism is not the new birth: they are not one
and the same thing. Many indeed seem to imagine, they are just the same: at
least, they speak as if they thought so: but I do not know, that this opinion
is publicly avowed, by any denomination of christians whatever. Certainly it
is not, by any within these kingdoms, whether of the established church, or
dissenting from it. The judgment of the latter is clearly declared, in their *
Q. 163, 165.
large catechism: Q: "What are the parts of a sacrament? A. The parts of a
sacrament are two: the one, an outward and sensible sign; the other an inward
and spiritual grace thereby signified. Q. What is baptism? A. Baptism is a
sacrament, wherein Christ has ordained the washing with water, to be a sign
and seal of regeneration by his Spirit." Here it is manifest, baptism, the
sign, is spoken of as distinct from regeneration, the thing signified.

In the church-catechism likewise, the judgment of our church is declared with
the utmost clearness. "What meanest thou by this word, sacrament? I mean an
outward and visible sign of an inward and spiritual grace. What is the outward
part, or form in baptism? Water, wherein the person is baptized, in the name of
the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. What is the inward part, or thing signified? A
death unto sin, and a new birth unto righteousness." Nothing therefore is
plainer, than that, according to the church of England, baptism is not the new
birth.

But indeed the reason of the thing is so clear and evident, as not to need any
other authority. For what can be more plain, than that the one is an external,
the other an internal work? That the one is a visible, the other an invisible
thing, and therefore wholly different from each other: the one being an act of
man, purifying the body; the other, a change wrought by God in the soul. So
that the former is just as distinguishable from the latter, as the soul from
the body, or water from the Holy Ghost.

2. From the preceding reflections, we may, secondly, observe, that as the new
birth is not the same thing with baptism, so it does not always accompany
baptism: they do not constantly go together. A man may possibly be born of
water and yet not be born of the Spirit. There may sometimes be the outward
sign, where there is not the inward grace. I do not now speak with regard to
infants: it is certain, our church supposes, that all, who are baptized in
their infancy, a^ at the same time born again. And it is allowed, that the
whole office for the baptism of infants proceeds upon this supposition. Nor is
it an objection of any weight against this, that we cannot comprehend, how this
work can be wrought in infants? For neither can we comprehend, how it is
wrought in a person of riper years. But whatever be the case with infants, it
is sure all of riper years, who are baptized, are not at the same time born
again. The tree is known by it is fruits: and hereby it appears too plain to be
denied, that diverse of those, who were children of the devil before they were
baptized, continue the same after baptism; for the works of their father they
do; they continue servants of sin, without any pretense either to inward or
outward holiness.

3. A third inference, which we may draw from what has been observed, is, that
the new birth is not the same with sanctification. This is indeed taken for
granted by many; particularly by an eminent writer, on his late treatise on
"the nature and grounds of christian regeneration." To wave several other
weighty objections, which might be made to that tract, this is a palpable one:
it all along speaks of regeneration as a progressive work, carried on in the
soul by slow degrees, from the time of our first turning to God. This is
undeniably true of sanctification; but of regeneration, the new birth, it is
not true. This is a part of sanctification, not the whole; it is the gate of
it, the entrance into it. When we are born again, then our sanctification, our
inward and outward holiness begins. And thenceforward we are gradually to grow
up in him, who is our head. This expression of the apostle admirably
illustrates the difference between one and the other, and farther points out
the exact analogy there is between natural and spiritual things. A child is
born of a woman in a moment, or at least in a very short time. Afterward he
gradually and slowly grows, till he attain to the stature of a man. In like
manner, a child is born of God in a short time, if not in a moment. But it is
by slow degrees that he afterward grows up to the measure of the full stature
of Christ. The same relation therefore, which there is between our natural
birth and our growth, there is also between our new birth and our
sanctification.

4. One point more we may learn from the preceding observations. But it is a
point of so great importance, as may excuse the considering it the more
carefully, and prosecuting it at some length. What must one who loves the souls
of men, and is grieved that any of them should perish, say to one whom he sees
living in sabbath-breaking, drunkenness, or any other wilful sin? What can he
say, if the foregoing observations are true, but you must be born again. "No,
says a zealous man, that cannot be. How can you talk so uncharitably to the
man? Has he not been baptized already? He cannot be born again now." Can he not
be born again? Do you affirm this? Then he cannot be saved. Though he be as old
as Nicodemus was, yet except he be born again, he cannot see the kingdom of
God. Therefore in saying, "he cannot be born again," you in effect deliver him
over to damnation. And where lies the uncharitableness now? On my side, or on
yours? I say, he may be born again, and so become an heir of salvation. You
say, "he cannot be born again." And if so, he must inevitably perish. So you
utterly block up his way to salvation, and send him to hell, out of mere
charity!

But perhaps the sinner himself, to whom in real charity we say, "you must be
born again," has been taught to say, "I defy your new doctrine; I need not be
born again. I was born again when I was baptized. What! Would you have me deny
my baptism?" I answer, first, there is nothing under heaven which can excuse a
lie. Otherwise I should say to an open sinner, if you have been baptized, do
not own it. For how highly does this aggravate your guilt? How will it increase
your damnation? Was you devoted to God at eight days old, and have you been all
these years devoting yourself to the devil? Was you, even before you had the
use of reason, consecrated to God the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost? And
have you, ever since you had the use of it, been flying in the face of God, and
consecrating yourself to satan? Does the abomination of desolation, the love of
the world, pride, anger, lust, foolish desire, and a whole train of vile
affections stand where it ought not? Have you set up all these accursed things
in that soul, which was once a temple of the Holy Ghost? Set apart for an
habitation of God through the Spirit? Yea, solemnly given up to him? And do you
glory in this, that you once belonged to God? O be ashamed! Blush! Hide
yourself in the earth! Never boast more of what ought to fill you with
confusion, to make you ashamed before God and man! I answer, secondly, you have
already denied your baptism; and that in the most affectual manner. You have
denied it a thousand and a thousand times; and you do so still day by day. For
in your baptism, you renounced the devil and all his works. Whenever therefore
you give place to him again, whenever you do any of the works of the devil,
then you deny your baptism. Therefore you deny it by every wilful sin: by every
act of uncleanness, drunkenness, or revenge; by every obscene or profane word;
by every oath that comes out of your mouth. Every time you profane the day of
the Lord, you thereby deny your baptism: yea, every time you do any thing to
another, which you would not he should do to you. I answer, thirdly, be you
baptized or unbaptized, you must be born again. Otherwise it is not possible
you should be inwardly holy: and without inward as well as outward holiness,
you cannot be happy even in this world; much less in the world to come. Do you
say, "Nay, but I do no harm to any man; I am honest and just in all my
dealings; I do not curse, or take the Lord's name in vain; I do not profane the
Lord's day: I am no drunkard; I do not slander my neighbor, nor live in any
wilful sin." If this be so, it were much to be wished, that all men went as far
as you do. But you must go farther yet, or you cannot be saved: still you must
be born again. Do you add, "I do go farther yet; for I not only do no harm, but
do all the good I can:" I doubt that fact: I fear you have had a thousand
opportunities of doing good, which you have suffered to pass by unimproved, and
for which therefore you are accountable to God. But if you had improved them
all, if you really had done all the good you possibly could to all men, yet
this does not at all alter the case: still you must be born again. Without this
nothing will do any good to your poor, sinful polluted soul. "Nay, but I
constantly attend all the ordinances of God: I keep to my church and
sacrament." It is well you do. But all this will not keep you from hell, except
you be born again. Go to church twice a day, go to the Lord's table every week,
say ever so many prayers in private, read ever so many good books, still you
must be born again: none of these things will stand in the place of the new
birth: no, nor any thing under heaven. Let this therefore, if you have not
already experienced this inward work of God, be your continual prayer, "Lord,
add this to all thy blessings, let me be born again. Deny whatever thou
please, but deny not this, let me be born from above. Take away whatsoever
seems thee good, reputation, fortune, friends, health. Only give me this, to
be born of the Spirit! To be received among the children of God. Let me be
born, "not of corruptible seed, but incorruptible, by the word of God, which
lives and abides for ever." And then let me daily "grow in grace, and in the
knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ!"

THE END OF THE THIRD VOLUME.
CONTENTS OF VOL. III.
The 11th discourse upon our Lord's Sermon on the mount, from Matt. vii. 13,
14. Page 3 The 12th ditto, from Matt. vii. 15, 20. Page 17 The 13th ditto, from
Matt. vii. 21, 27. Page 33 The Original, Nature, Properties, and Use of the
Law, from Romans vii. 12. Page 51 The Law established through Faith, from Romans
iii. 31, Page 73 The 2d ditto, from Romans iii. 31. Page 91 The Nature of
Enthusiasm, from Acts, xxvi. 24. Page 105 A Caution against Bigotry, from Mark,
ix. 38, 39. Page 124 Catholic Spirit, from 2 Kings x. 15. Page 144 Christian
Perfection, from Phil. iii. 1^. Page 163 The Promise of Sanctification, A Hymn,
from Ezekiel. xxxvi. 25, etc. Page 191 Wandering Thoughts, from 2 Cor. x. 4. Page
197 Satan's Devices, from 2 Cor. ii. 11. Page 212 Original Sin, from Genesis vi.
5. Page 229 The New Birth, from John iii. 7. Page 246

