TO all Persons whom these may CONCERN, in the Several Towns, and Plantations
of the UNITED COLONIES in New England.
IT is hereby declared, That his Highness the Lord Protector of the Common
wealth of England etc: has Commissioned and Empowered Daniel Gookin dwelling
at Cambridg in the Massachusetts, to make agreement with any convenient number
of the English in the Colonies of New England, who shall desire to remove
themselves or families into Jamaica in the West Indies, now in possession of
the State of England; And for their better Encouragement, His Highness (bearing
a special affection to the people of New England, and being very desirous to
have the said place inhabited by a stock of such as know the LORD, and walk in
his Fear,) will grant them, Ships for transportation; a sufficient proportion
of Land to them and their heirs for ever near some good harbor in the said
Island; Protection (by Gods blessing) from all enemies; a share of all the
Horses, Cattle and other beasts, wild and tame upon the place freely, Together
with other Privileges and Immunities, the particulars whereof may be known by
those who shall see cause to address themselves to the said Daniel Gookin (or
such as he shall desire to be helpful herein, whose names are underneath
expressed in writing) who will be ready to make full agreement with them
according to his Highness Instructions, and take their reciprocal Engagements
and Subscriptions to remove accordingly. Farther it is desired that such as
incline to the Design aforesaid, do make known themselves without delay, it
being his Highness Pleasure that the work of Transporting should be begun
before the end of September next.

Dated this 25 of March 1656.

