JOHN USHER Esquire RECEIVER General of His MAJESTY's Revenues within His Territory
and Dominion in NEW ENGLAND,
To the Commissioner and Select-Men of the Town of (...) in the County of (...)
Greeting.
By Virtue of an Act made by His EXCELLENCY the GOVERNOR and COUNCIL,
Entitled An Act for the Continuing and Establishing of Several Rates, Duties
and Imposts:

YOu are in His MAJESTY's Name Required, sometime in the Month of August next
ensuing, to make a List of all the male Persons in the same Town, from Sixteen
years old and upwards; and a true Estimation of all Real and Personal Estates
in such manner and Form as particularly in the said Act is Directed, all which
Persons and Estates are by you the Commissioner and Select men to be rated and
Assessed as follows, VIZ. Every Person aforesaid (except the Members of His
MAJESTY's COUNCIL) one Shilling and eight pence by the Head; and all Estates
Real and Personal, at one Penny for every Twenty Shillings, according to the
Rates of the Cattle in the said Act mentioned: and the said Commissioner is
hereby likewise Required upon the first Wendnesday in the month of September
then next following, to Meet and Assemble with the Commissioners of the County,
at their Shire or County-Town, and bring with him (fairly written the just
Number of the Male Persons listed as aforesaid, and the Assessments of the
Estates made in the said Town, where the Commissioners being so Assembled,
shall duly and carefully Examine those Lists and Assesments, and Correct and
perfect them, according to the true Intent of said Act; and the same so
perfected, the said Commissioners are speedily to transmit to the Treasurer for
the time being, and under their hands (or the major part of them) together with
the Names of the Constables in each respective Town, that Orders may be given
for Levying and Collecting the same accordingly.

Given under my Hand and Seal at BOSTON, the (...) of July, in the Fourth Year
of His MAJESTY's Reign, Annoque DOMINI, 1688.

