By the King. A PROCLAMATION.
CHARLES R.

WHereas the Safeguard and Protection We owe to such of Our own Subjects, and
to all others in League and Amity with us, as pass and repass the Seas
belonging to these Our Kingdoms, has been always a Principal part of our Royal
Care and Concern: And We finding that the Freedom and Security of Navigation
and Commerce to and from our Ports in times of Hostility between Our Neighbor
Princes has been much disturbed, nay the Reverence due to Our Ports, Harbors,
and other Places under Our immediate Protection, has been violated by the
Piratical Practices, Depredations, and Insolences of Private Men of War, and
others pretending Commission for the present Hostilities; We have thought fit,
by the Advice of our Privy Council, after an exact view first taken of the
Rules, Ordinances, and Provisions made upon the like occasions by Our Royal
Progenitors, and Our Self, to Revive, Establish, Ratify and Publish to all the
World, these Rules and Ordinances following. Our Royal Will and Pleasure
therefore is,

I. That within Our Ports, Havens, Roads and Creeks, as also in every other
Place or Tract at Sea, that may be reasonably construed to be within any of
those Denominations, Limits, or Precin^^^ (...) an Inviolable Truce and
Cessation of all Hostilities between all Persons and Parties whatsoever, and
that no Force, Violence, Surprise or Offense shall be done therein, either from
Man of War, to Man of War, or from Man of War to Merchant, or from Merchant to
Merchant, that happen to be in Hostily the one against the other; but that all,
of what Nation or Party soever, so long as they shall be within Our Ports,
Harbors or other Places reputed to be within Our more immediate Protection,
and where Our Commanders and Officers are accomptable for the Public Peace,
shall be understood to be under Our Special Safe Conduct, and must keep the
Peace inviolably each with other. And we do further Declare, and hereby
Denounce, That the Ships and Goods of all Aggressors, Actors, and Offenders
whatsoever against the true meaning of this Our Ordinance and Proclamation, are
and shall be ipso facto Confiscate, and proceeded against in Our High Court of
Admiralty, to Sentence and Condemnation, according to Law, notwithstanding any
Commission of War, or Letters of Reprizals such Offenders may have, or pretend
to have for their Justification.

II. We Will and Command, That all Our Officers and Subjects by Sea and Land,
do as much as in them lies, Prohibit the Roving and Hovering of Men of War so
near the Entry of any of Our Harbors, or Our Coasts, as that Merchantmen
home-ward or outward-bound, to or from any of Our Ports, shall apprehend their
Passage to be unsafe, or their danger of being Set upon and Surprised apparent,
to the hindering and diverting of Trade and Commerce from our Ports. And We do
strictly Charge and Require Our said Officers and Subjects to Rescue, Succor
and Defend all Merchantmen, and others that shall happen to be Set upon or
Surprised so near Our Coasts, or the Entry of Our Harbors, as may be easily
construed to be under Our more special Care and Protection, and that they
Apprehend and Seize all Offenders in this kind, in order to bring them to
Condign Punishment, for Disturbing and Hindering the Trade and Commerce between
Our Subjects, and those of our Neighbors and Allies.

III. That where it happens that a Man of War of the one Party come into any of
Our Ports where there shall be a Merchant-man (one or more) of the other Party,
such Merchant Ship or Ships, if they desire it, shall be suffered to depart the
Port two Tides before the Man of War, to the intent they may get themselves out
of his reach and pursuit; And if it happen that any Man of War, one or more of
the one Party do come in while any Man (or Men) of War of the other Party are
in Our Ports or Roads, none shall be suffered to go out to Sea the same Tide
with his Enemy, but those that are most likely to Pursue and Engage as soon as
they are out of Our Ports, shall be stayed and detained two (...) those of the
adverse Party are put to Sea.

IV. And We do hereby Charge and Require all Vice-Admirals, Customers, and
other Our Officers in Ports and Maritime Places, That they Visit all Ships and
Vessels belonging to Our Subjects, that shall Victual, Furnish, or Recruit
themselves for Voyages at Sea, and that they stay and detain all such as they
shall suspect by the Provision or Furniture to be designed for any other than
Trading or Fishing-Voyages, until further Order from Us, or Our Lord
High-Admiral, or our Commissioners for Executing the Office of Lord
High-Admiral for the time being in that behalf.

V. And We do further straightly Command and Require all Governors and Officers
in Ports, and other Maritime Places, not to suffer any Private Man of War
Sailing by a Foreign Commission, and having any Prize or Prizes (that he may
have taken) in his power and possession, to stay above Twenty four hours in any
of our Ports, or Harbors, unless he be thereto constrained by contrary Winds,
Blocking up by Enemies, or other Distress; Yet so that during his stay, he do
not break Bulk, Sell Barter, or leave behind him any of his Prize, Goods, upon
any terms or pretense whatsoever. And We further Require Our Officers and
Subjects not to interpose or meddle in the Affairs and Proceedings of such Men
of War as put into Our Ports upon any Distress, with Foreign Commissions, but
to suffer them to carry away their Prizes whither themselves think fit;
Provided they have not the Goods or Merchandises of any of our own Subjects on
Board such Prizes: Which if they happen to have, Our meaning is, That they be
upon due proof taken out and restored to the true Proprietors.

VI. We do straightly Require and Command, That none of Our Subjects, of what
degree or condition soever, do presume to Buy, Contract, or Deal with any
Foreign Men of War, their Officers or Company, or with any other person coming
from Sea, not being a known Merchant, for any Wares, Merchandises, Victuals,
Ammunition, Tackle, Furniture, Provisions or Goods whatsoever, not brought in by
the Course of Merchandise, and the Custom and Duties upon them first paid, upon
pain of forfeiting all such Wares and Goods as Bona Piratarum ought to be, and
of being further proceeded against and Punished in Our High Court of Admiralty
as Abetters and Accomplices of Pirates, and as Receivers of Pirates and their Goods
ought to be by the Laws and Customs of the Sea in that behalf.

VII. And whereas diverse of Our Subjects out of their inclinations to Rapine,
and Licentious Courses, rather than to Trading Voyages, and other honest
Employments at home, do engage some of the one side, and some of the other, in
the Quarrels of our Neighbor Princes now in War, without Our Leave or
Permission; We do hereby straightly Command and Require, That no Officer or
Mariner whatsoever, being Our Subject, do presume to put himself into the
Martial Service of any Foreign Prince or State, or accept of and execute any
Commission of War, or Letter of Marque, or Reprizal, from any such Prince or
State, or go in any Merchant or Fishing Voyage, in any other Ship or Vessel
than such as belong to Our own Subjects, without leave from Our Self, or Our
Lord High Admiral, or Our Commissioners for Executing the Office of Lord High
Admiral for the time being, in due form first obtained. And We do hereby Charge
and Command all Officers, Mariners, and Seafaring Men whatsoever, that are now
in any such Service, to leave the same forthwith, and to get their Appearance,
and Return to their Native Country Recorded in Our High Court of Admiralty, or
before some of Our Officers thereunto Empowered, upon pain of being Reputed and
Punished as Pirates. And in case any Officer or Mariner neglecting to return
upon these Our Summons, happen at any time hereafter to come into any Port or
Place of Our Dominions, We do hereby Charge and Require all Vice-Admirals and
Our Officers in Ports and Maritime Places, to Apprehend and Seize such Person
or Persons, and him or them so Seized, to commit to the next Goal, there to
remain until further Order, and the Certificate thereof to return with all
speed into Our High Court of Admiralty, to the end that the Offender or
Offenders may be Proceeded against according to the Laws of this Out Realm in
that behalf provided.

Given at Our Court at Newmarket the Twelfth day of March, In the six and
thirtieth Year of Our Reign, 1683/4.

GOD SAVE THE KING.
LONDON Printed by the Assigns of John Bill Deceased: And by Henry Hills, and
Tho. Newcomb, Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1683/4. And is now
Reprinted here in Boston in New England by Samuel Green, for the Information
and Direction of all His MAJESTY'S Subjects in this Colony concerned therein:
By Order of the Governor and Council, Sept. 4. 1684. Edward Rawson, Secret.

VERA COPIA.


