AT A GENERAL COURT ON ADJOURNMENT, Held at Boston, March, 14. 1682.
THis Court considering the Solemn Warnings of Providence; both by Signs in the
Heavens, and the various Instances and Effects of Divine Displeasure, which we
have felt formerly and of late, by Sword, Fire, Blastings, Losses at Sea,
Sicknesses and Deaths of many Eminent and Useful Persons amongst us; and those
Difficult Circumstances we have been, and are yet laboring under, with respect
to our Public Affairs: As also the Troubles of the People of God, and Low and
conflicting Condition of the Protestant Interest in Christendom; And knowing
that our Sins against, and Provocations of the Lord (which yet visibly increase
amongst us) are the procuring Causes thereof, and for which, without
Reformation, we may yet justly expect greater and more Universal Calamityes;
And that the only Means for the averting Impending Judgment, and lengthening
out of our Tranquillity, are Sincere Humiliation and Repentance,

Do therefore Appoint the Tenth of May next for a Day of Solemn HVMILIATION
throughout this Colony, therein humbly to implore the Mercy and Favor of God
for our selves here in respect of our Sacred, Civil, and Temporal Concerns; and
more especially those in the Hands of our Agents abroad; as also for those
Kingdoms, upon whose VVelfare our own does so nearly depend; and for the
Protestant Churches and Interest elsewhere. And all Ministers are desired to
give timely Notice to their People in their respective Churches and Towns, that
they may be the better Prepared to attend upon the Work of the Day, according
to the Nature thereof, and the Solemn Calls of God thereunto. And all People
are Forbidden servile Labor upon that Day.

By the Court, Edward Rawson Secretary.


