CHRIST'S Certain and sudden Appearance TO Judgment.

By Thomas Vincent, sometime (...) Maudlins Milk-street, London

Heb. 10. 37. For yet a (...) that shall come, will come (...) tarry. Boston
Printed by Samuel Green for Benjamin Harris at the London Coffee-House. 1690.

TO THE Citizens of London,
Y Ou have heard God's terrible Voice in (...) City, expressing it self in the
late (...) Desolating Judgments of Plague (...) the sound of which has gone
(...) every corner of the Land, but I believe (...) time, unto the farthest end
of the ^orld (...) leave to sound another Trumpet in your (...) forewarn you of
a ten thousand times (...) Judgment, I mean the last and general (...) the
whole World, at the second appearance (...) Jesus Christ, who will most
certainly (...) be revealed from Heaven in flaming (...) ^^^geance upon all
them which shall be* (...) that Day.

Could I have certainly foretold (...) that fell by the Plague, in the Year
(...) near approaching death; surely they (...) ^^^voured to prepare, that the
sting and (...) might have been removed; could I (...) Citizens of London of
the many (...) which should fall by the Fire, in the Year (...) they would have
endeavored to prevent the (...) least have removed all their Goods beforehand
(...) these things could not be foreseen, and therefore as the Judgments were
unexpected, so they took the most unprovided: But I can certainly foretell you
from God, who cannot lie, of the future last Judgment, by the Lord Jesus Christ
at the last Day, which is the subject of this ensuing Treatise: And when you
have warnings hereof out of the Word of Truth, and awakening Mo^^^es to
prepare, by dreadful temporal Judgments, you (...) ^^^lect to do it, and after
all be found unprovided (...) ^^arance of Christ; as your sin will be the (...)
more inexcusable, so your dread will be the (...) ^ight of your Judge (whom
those very (...) these Lines, will behold ^re long coming (...)) and your
punishment will be the more (...): But if the Lord incline your hearts to
fol^^^^ (...) (...) and counsels of his Word to prepare (...) and notable day,
you shall lift up your heads (...) the greatest part of the World shall be
(...) terror and confusion, and when the Lord Je^^^ (...), you also shall
appear with him in glory.

(...) design of these sheets is to set forth the glo^^ (...) appearance of
Christ* with the certainty and (...) thereof, that Sinners might be awa^^^
(...) repent, and Believers might be comfort^^^ (...) the hopes of it, and all
might be in a (...) for the day, which is so sure, and near; (...) that you may
be, and that my endeavors (...) (...) be blessed for your help herein, is the
prayer (...) of an earnest well-wisher to your Souls.

Thomas Vincent.

Christ's certain and sudden Appearance to Judgment.
Rev. 22* 20. Surely I come quickly. Amen. (...) Lord Jesus.
CHAP. I.
THe last words of a dear (...) most remarked, and best (...) ^^pecially when
they speak (...) these are the last words (...) the best friend that the (...)
ever had; which he sends his (...) ^e4ven, after he had been some years in
(...) Father, to speak in his Name unto his Church (...) earth, verse 16 I
Jesus have sent mine Angel to (...) things in the Churches: and of all the
things which (...) ^^^eth by his Angel, this is the last and the sweetest in
(...) (...) S urely I come quickly. Which words of Promise coming (...) (...)
from Heaven, and expressing so much love to the (...) are followed with an
Echo, and resound of the Churches earnest desire, Amen. Even so come, Lord
Jesus.

Hence observe

Doct. 1. T hat the Lord Jesus Christ will certainly and quickly appear.

Doct. 2. That there is an earnest desire and longing in the Church after
Christ's appearance.

Doct. 1. That the Lord J esus Christ will certainly and (...).

(...) (...) shall speak,

^word (...) Christ's appearance. (...) he will certainly appear. (...) he will
quickly appear. (...), Apply.
(...) Christ s appearance. There is a twofold (...) of Christ which the
Scripture makes mention of (...).

(...)

CHAP II.
(...) appearance of Christ was in the flesh, above (...) hundred years ago in
the Land of J udea, unto (...) of the Jews, the only-then-visible-Church upon
(...). There it was that the Word was made Flesh; and (...) people he dwelt for
a while, some or whom (...) the glory as of the only begotten of the (...) of
grace and truth. There it was that the Eter^^^^ (...) God was made Man, being
conceived miraculous^^^^ (...) of the Holy Ghost, in the Womb of the Vir^^^^
(...) without the contamination of Original Sin, which (...) Conceptions do
introduce: His real Mother, and (...) Father were both of the Tribe of J udah,
and of the (...) of Daniel, and he was born in the Town of Bethlem, (...) ^^ing
to the Scripture predictions; who, after he had (...) (...) thirty years in
obscurity, was baptized by J ohn Baptist, (...) forerunner and Harbinger; in
whose Baptism, when John saw the Heavens opened, and the Spirit of God
descen^^^^ like a Do^e, and lighting upon him, and heard the voice from the
excellent glory, saying. T his is my belo^^^^ S on, in whom I am well pleased:
He gave his testimony concerning him, that he was the Son of God, and the Lamb
of God, who takes away the sins of the World. Who (...) his own baptism and
temptation, and J ohn's Imprisonment^ made his appearance more openly unto
Israel, shewi^^ (...) (...) his glory, not in outward pomp and splendour, (...)
in (...) high, eminent, and wonderful manner, altogether (...) ^^ceeding the
imitation of any Earthly Monarch in (...)

He showed forth the glory of his Power, in (...) which he did work, namely in
opening the (...) and ears of the deaf: in loosning the (...) the bonds of
other infirmities, in cleansing (...) healing other diseases with a word: in
(...) after long possession: in calming the (...) boisterous and stormy: in
raising up the (...) after burial for some days, and the like.

He showed forth the glory of his (...) into the hearts of those which came
(...) to perceive their most secret thoughts (...) needed not that any should
testify of (...) what was in man.

He showed forth the glory of his (...) answer, to the ensnaring questions of
(...) others, in the most excellent and Heavenly (...) Preached, wherein he did
not teach (...) empty speculations, which the greatest (...) have busied
themselves about, but (...) Indeed he revealed some great and (...) the reach
of the highest wit of the gre^^ (...) the teachings of the Spirit) which (...)
needful in order unto practice, but the (...) doctrine was plain and easy.

He showed forth the glory of his Holiness, (...) walking and perfect obedience
unto the Law of (...) out the least deviation or sin.

He showed forth the glory of his Goodness and (...) toward the Children of
Men in going about to do (...) (...) good, and give succor to them which were
in misery, casting out none which came unto him.

Especially he showed forth the glory of his Mercy and Infinite Love to his own
people in submitting to so low a condition as he lived in for their sakes; in
humbling himself, and becoming obedient unto the Cross, besides the
soul^^^^eries which he endured through sense of Gods Wrath (...) for their sin,
that he might satisfy Gods Justice, and (...) (...) them from eternal Death
and Wrath to come, and (...) life and glory for them.

(...) Christ lived, and thus Christ died for our sins, ac^^^ (...) scriptures,
and being dead, the bonds of (...) him, neither did the Holy One see (...)
third day rose again from the dead, ac^^ (...) scriptures; and after his
Resurrection, was (...), of Peter, J ames, all the Apostles, (...) ^rethren at
once, according to the Scrip^^^ (...) was taken up into Heaven, and is (...)
Nature, at the right hand of the (...) in the Heavens, making intercession for
(...) he will abide until the second appearance. (...) Christ's appearance in
the flesh.

CHAP III.
(...) appearance of Christ will be in Glory at (...) when the world shall come
to an end: (...) we are treating of, and therefore I (...) largely, and show,
(...) of this appearance. (...) transactions at this appearance.


(...) the manner of Christ's second appearance, what (...) of Men or Angels is
able to set it forth? what (...) conceive the splendor thereof? Something the
(...) does reveal, and taking the Scripture for my ^^ide, I shall assay to
speak something of it, see Luke 21. 27. Then shall they see the S on of Man
coming in a Cloud, with Power and great Glory.

^ Christ at his second appearance will come with Power, with great power; he
has all power put into his hands in Heaven and in Earth now, and does exercise
it more secretly; then he will exercise it more visibly and apparently (...)
(...) sight of the whole World. To give instance.

1. He will come with power over Death. Death (...) great power since the Fall,
and is the greatest (...) in the world; Death has made universal (...) the
Sons and Daughters of Adam ((...) excepted) which lived in former Gene^^^ (...)
them captive, binding their faces in (...) hands and their feet, and clapping
them (...) in the grave, and none have been (...) yea, Death did assail the
Lord of Life (...) victory for a while, and shut him (...) loose before three
days were at an (...) and gave death a deep wound, as it (...) stroke in his
Resurrection, 2 Timothy (...) complete victory which afterward (...) Enemy of
Mankind. Now when (...) appearance in the world at the last (...) power over
Death, he will lead (...) his first hands on Death* and trea^ (...) feet, and
strip him of all his force (...) been treasuring up for so many (...) keys of
the grave out of the hand (...) his chains, and bring out all his (...)
enlargement: as it is said, Hos. 13. (...) from the power of the Grave; I will
(...) O Death! I will be thy plague! O Grave! (...) ^^^^ction! And it is said,
1 Cor 15. 25, 26. that (...) ^e put under the feet of jesus Christ, and the
last (...) ^e shall destroy is Death. And v 54. When this mortal (...) on
immortality, then Death shall be swallowed up (...) (...) surely Christ must
needs come with great power to get victory over such a potent Enemy.

2. He will come with power over Men and Devils, he will have power over all
his Enemies, which have rebelled against him; over all the Principalities and
Powers on the Earth, that exercise Lordship and dominion in the World; he will
(...) Kings of the Earth down from their seats and pluck (...) of Princes; he
will take the staff and the (...) their hand, and divest them of all their
royalty (...) and they who have employed their borrow^^^ (...) him* how will
they quake and tremble be^^^ (...) 1^. 15, 16, 17, 18. When the seventh (...)
great voices in Heaven, saying, ^he (...) are become the Kingdoms of our L ord,
(...) be shall reign for ever and ever. And (...) Angels fell on their faces,
saying, We give (...) God Almighty, which art, and ^^st, and art (...) taken to
thee thy great power and have (...) were angry, and thy wrath is come, (...)
that they should be judged; and that (...) unto thy servants the Prophets, and
to thy (...) thy Name small and great, and should (...) the Earth.

(...) Earth, and great Potentates will be an^^^^ (...) ^^roned: and the Wicked
of the earth (...) the Lord Jesus shall come down from (...) them to Judgment:
If all the powers of (...) Devils too, who are greater in power (...) would
make head, and resist the Lord (...) him from his Throne, and put him to (...)
at his first appearance; if they had (...) ^^ing their party good against him,
how (...) forces, and gather their Armies, and (...) this great king;
especially when all the (...) he raised up, and the ancient Rebels, the Gy^^^^
(...) old World, shall come forth of their dust, and (...) prison of Hell,
where some of them have been tormen^^^ him many years* O how would they combine
their strength and so many millions of them together rush upon him with rage
and violence; and endeavor to avenge themselves upon him, at least defend
themselves against him, when he comes to torment them? but Christ will come
with so great power, that he will be able to deal with the^ whole wicked world
of men together, when they are raised and united in one body, and have obtained
more strength (...) body, and are filled with more rage and spite of mind
(...) here they had, and are out of all hopes of making (...) with him, and
have the whole flock of all the (...) to join into their company; I say Christ
(...) sufficiency of strength to bind them all in (...) hold them all down,
that they shall not (...) least ressistance; he that has power to (...) the
dead, will have power to keep all (...) ^^bellion, he will come with Power.

2. Christ will come at his second (...) At his first appearance, he came (...)
Servant of Servants; at his second (...) like a Lord, yea, like a Lord ^f (...)
(...) glory; at his first appearance he was (...) ^^nour, and a chain of
contempt was (...) second appearance he will be (...) ^^nour, and most
excellent Majesty (...) his first appearance his Deity was (...) masked with
infirm flesh, his brigh^^ (...) though sometimes some beams did (...) dazzling
luster, as made Peter fall at (...) from me, for I am a sinful man, O Lord
(...) in the Ship to worship him, acknow^^^ (...) art the S on of God* Mat, 14.
3^. And (...) with fear and astonishment; but he was (...) that few knew him at
all, none knew much (...) was so disrobed, and so meanly attired, and (...)
said the Princes of this world knew hi^^ not; (...) they would have laid down
their Sc^pters at his feet; (...) (...) known him, they would not have dared so
disgracefully (...) have crucified the Lord of Glory, 1 Cor. 2. ^. But at his
second appearance, the Vail will be so drawn aside, that the Deity of Christ
will shine forth with amazing splendour to (...) view of the whole world: his
humane nature will be glorious beyond any other creature; but oh how glorious
ill his Divine Nature be, when the eyes of the whole world ^^ll be opened to
see God in such a way, as now we are not a^^ to conceive? He will appear in the
brightness of his (...) so that they which see him will see the Father (...),
Authority, Dominion, Power, Holiness, (...) of the Father, will be like so many
spark^^^ (...) the Crown of Christ at his appearance: (...) the royalty and
surpassing excellency (...) when he comes down out of his Fathers Pa^^^^ (...)
he will come in great glory, God will (...) and with him; the Throne of God
will (...) will be below, Heaven will be (...) Christ is, there is Heaven,
there is (...) to be seen: he will come in great (...) such glory seen upon the
face of (...) of man behold such a sight (...): We read of great and pompous
shows, (...) made in their Triumphs: but ne^^^^ (...) in the world, as there
will be (...) Jesus Christ, when he comes trium^^ (...), when he comes with
the spoils (...), making a show of them openly (...) ^^^dient glory. A little
further to set (...).

(...) with a glorious retinue of Angels, (...) Of more then twelve legions of
Angels (...) thousands, yea, ten thousand times (...) minister about the
Throne: of God: (...) 11. Of a number of ten thousand times (...) thousands of
thousands of Angels, and Heb. 12. (...) ^^^^merable company of Angels, All
these Angels (...) upon Jesus Christ at his second appearance. It is said Matt.
25. 31. That all the Holy Angels shall come (...) him. Now the Angels are
dispersed in several places; (...) of them are upon the Earth ministering unto
the Saints, which shall be Heirs of Salvation, Heb 1. 14. Others are in Heaven
beholding the face of the Father, ready to execute (...) Will, some are
ascending, some descending; but then the^ will all be gathered together into
one company, and like so many Courtiers, attend upon this great King in this
his glorious appearance in the World, all will descend with Christ; Heaven will
be emptied of Angels, they will all come (...) come down from their old
Habitation; and Oh (...) will the train be! he will come with all the (...)
Angels that are Holy and Glorious: not (...) Courtiers which attend upon some
Earthly (...) no other glory upon them but what (...) splendid apparel: the
bodies of some of (...) uncased, would appear to be full of (...) whose souls
are monstrously ugly, and (...) some and noisome lusts, besmeared with (...)
who, could their inside be turned outwa^^ (...) of sin be seen with bodily eye
s, would (...) black and swarthy, and more miship^^ (...) born with the
greatest blemishes (...) in their bosom s, and like so many (...) are led
about by the Devil in Chains (...) ^^ny Kings on Earth, when they appear (...)
of lust, with eyes full of adultery, (...) and filthy ribaldry: who are like so
(...) of their Prince s; or like a cloud (...) darkneth their glory in the eyes
(...) minded: but Christ will come (...) holy Angels* arraied in such pure
(...) shall not have the least spot, or tinc^u^^ (...) he will come with holy
Angels, who (...) Flames of Fire, full of holy sweet (...) light and glorious
excellency as will not (...) the glory of their Lord and Prince they attended
(...)

2. Christ will come with a glorious brightness and (...) (...) a light will
shine in him and about him, as will a thousands ^old surpass the light of the
Sun, when it shines in its (...) strength: we read Mat. 13 43. That the
righteous shall (...) (...) the Sun in the Kingdom of their Father, how then
will (...) Sun of righteousness shine? from whom they will receive (...) it
brightness by reflection, as the Moon and some other (...) do from the Sun in
the Firmament. It is said, Mat. 24. ^^. ^0. (...) at (...) coming of Christ,
the S un shall be darkened, (...) give her light, and the Stars of the Heaven
(...) 6. 12,13,14. That the Sun shall be (...) hair, and the Moon shall be like
blood, and (...) all fall to the earth, even as a Fig Tree (...), when she is
shaken as a mighty wind, (...) depart as a scroll when it is rolled together,
(...) ^ou^tain shall be moved our of their places. (...) there will be such a
brightness as (...) and other Luminaries in the Heavens, (...) darken the
lesser Stars, who though (...) a twinkling light, and like so many (...), yet
upon the Suns first listing up (...) and casting about its b^ams, they pre^^^
(...), and disappear; so the Sun it (...) of Heaven will disappear, when (...)
rise in the morning of the last (...) their light: and what further need (...)
will ^e all day, Rev. 2 22. I n the (...) there will be no need of the S un,
nei^^^ (...) it: for the glory of God will enligh^^ (...) be the light of it:
and Ch 22. 5. (...), and they shall need no Candle nor the (...) God gives
them light, and they shall (...) Hell it will be all night and no day, (...)
darkness for ever, and not the least (...) into that place? and if the Sun and
(...) for the measure and destinctions of times (...) the last day is come,
time will be no longer, (...) forth from the confines of Time, into the (...)
of eternity* which cannot ^e bounded nor measured: It is said, Rev. 20. 11.
When the great white T hrone shall be set, and Christ is placed thereon, that
the Heavens and the Earth shall flee away from before his face, and no more
place be found for them: and 2 Pet. 3. 10. When the day of the L ord comes,
that the Heavens shall pass away with a great wise, and the Elements shall melt
with servant heat, and th^^ Earth with all its works shall be burnt up. Christ
will come with a glorious light, and with a roaring dreadful noise* which will
further set forth the glory of this appearance, (...) this expressed, 1 These.
4. 16 The Lord himself shall (...) from Heaven with a shout, with the voice of
the Arch (...) and the T rump of God, and Mat. 24. 31. He shall (...) his
Angels with a great sound of a Trumpet, (...) his Elect from the four winds.
Never was there (...) heard in the World, as then will be heard (...) shall
appear, the Heavens will roar, the (...) flames of Fire, there will be a great
(...) the last Trump in the Air: this shou^^ (...) Jesus Christ himself, as is
likely, for (...) The hour is coming, in which all that (...) hear his voice,
and shall come forth: (...) When Christ came to raise (...) loud voice, Lazarus
come forth: surely (...) to raise the World, he will cry and (...) louder
voice: such a voice likely will (...) in a roaring shout. Awake ye (...) or
arise ye Children of men, and (...) ^^ver was there such a shout given an (...)
will be accompanied with the sound (...) Angels shall found the Trumpet^ (...)
when the Lord gave the Law from (...) were Thunderings and Lightning (...)
exceeding loud, which made all the (...) Camp to tremble. O what Thunderings
(...) Air at Christ's second appearance? and (...) will the sound of this last
Trumpet be, (...) to judge them which have broken this Law? (...) heard only by
the Nation of the Jews, which (...) about the Mount: This Trumpet will be heard
by all Nations throughout the World; that Trumpet was heard only by those that
were alive at that time; This Trumpet will be heard not only by them that shall
remain alive upon the Earth at the last day, but also by those which have died
throughout all Generations from the beginning of the Creation. Such a noise
there will be as will awaken all that shall be asleep in their Grave s. Such a
noise as will make all the corners of the Earth to ring, and the pillars of the
world (...) tremble; but O! how will they startle the wicked when (...) it, and
fill them with terror and amazement? thus (...) something of the manner of
Christ's second appea^^^ (...) unto you, he shall come with Power and (...).

CHAP. IV.
(...) to speak of, is the end of Christ's (...), and the transactions of that
day.

(...) second appearance will be to judge (...) ^^is first coming was not to
judge, but (...) ^e tells his Disciples when they de^^^^ (...) judgment from
Heaven upon those (...) not receive him, Luke 9 55, 56. (...) are of, for the
Son of Man is not (...) but to save them. And Joh. 7. 47. (...) believe not, I
judge him not: for (...): But when Christ does ap^^^^^ (...) will come to judge
the world, (...) comes with ten thousand of his (...) upon all, etc. Mat. 26.
31, 32* (...) come in his glory, and all the holy (...) on the Throne of his
glory. (...) gathered all Nations: And so he go^^^^ (...) of the last Judgment.
In speaking (...) the World, and the transactions at (...) show,

1. That Christ will raise up all the Dead put of their (...).

2. That he will gather all Nations before his judgment seat.

3. That he will separate the righteous from the wicked.

4. That he will open the Books out of which all must be judged.

5 I shall speak more particularly of the Judgment of the Righteous and the
wicked.

1. Christ at his second appearance will raise up all the dead out of their
graves: there shall be a general Resurrection, John 5. 28, 29. The hour comes
in which all that (...) in their Graves shall hear his voice and come forth,
they that (...) done good to the Resurrection of life, they that have (...) the
R esurrection of damnation. Something has (...) already concerning Christ's
victory over death* (...) all his prisoners, but give me leave to (...)
^^^ction a little further; and here I shall (...) forth by an allusion to that
notable (...) ten first verses. T he hand of the Lord (...) ^^^ried me out in
the Spirit of the Lord* (...) midst of the valley, which was full (...) pass by
them round about: there (...) ley, and ^o they were very dry. (...) can these
bones live? and I (...) gain he said unto me, Prophe^^^ (...) them, O ye dry
bones hear the (...) L ord unto these bones, Behold I (...) you, and ye shall
live, And I (...) up flesh upon you, and cover (...) you, and ye shall live,
and ye (...) prophesied as I was (...) noise, and behold a shaking, (...) ^^is
bone. And when I beh^ld (...) them, and the skin covered (...) them. Then said
be unto me, (...) ^^th the L ord God, come (...) ^^eathe upon these slain that
they (...) me, and the breath (...) upon their feet, an exceeding (...) this
will the Resurrection be at (...) bones and bodies of all former generation
(...) and down in the valley of the shadow of Death: some are sunk into the
deep, others are buried in the earth, the flesh is consumed, and dissolved into
its first Elements, and the bones of some remain, of others are mouldred into
earth: now when the Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of God, shall come down from
Mount Sion which is above, into the Valley of the inferior World, he will
Prophecy over all the bodies and bones of all the children of men that are
dead, and (...) unto them to live: he will say unto them whilst they (...)
their Graves, Live: he will say, Awake ye that (...): and O what a noise and
shaking will (...) in the ground? what a clatterring of bones (...) coming of
bone to his bone? If the body (...) and buried, part in one place, and (...);
(as the Levites Concubine, who was di^^^^ (...) parts, and sent to the twelve
Tribes of (...), buried in twelve distinct places) (...) through the air out of
all those places, (...) one body. O what a great part of (...) Earth will there
run into conjunction, (...) Christ, and be turned into those very (...) into
them by Death, and the (...) with the addition of such new (...), spiritualize,
and refine them (...), and ill humor that shall be (...) or death for ever;
then (...), and be like stones for (...) be as it were Iron sinews, (...)
strength will be put into them, (...) ^^^und in the strongest Creatures (...);
that they might be fit^^^ (...) ^^^t^ous for an eternal life of (...) ^^ory of
Heaven; the bodies of (...) of misery, and bearing the (...) of which the body,
now as it is, (...) ^hen the Sea will give up her dead, (...) give up her dead,
Rev. 20. 13. As the (...) upon the shore after he had lain three days in his
belly; so the Sea will give up all the dead that for so many years have been
buried in its Bowels* But what a stirring will there be in the Earth! tho^^
which are alive will wonder to see such a strange (...) morphosis of the
ground, to feel Men and Women stirring and moving under their feet, arising and
crouding (...) room amongst them. Then will the Lord bring down (...) the souls
of the righteous which have been in Paradi^^ with him many years, and they
shall find out their, (...) bodies, and he will open the prison of Hell, and
let (...) the souls of the wicked for a while, that they also (...) (...) out
their own bodies, which shall be prepared (...) that they might both be
prepared for the (...) of which more when I come to the (...) of the Righteous
and Wicked.

Thus Christ will raise up all the (...) graves.

2 Christ at his second appear^^ (...) before his judgment S eat. Rev. (...)
white Throne, and him that (...) small and great, stand before (...) appear
before the Judgment (...) 32 When the S on of Men shall (...) shall be gathered
before him. (...) there be when so many (...) shall be alive together, and
(...) place! If so be the multi^^^ (...) so great when they are (...) no man
can number them, (...) a great multitude which no (...) and ^^^dreds, and
people, and (...) and before the Lamb, clothed with (...) in their hands. What
then will the (...) be, when they are gathered toge^^ (...) whom, the righteous
are but few (...) be gathered before Christ's Judgment (...)

3. Christ at his second appearance will separate the righteous from the
wicked, the Chaff shall be purged from the Wheat, Met 3. 12. the Tares shall be
gathered from the Corn, Mat 13. 30, The bad Fish shall be divided from the
good. V. 48. The Goats shall be separated from the ^heep, Mat. 25. 32. By the
Chaff, Tares, bad Fish, Goats, we (...) to understand the wicked; by the good
Corn, good Fish, (...), we are to understand the righteous: who will be (...)
one from another, however they are now in some (...) and linked together; the
Elect shall be ga^^^^ (...) into one company from the fore winds, Mat. (...)
shall stand on the right hand of Christ, and (...) wicked shall stand on the
left, Mat 25. 33. In (...) and separation, their shall be no mistake, (...)
now. Many close hypocrites may in this (...) children of God; they may live
together (...) receive the Sacrament together, and (...) of Religion: yea, some
hypocrites (...) appearance, seem to out-go some of (...) forwardness; the
Lamps of the (...) shi^e with a greater blaze than (...) the wise; when they
have not the least (...) Grace in the vessel of their hearts, (...) yea, some
of Gods own children (...) for hypocrites (their chiefest life being (...)) by
them which are uncharitable; (...) themselves through the temptati^^^ (...)
^^^tings of their mis-giving un^^^^ (...) last day, there will be no mis^^^^
(...) openly profane and notoriously vile (...), (who were even professed
Ene^^^^ (...) shun their company, and separate (...) be separated from them by
Jesus (...); but also those who were more (...) kind of love to them, but none
unto (...) ye^, all hypocrites, who seemed to be of (...) company, shall then
be parted from them: Christ will look upon all with a piercing, distinguishing
eye, he will easily discern and discover all the Hypocrite s, however they may
plead that they have eat and drank in his presence, and some of them cast out
Devils in his Name; he will not judge according to the outward appearance, but
according to the truth which has been in the Heart: and they which have so
much deceived men, shall not be able to deceive him: none of them shall twine
themselves unperceivably, and crowd into Heaven amongst the Righteous: then the
Lamps of the foolish Virgins will be gone out: then the Vail and Mask of (...)
outward show, will be rent and torn to pieces: then (...) Sheeps-skin will be
plucked off, and they will appear (...) (...) whole World to have been but Goat
s, and among (...) they must go: Christ will not leave one of the (...) amongst
the Sheep, and he will not leave one of (...) amongst the Goats; all that
belong to his fold (...) ^^^thered into one society: of their meeting, (...)
particular Judgment.

4. At the second appearance of Jesus Christ's (...) opened, out of which all
must be judges (...) the dead, small, and great stand before (...) were
opened, and another Book was (...) L ife, and the dead were judged out of (...)
written in those Books, according to (...) five Books which will then be (...)
remembrance. 2. The Book of (...) Book of the Law. 4. The Book of (...) of Life.

1. The Book of Gods Remembra^^^ (...) we are to understand in a spiritual
(...) a real Book which God did make use of (...) of things, as men do, who
have frail (...) which would let slip many things of not (...) help: but hereby
we are to understand (...) exact notice of things, and remembers them (...) if:
(...) them written in a Book by him. The Book of Gods Remembrance will be
opened, wherein will be found recorded,

1. The Names of all the Sons and Daughters of Adam, whatever Age and
Generation they have lived in, from the beginning of the Creation unto the
consummation of all things: as also the Relation they stood in, and the charge
was committed to them. Such and such were Magis^tates, and had such and such
Subjects under them: such had the (...) word of Justice put into their hands,
and there charge was (...) (...) under Christ: to encourage and reward them
that (...) well: and to punish evil d^^rs: such and such were Mi^^^^ (...) and
they where entrusted with the care of Souls, they (...) by the Lord for
Watchmen to forewarn the peo^^ (...) (...) ^^^ements: as Stewards to dispense
the food of the (...) to give every one their portion: such and such (...) of
Families: whose work was to set up (...) the Worship of God in their Houses,
and La^^^^ (...) after the Salvation of the souls, as well (...) under them
about their civil work, and to (...): such and such were Children and (...) was
to yield obedience to Parents (...) Lord with meekness and fear, with (...).

(...) recorded the places where such (...) lived in the dark places of Hea^^^
(...) but such and such lived in I srael, in (...): such and such lived in
England, (...) Family: there will be recor^^^ (...) which they have enjoyed in
those (...) such a powerful Ministry, heard such (...)-warming Sermons, and had
such (...) Word dropping upon them; they were (...) and they had fat pastures
to feed in* (...) ^ound recorded, the various dispensations (...) toward them
for their good: such and (...) only Gods Word, but also God's Rod to* (...)
they lived under the sound of awakening Judgments: they lived in London when
the Plague raged so sorely: and when the Fire brake forth and consumed the
City; and such were preserved, when thousands fell into the Pit; they were
brought down to the Doors of the grave, and eternity, and they were brought up
again; they were preserved and provided for, and every day tasted of the Cup of
Gods goodness, they were laden with his mercies.

4. And especially there will be found recorded, all the actions of the
Children of men, and there carriage toward God, and toward one another, in
those Places, in those Relations, under those Ordinances and Providence.

1. There will be found recorded all the good that (...) been sound in, or done
by any, from the day of their (...) hood to their dying hour; such and such,
they were (...) to Parents when they were young; they were (...) learning their
Catechism, and ready to receive (...) in the Principles of Religion; such were
acqu^^ (...) the Scriptures when they were but Children: (...) ^^der hearts in
their tender year s; such loved (...) lowed God, when they were but youths:
(...) their hearts opened in hearing of the Word (...) hearts in prayer: such
were awakened (...) and convinced and humbled for sin, and (...) and turn to
the Lord: such opened the (...) when he knocked, and set up his (...) put their
necks under his yoke (...) qu^^nters and lovers of the Ordinan^^ (...) Christ.
Such made it their busine^^^^ (...) walked with God in their Families* (...)
dealings, in the World, such used (...) took up their Cross, and labored (...)
wherever he led them: such (...) could not reform: were thankful for (...):
were faithful in the relations the (...) faithful under the means they enjoyed
(...) their Brethren in misery: were patient (...) the Rod, which was laid upon
them, and all (...) of men will be had in remembrance.

2. There will be found recorded, all the evil actions, all the sins of the
Children of men. Such and such were disobedient and untoward Children;
slighting the command of God and their Parents; were idle and careless of
instruction, and would not open their ear to discipline, such were old in sin,
when young in years: were strong and skilful in wicked sinful practices, when
there bodies were but weak, and minds sottishly ignorant in the things of God:
such had good examples before them, but they would not follow them: they saw
dreadful Judgments, but were ^^^^ned under them; they received many mercies,
but (...) abused them: they had seasons of grace but they mis^^^^ (...) them:
they had calls, but they shut their ear against (...) (...) they had
convictions of Conscience, but they stifled (...) (...) ^^ey had motions of the
spirit, but they quenched (...) had proffers of Christ, and pardon and
salvation, (...) ^^^fused them* and turned Gods glory into shame, (...) into
wantonness. Such and such were Sab^^^^ (...) such were Swearers: such were
Drunkards, (...) ^^^ean^ persons, and Adulterers, such were (...) ^^ere
Covetous persons and Idolater s, such were (...) ^^ighteous in their dealings,
such were bitter (...) in their speeches, such were injurious in (...) the sins
of Men and Woman will be (...) of Gods Remembrance, Deuteronomy 32 34. Is (...) with
me, and sealed amongst my trea^^^^ (...) treasures up the sins of the wicked
(...) day of his wrath, and their per^^^^ (...) 14 16, 17. Thou numbrest my
steps, do (...), my transgressions are sealed up in (...) mine iniquities.
God numbreth (...) by one, sin by sin, as a man would (...) he watches that he
may number (...) notice of the footsteps of every (...) impression in the Book
of his Remem^^^^ (...)-steps of the body do, when a man walk^^^ (...). He
puts the transgressions in a Bag, (...) the Bag, and seals the Bag: all
which expressions denote Gods exactness in recording and laying up the sins of
men. It is said Jere. 17. 1. That the sin of ^udah is written with a Pen of
Iron, and the point of a Diamond. All secret sins will be found there recorded,
for nothing is secret to God, whose eyes are like a flame of fire, which gives
light to every dark corner: darkness hides not from him, but the night shines
as the day: he looks into every corner of the Earth, and into every corner of
the Heart, and has set out secret sins in the light of his* Countenance: and
all open sins will be found there recorded? no man has taken so much notice of
others fins* as God has done: he does as it were Book all done (...) his
remembrance, and when Christ comes at the last (...) the Book of Gods
remembrance will be opened.

2. The second Book which will be opened at Christ's (...) will be the B ook of
men's own Consciences: and this (...) the counter-part to every man's particular,
of what (...) ten in the Book of Gods remembrance they will (...) same thing
there registered: indeed Conscience (...) seem to be asleep, and say nothing
whilst men (...) ^^^ing and drinking, and sinning* yet Conscience is (...)
awake and busy in writing, and taking notes of (...) actions every day:
Conscience has its Day-(...) has not an empty page: the mouth of (...) be
shut, and with much ado for the prese^^ (...) from speaking and biting; but the
e^e of (...) be shut from seeing, nor the hand of Cons^^^ (...) from registring
what it takes notice of: (...) World has as it were whole Volumes of (...) his
bosom written down by Conscience; (...) letter of some things done long ago,
may (...) and worn out, so that a man cannot read (...) when this Book shall be
opened at the last (...) appear in very legible characters; like as when a
(...) with the juice of a Lemon upon fair Paper, the juice (...) and the Paper
is white, and cannot read a word when (...) i^ written, nor while it is
writing: but let him keep the paper many years by him, and after bring that
Paper close to the fire, the white letters will turn black, and become very
legible: so the Conscience of wicked persons is writing whilst they are
sinning, and they do not perceive it after it is written: they forget many of
their old sins, yea they do not take notice of them as sins, whilst they are
committing them, but when the last day is come, and Christ is come, who will be
revealed from Heaven inflaming fire, to take vengeance upon them, and the Book
of their Consciences shall be opened before them, then all the notes of
Conscience shall be plain and easy to be read, and a ready (...) ^^^firmation,
Conscience will give of all that is written in the (...) of Gods remembrance:
and O how sweet will the (...) ^^^ony of conscience be of good actions? how
bitter will (...) ^^ords be of sins?

(...) third Book which will be opened, will be the Book of (...) which
requiring perfect and perpetual obedience, (...) all, both righteous and
wicked, because all have (...) by the Law are cursed, Gal. 3. 10. Cursed is
every (...) con^inueth not in all things which are written in the (...) the L
aw, to do them; but then an appeal will be (...)

(...) B ook which will be opened, is the B ook of the (...) the righteous will
find the merits of Christ (...) ^ad none of their own: they will find ex^^^^^
(...) precious promises of pardon, and Salvation, (...), which have been made
to all them that (...) ^^lieve in Christ, and testify the same by their (...)
God, making choice of him ser their chief go^^ (...) and laying up their
treasure in Heaven, and b^ (...) obedience to his commands, and walking in
(...) way: and then Conscience will give in evidence, (...) Gods remembrance
will confirm it, and the Spirit will witness it, and Christ himself will
acknowledge it, that all his true Disciples have had the qualifications, which
have shown their interest in the Promises: yea, the weakest of believer s,
whatever doubts and fears they have now, will then certainly know, and
confidently plead these qualifications which they have had, they will be able
to say, that they had true says, though it were but weak: that they did truly
lay hold on Christ, though it were with a trembling hand: that they had the
faith of reliance and recumbance, though they had not the faith of assurance
and strong confidence: that they did heartily repent and grieve for sin, though
they had not that measure of Godly sorrow, which they desired* that sin did not
reign in them, though sometime it did rag^^^ and domineer: that they had chosen
God for their (...) good, above the whole World, and the ^^yass of their (...)
was toward him: and that they had a sincere love to (...) (...) though they
fell short in the fervency which they desi^^ (...) have: that they did walk and
keep on in Heavens wa^^ (...) if sometimes they wandered, that they found their
way (...) (...) if sometime they stumbled, that they got up again: (...) (...)
Book of the Gospel, will give all true believers such (...) (...) ^^^tances as
that they shall not co^^e into condemnation (...) (...) 3. 16. Whosoever
believes in the Son shall not perish (...) everlasting life, and Rom 8. 1.
There is no (...) which are in Christ Jesus, who walk not after the (...) the S
pirit. And the like.

But the Unbelievers will get no benefit by this (...) find great and ^weet
promises, but not one (...) Book of the Gospel belonging to them, because (...)
Christ: they lived and dyed in impenitency (...) neglect of Christ and
salvation, and now (...) favorable word for them: and therefore they (...) to
be tried by the Book of the Law, only the (...) the condemnation of such as
have not fielded (...) his obedience.

5. A Fifth Book which will be opened, will be the Book of Life: where all the
names of the Elect are enrolled, which when they read, how will they adore the
riches of the free grace of God in choosing them before the foundation of the
World was laid: and all those whose names are not enrolled in this B ook, shall
be condemned and cast into the Lake of fire, Rev. 23. 12, 15.

5. The fifth thing proposed, and the chiefest, is to speak more particularly,
of Christ's judging both the righteous and the wicked, at his second appearance.

And here I shall speak. 1. Of their Particular Judgment.

2. Of the execution of their sentence pronounced in judgment.

^. Concerning the Judgment of the righteous and the wicked.

CHAP. V.
THe judgment of the righteous will be first, and therefore I shall first
treat of it, and here speak, 1. Of the immediate antecedents to their judgment.

2. Of the judgment it self.

1. Concerning the immediate antecedents to the judgment of (...) righteous.

1. The first Antecedent to the righteous judgment will be their Resurrection
from the dead, 1 These. 4. 16. The dead in Christ shall rise first, when Christ
descends from Heaven, the souls of the righteous shall descend with him, 1
These. 4. 14. Them that sleep in Jesus will God bring with him. The Spirits of
all the just men and women made Perfect, shall then come down and find out
their own bodies which have been sleeping in the bed of their graves, and they
shall enter again into their old Habitations, they went out of them it may be
with fear and trembling, with grief and sorrow, being unwilling to leave them
behind, though they were so rotten and ruinous: but O with what joy will they
return and enter again, when the building shall be repaired, when their bodies
shall be raised by the power of the Lord Jesus Christ, and healed of all
infirmities, when they shall be made incorruptible and immortal! see 1 Cor. 15.
52. In a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, at the last Trump, for the Trumpet
shall sound, and the dead shall be raised incorruptible, and we shall be
changed: And Verse 54 So when this corruptible shall have put (...) on, and
this mortal shall (...) brought to pass the saying (...) in Victory; then shall
(...) saying, Verse 55. O (...) is thy Victory? The (...) ^^^ous over this
Conquer^^^ (...) has given us the Victory (...) parting of soul and body (...)
Saints at their death, as (...) resurrection; O how (...) strange metamorph^^^
(...) of (...) body vile to (...) and (...) it come forth more bright and (...)
has been refined in a furnace, (...) fashi^^ed like unto Christ's most glor^^
(...) how will the soul delight in the beauty, (...) ^rtality, which then shall
be put upon the (...) will be more suited to its nature, and fitted for its
(...) ^^^^ions, and participation in its glory, and how will the body delight
in the wonderful glorious and shining excellencies which the soul has attained
since its separation? If the love between the soul and the body were so great,
when the body was so vile, and the soul so sinful, what will it be ^hen both
are glorified? If the conjunction between the (...) and body were so sweet,
when the body was so frail, (...) subject to death, and the soul a spiritual
and never-dying substance, what will it be when the body shall be made
immortal, and in some sort spiritual? O! with what pleasure will the body
awaken out of its long sleep, and arise and shake o^t its dust, and put on its
beautiful garments of immortality and glory? with what delight and joy will it
first open its eyes upon those beautiful and glorious objects which will
quickly present themselves to (...) view? Thus concerning the Resurrection of
the righteous bodies.

2. The second Antecedent to the Judgment of the righteous, will (...) (...)
meeting with Angels at their graves ^^outh, Mat. (...) the great sound of a
Trum^^^^ (...) the sour winds from one (...) are they awakened and (...)
entertained by An^^^^ (...), who have such a (...) many good offices (...) body
they did not (...) for their acquain^^^^ (...), and be able to dis^^^^ (...),
who for so many (...) their Father in Hea^^^ (...) luster upon them, that will
(...) and these shall be part of (...) ^^^pani^^s in Glory; instead of (...)
^^arkness, which used to assault, buf^^^^ (...) when in the body before, they
shall (...) of light with them, and about them to join (...) the love and
praise of the great J ehovah. The (...) will be sent to ^all them, and gather
them, and we may rationally imagine that they will falute them at their rising,
and welcome them out of their Graves: We read of the Angel Gabriel's* salutation
of Mary, Luke 1. 28. Hail thou that art highly favored, the Lord is with thee,
blessed art thou among women: and the same Angels words to Daniel, chap 2. 23.
Thou art greatly beloved. Such salutations possibly the Angels may give to the
Saints at their resurrection. Arise ye that are highly favored of God, come
forth ye that are greatly beloved: welcome, welcome ye happy ones: ye that are
blessed amongst the Children of men: your Lord is come d^wn and stays for
you; he has sent us to call you, and convey you into his Presence, and bring
you where he is, that you may see and share in his glory: O how will such words
make their hearts to glow within them? How joyful will such a message be unto
them? O happy they that ever they were born! or rather that ever they were new
born! O happy they that they should live, that they should be raised to see
such a day as this will be! O what looks! what speeches! what joys will they
have, when they are entertained by the Angels?

3. The third Antecedent to the righteous J udgment, will be their meeting one
with another, Mat. 24. 31. The Angels will be sent to gather the Elect
together, 2 These. 2. 1. I besee^^^ you B rethren, by the coming of our Lord
Jesus Christ, and our gathering together unto him: the Saints will be all
gathered together, and we shall be gathered with them, if we be found in that
number: there we shall meet with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and all the holy
Kings, and Prophets, and Apostles, and Martyrs, and Holy Men, who have lived,
in all Generations: and all these in another hue than when they lived upon the
Earth: they will arise like so many shining Suns out of the earth; O how shall
we be delighted with the sight of such a glorious train and company* when we
see the Image and picture of the Lord upon them drawn so to the life? what
sweet greetings shall we have, and mutual congratulations of our old
acquaintance in the flesh, who were with us acquainted with the Lord? and is
this the end of our hearing and fasting and Praying, and Self-denial, and
Mortification, and the poor services we have done for the Lord? Is this the
issue of our pains and labor: O happy we that ever we repented, and believed,
and closed with Jesus Christ! O happy we that laid up our Treasure, and waited
for our glory and happiness till this time.

4. The fourth Antecedent is that the Righteous shall be caught up together in
the air: all the righteous shall be caught up, they that are raised from the
dead, and they that remain alive upon the earth on that day, 1 These. 4. 16, 17.
The dead in Christ shall rise first: Then we which are alive and remain, shall
be caught up together with them to meet the Lord in the Air: we read of the two
Witnesses which were stain: after three days and a half the Spirit of Life from
God entered into them, and they stood upon their feet, and they heard a great
voice from heaven saying unto them, come up hither, and they ascends up to
heaven in a cloud, etc. Rev. 11. 11, 12. In the morning of the Resurrection the
spirit of Life from God will enter into the bodies of all the Saints, and they
will stand up, and possibly they may bear a voice from Christ in the Air, Come
up hither! and then they will be caught up, (...) ascend into the air to meet
with the Lord? O what unexpressible pleasure and delight will they find when
they Feel themselves begin to mo^e upwards, when they are leaving the earth and
wicked men, and so many glorious persons of them together ascending to meet
their most glorious Lord.

5 The fifth Antecedent to the judgment is their meeting with the Lord in the
Air: 1 These 4. 17. Then we which are alive and remain, shall be caught up
together with them to meet the L ord in the Air. We have spoken of the meeting
of the Soul and the Body* of the meeting of the Saints with the Angels: of the
meeting of the Saints with the Saints: all which meetings will be very
delightful, but the meeting of the Saints with the Lord himself will be beyond
all. O how sweet will the sound of Christ's coming be unto them before they see
him? when they hear the long expected shout, and the sound of the last Trump!
This, this will be music indeed in their ea^s: T hen then they will lift up
their heads with joy: and do! us think how transporting the first glance of
their eye will be upon the Lord Jesus Christ when they see him yet afar off
clothed with such brightness and beauty: never did their eye behold such an
object before: they admired to see the Saints, and to see themselves so
transformed, but how will they admire to see the Lord in such glory? if so be
that some of his Disciples did gaze after him with wonder, when he was taken
from them, and ascended into Heaven, Acts 1. 11. With what wonder will all his
Disciples (most of which never saw him in the flesh, none of which saw him in
such glory) then gaze upon him when he shall come down from Heaven? Ye men of
Galilee, why stand ye gazing back into Heaven? say the Angels, this same J esus
which is taken up from you into Heaven, shall so come in like manner, as ye
have seen him go into Heaven; If you look and wonder now at his going, how will
you look and wonder at his coming* which will be as surely, but far more
gloriously? But when they are come nearer unto Christ, and have a fuller view
of him: O what thoughts! what affections! what joys will there then fill their
souls! O what workings, what beatings of heart? what transports and ravishment
of spirit will they have! O how would they be overwhelmed with this sight, and
utterly unable to bear it, if they were not strengthened beyond their present
capacity! And is this the Savior and Redeemer of the World? O glorious S on of
Righteousness! did this most excellent person, who thus appears in the
brightness of his Father, and is now come down from his glorious habitation,
with such a glorious train of Angels, once vouchsafe to dwell with men, and
vail his glory in the flesh? did this eternal son of God stoop so low as to
take upon him our nature, yea to take upon him the form of a servant? did he
live in such meaness and obscurity, and endure such hardship, contradiction,
reproach and injury, when he was upon the Earth? O infinite condescension! did
this Lord of Life and glory in the days of his flesh so Weep and Pray, and cry:
sweat and bleed, and dye, though with such pain, anguish and disgrace: yet with
such willingness and patience in our steads* that he might redeem us from sin
and death, and wrath to come: that we might not perish but have everlasting
life? O wonderful, unconceivable love! what, so glorious, a Person to be made
man? to be made a curse? to do such things? to suffer such things? for such
mean, vile, cursed sinners as (...), that we might be blessed and happy with
him: O surpassing superlative kindness! ^s this he who made choice of us, when
he chose so few, that called us, when the most were passed by, that pitched his
love upon us when there was no attractive in us, nothing to move him* but his
own bowels, that revealed his secrets to us, when he ^id them from the wise and
prudent, that brought us nigh, when we are afar off, and made us
fellow-Citizens, and fellow-heirs with the Saints, and of the household of God,
who were by nature Children of wrath, even as others? O astonishing free Grace!
Is this he who clothed us when we were naked, even with the Robes of his own
righteousness? that washed us when we were defiled, even in the fountain of his
own blood? that cheared us when we were troubled, even with the comforts of his
own spirit? that strengthened us when we were weak, even with ^his might and
glorious power in our inner-man? was i^ from this Person that we received our
Pardon, and Peace, our Supports our Graces* our Encouragements, and all the
sweet refreshments we have found in Ordinances.

Is this the advocate we made choice of, relied, and trusted upon for life and
salvation? Is this the master whom we followed, and whose work we were employed
about? Is this the Captain whose colors we wore, and under whose banners we
fought? Is this the Lord whom we obeyed? the friend, the husband whom we loved?
and is he so glorious? O how will the Saints be wrapped up in admiration and joy!
how will they ^e all in a flame of burning love and affection when they come to
behold the Lord Jesus Christ himself, and viewing him in such glory, as then he
will be decked withal? when they come to see him face to face, who has such
loveliness in his face, and such love in his heart unto them. It is said, 1
Pet. 1. 8. Whom having not seen ye love, in whom though now ye see him not, yet
believing, ye rejoice with joy unspeakable and full of glory.

If so be that the Saints do now love Christ, whom they never saw, only have
heard of, and believed the report of the World; how will they love him when
they have this sight of him, and see a thousand fold more beauty in him than
was reported, or could be imagined? if so be that now sometimes they rejoice,
with glorious and unspeakable joy in believing, what will they do when they
come to see him in his glory: if they can now rejoice in tribulation, and take
pleasure in the Cross and reproach of Christ, what will they find in their
Masters joy, and the Crown which he now comes to put on their heads? O how glad
will they be that they have been counted worthy to suffer any thing for such a
Savior* It will be a joyful time indeed unto the Saints when they are caught
up in the Clouds to meet the Lord in the Air.

And the ^oy of Christ will be no less, to meet with them; O with what an eye
will he view them, when they are arising and descending with so much of his
beauty and luster upon them! none can conceive the love and delight which the
Lord Jesus will take in them at that day: He will look upon them as those who
were beloved by the Father and himself from all eternity; as those who fetch
him out of Heaven, before to Redeem them, and now to Glorify them; he will
look upon them as the travel of his soul; as the price of his blood; He will
look upon them as the Jewels: as spoils taken out of the hands of his Enemies;
he will look upon them as Plats grown up unto perfection; as servants who have
done their work; as those who have kept up his honor in the World, he will
look upon them as Members of his Body; he will look upon them as his dearest
spouse and most beautiful Bride, who now comes to be joined to him more
nearly, and to live with him for ever. O the love and joy of Christ at his
meeting! if so be that Christ so dearly loved his spouse, and could delight in
her too, when she was black and sooty, when her clothes were spotted and
stained, when her affections were weak, low and inconstant; how will he love
and rejoice in her when she is made perfectly like to himself, and so beautiful
with his comeliness? when her stains are all washed off, and she is presented
before him without spot, or wrinkle, blemish, or any such thing: when she shall
be arrayed in white, and has put on her shining garments, and appear so
lovely; and her love shall be so high, and full, and strong, and fla^^ing?
never did Lovers meet with such delight and joy on their Wedding day, as Christ
and his spouse will meet at the day of his second appearance: O the sweet
smiles the Saints will see in the ^ace of Christ! such smiles upon them, such
glances of love will sparkle forth from his eyes, as will ravish their hearts;
O the sweet words they will hear? the welcome he will give them when they first
meet! when they are come, he will place them at his right hand. So much
concerning the more immediate Antecedents of the Judgment of the Righteous.

CHAP. VI.
THe second thing is to speak concerning the Judgment it self of the righteous.
And there are two things the Scriptures speaks of, which Christ will do at his
second appearance in the judgment of the righteous.

1. He will take an account of them.

2. He will pronounce the sentence upon them

1. Christ will take an account of the righteous* Rom 4. 10, 12. We shall all
stand before the Judgment S eat of Christ, and every one of us shall give an
account of himself unto God; though the righteous shall not be brought to
condemnation, yet they shall be brought into judgment, which will be for their
Masters honor and their own: especially of those who can give a good account
of the Tallents their Lord has entrusted them withal.

I know it is a question among Divines, whether the sins of Gods people will be
mentioned: and made manifest at the day of Judgment; I shall not determine the
question, since the Scripture is not so plain; possibly the Lord having
pardoned them, covered, blotted them out of the Book of his remembrance, he
will not mention them on that day; but sure I am, if they should be mentioned*
it will not be to their disgrace and grief, but to their more abundant joy in
the Lord who has forgiven them: If they should read their sins in the Book of
Gods remembrance; they will find them like so many debts crossed out with the
red lines of Christ's blood: if the Devil should be permitted to accuse them at
that time, who is now the Ac^user of the Brethren, and rip up their secret
faults, the Lord himself will stand up and plead for them: he will make known
the sufficient value of his Merits for their Ransom, and publicly acquit them
from all guilt and condemnation: Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods
Elect it is God that justifies: who is he that shall condemn? it is Christ
that died for them, Rom: 8. 33, 34.

But these four things Christ will take an account of, in the judgment of the
righteous.

1 He will take an account of their Graces The vessels of the Virgins will be
looked into, what O I they have got, the hearts of the Saints will be looked
into, what graces they have obtained. Christ will then take notice what Godly
sorrow they have had for sin, their secret weeping and mourning, will then be
made manifest; he will take notice what humility and meekness, what self-denial
and patience they have had, especially what faith, and love, and hope, and
spiritual joy they have had, and all their raised affections toward himself,
and Heavenly things, in his Ordinances, and his judgment of grace will not be
according to the appearance and show which has been, but according to truth:
and then the Saints shall be ^ancked, not according to their esteem and dignity
in the World, but according to the measure of the graces they have attained.

2. Christ will take an account of the improvement of the talents of graces and
gifts, and opportunities of service which he has entrusted them with all, Mat
25. 19. And Christ will then take chief notice of those which have been most
industrious and faithful, and instrumental for doing most good, and bringing
most glory to his Name, and though all shall have a full reward that are found
truly faithful, and shall ^^ter into their Masters Joy; yet they shall have a
more full reward, and be capable of more joy and glory than the other.

3. And especially, He will take an account of their works of Mercy, Mat. 25.
35, 36. I was hungry, and ye gave me meat: I was thirsty, and ye gave me drink:
I was a stranger, and ye took me in: naked, and ye clothed me: I was sick, and
ye visited me, I was in Prison, and ye came unto me, etc.

It will even astonish and confound the righteous to hear such language as this
from the Lord Jesus Christ: when he appears in such glory, they will be ready
to question, when he was in any want, and received relief at their hands: When
saw we thee an hungry, or a thirst, or naked, and ministered any help. We
received all from thee, but we could give nothing to thee: thou did relieve
us, and redeem us out of the deepest poverty and misery in which we were sunk,
and should have perished without thy help: but what relief had thou from us;
Then the King will answer and say unto them, v. 40. Verily I say unto you, in
as much as ye have done it to one of the least of these my Brethren, ye have
done it unto me. At such a time and such a time, the poor came to you for
relief making use of my name, whose backs for my sake ye clothed, and whose
bellies you refreshed, and whose necessities you supplied, that was done unto
me; though they were poor, they were my brethren: some of my servants were
brought into straights for Conscience sake, and you received them, or sent help
to them: you received me then, and gave help to me, and I am come to give you a
thousand sold reward. Were this truth more effectually believed, what a
forwardness would there be in Christians to works of mercy: surely they would
look upon that part of their estate as best improved: which in such works is
bestowed. Christ does not mention any other use which they put their money unto,
which if worthy to be compared, would be made mentioned of* he does (...) speak
of so much laid out in building, so much laid out in clothing, so much laid
out for (...) so much laid up in portions for Children: all this the wicked can
do: but so much laid out to the poor, and (...) in them, which is the only part
ye have laid up for your selves: and which I am now come to return you with
usury.

4. Christ will take an account of the afflictions which the righteous have
endured: especially, of their sufferings for his sake: such reproaches, such
losses, imprisonments, banishments* buffetings: but if they have suffered
death, with what honor will this be made mention of? with what great esteem
will he receive and speak unto them which have come out of great tribulation*
and O the Joy in this morning, after the tears of the night* then they will
find that their light affliction which they have endured for a moment, has
wrought for them a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory, 2 Cor: 4. 17,

2. The second thing in Christ's judgment of the Saints, is the Sentence which
he will pronounce upon them, which will be a most glorious Invitation of them
to take possession of the Kingdom of Heaven which he has prepared for them.
Mat 25. 34. Then shall the King say unto them on his right hand* Come ye
blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from the foundation
of the World.

All Christ's invitations in Scripture are very sweet, Come unto me all ye that
labor* and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest, Mat. 11. 28. How sweet
is this to a troubled Conscience, and an oppressed spirit, ready to sink under
the burden of sin? (...) every one that thirsts, come to the waters: and be
that has no money, come buy wine and milk without money, and without price,
Isa. 55. 1. O what sweet words are these to those which are parched, and
pained, and ready to dye with spiritual thirst, and can find nothing in the
creatures which can give them any satisfaction or ease? But of all the words
that ever Christ did speak, of all the invitations that ever Christ did make,
this will be the sweetest, which he will give to his Disciples at the last day,
Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you, from the
foundation of the World. Come ye blessed and happy ones, however accounted
miserable ones by men, yet blessed of my Father, Come inherit the Kingdom
prepared for you, from the foundation of the World. Take possession of your
eternal inheritance: Come enter into the Kingdom of Glory, which the Father
has chosen you unto, and called you unto, and which I have purchased, and now
fitted and made ready for you: Come along with me, and I will show you my
glory: and where I am, there ye shall be also. Come along, with me into Heaven,
and ye shall live and reign with me for ever and ever. Come along, and enter
now into your Masters joy: come and I will show you the Father, and bring you
into his House and presence, where there is fullness of joy, and pleasures for
evermore. And now Beloved, think with your selves, what joys! what
exhaltation! what clapping of hands! what shoutings! what Hallelujahs! what
Hosannahs! what triumphing acclamations the Saints will make upon the hearing
of these words But here words fail, conceptions fall short, Who can utter what
the affections and behavior of the righteous will be, when they have their
sentence, and hear such sweet and gracious words from the mouth of their Judge
and Redeemer.

Thus concerning the Judgment of the righteous.

CHAP. VII.
COncerning the judgment of the wicked, at the second appearance of Jesus
Christ: in treating hereon, I shall as in the judgment of the righteous speak,

1. Of the immediate antecedents.

2. Of the Judgment it self.

1. The immediate antecedents of the Judgment of the wicked will be,

1. The Resurrection of their Bodies from the Grave^: all the wicked that are
dead, shall be raised, though not so soon, yet as certainly as the righteous,
John 5. 28, 29. The hour comes, that all that are in their graves shall hear
his voice, (not only) they that have done good, shall come forth to the
Resurrection of life, (but also) they that have done evil to the Resurrection
of damnation. When the wicked die, their bodies are clapped up in the Prison of
the Grave, where they rot and putrify under the chains of death, which are
laid upon them, and their souls are shut down into the Prison of Hell, where
they are bound in chains of darkness, and woe, and reserved unto the judgment of
the great day; when the Lord Jesus shall appear to judge the World, he will
bring the keys of Death and Hell along with him, and open both these Prison
doors, not to give liberty and release to the Prisoners, but as Prisons are
opened at assizes, to bring them forth to Judgment; he will open the Prison of
Hell, and all the souls of the wicked shall come forth like so many Locusts out
of the bottomless Pit: and he will open the Prison of the Grave, and all their
bodies shall creep like so many ugly Toads out of the Earth: and then soul and
body shall be joined together again, and this meeting will be sad, beyond
expression: the meeting of the souls and bodies of the righteous will not be
more joyful, than the meeting of the souls and bodies of the wicked will be
doleful: possibly some of the wicked had no hands in their death, and their
souls went forth of their bodies without much pain or fear; but their entrance*
into their bodies again, will be with unexpressible horror: and if some of the
wicked had their Consciences awakened at death, and they lay down with torrour:
when they awake and rise again from the dead, it will be far greater terror.
The old World dyed in a fright with the Deluge of water, which overwhelmed
them, Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, with their Company, died in a fright, at the
cleaving and opening of the Earths mouth, which swallowed them up: Judas and
other despairing souls died in a fright, at the apprehensions of the open mouth
of Hell, ready to receive their guilty spirits: but none of the wicked could go
forth of their bodies in such a fright as they will enter into them again at
the last day: The damned souls have been lying in Hell many years, full of
anguish in their separation, and they know that their anguish will be increased
by the torment of their bodies in their union: and no wonder if they be
exceedingly unwilling and fearful to enter into their old lodging: their bodies
have been sleeping all this while in the Dust, and have felt no pam at all: and
O how unwelcome a guest will their Souls then be: Never was Death so terrible
unto them, as Life will be at that day: they had rather sleep still in their
Grave, and continue in their rottenness and corruption: they had rather lie hid
for ever in the dust of oblivion, or be quite annihilated like Beasts, than to
rise again unto such torments: as now they must undergo: but they must arise,
willing or unwilling: It is said that the vile bodies of the righteous shall at
the last day be fashioned like unto Christ's glorious body, Phil. 3. 21. They
shall be made like unto Christ's body in beauty and glory: but the bodies of the
wicked will have another hue and fashion: i^ it were possible to fashion bodies
like Devils, those impure and foul spirits, such spiritual bodies the wicked
should have: be sure their bodies shall have no glory put upon them: but they
lay down vile bodies, they shall rise up more vile: they lay down in dishonor,
and they shall be raised in far greater dishonor: indeed they will be raised
incorruptible and Immortal: but this will not be for their glory, but that they
may be capable of the greater and longer torment and misery: their bodies will
be so far from being made beautiful like unto Christ's, that I believe they will
not regain that natural beauty which they had here upon the Earth: now some of
them outshine Gods own Children (whose chief beauty lies inward) in external
comeliness: then none but the Bodies of Gods Children will shine: And then the
bodies of the wicked most probable will be swarthy, black, ugly monstrous
bodies: if there be a ghastliness upon the bodies of the most beautiful, when
they are dead, what ghastliness will there be upon the bodies of all the
wicked, when the second death shall seize upon them? were their bodies never so
beautiful in themselves, yet their features would quickly be altered by the
horrible passions of their mind: the blackness and dread of the soul would
quickly appear in their countenance: besides the impressions which the Fire of
Hell will have upon them. The foul will find nothing in the body which will
give it any delight or ease, or in the least contribute unto the astwagement of
its anguish: it will return into the Body as in a Prison or Dungeon, where
there is no pleasure to be found, and if the body be black, how black will the
soul be, after so long abode with foul Devils in the lower Region of darkness?
And when such soul souls and such vile bodies meet What a meeting! What a
greeting will there be! We may fancy a kind of language to be between them, at
that day. The soul to the body, come out of thy hole thou filthy dunghill flesh,
for the pampering and pleasing of whom, I have lost my self for ever: who have
stolen away my time, and thoughts, and heart from God and Christ, and Heavenly
things, to ^eed, and cloth, and cherish thee, and make provisions to satisfy
thy base deceitful lusts: when I should have been making provision for thine
and mine everlasting happiness. Awake and come forth of the dust, thou
bewitching dirty flesh, who did lull me asleep so long in my pleasing chains,
until thou did suddenly open thy doors and thrust me out, where I was
awakened in torments before I was aware, now I must come into thy doors again,
that thou may share, and taste the bitter issue of sinful pleasures and
delights. And O how will the body be affrighted, so soon as the foul is entered!
never did the foul taste so much of the bodies delights, as the body will then
feel of the souls anguish. The body to the soul: And have thou found me out O
my enemy? could not thou have let me alone to lie still at rest in this sweet
sleep? Have thou used me as a slave, and employed all my members as servants of
iniquity, and unrighteousness, and art thou now come to torment me? and is this
the fruit of all the pleasures we have taken together? should not thou have
been more wise, and provided better for thy self and me? O what cries and
shrieks will the Tongue give forth, so soon as it has recovered (...) (...)! O
what fearful amazing sights will there appear before the eyes, so soon as they
are opened, when they first peep out of the Grave, and sinners see Heaven and
Earth on fire about them, and Christ coming in flaming fire, to take vengeance
upon them? O how dreadful will the shout, and the voice of the Archangel, and
the sound of the last Trumpet summoning them to Judgment be unto the ears? O
how will every joint and member of the bodies of the Wicked tremble, when they
are raised again at the last day?

2. The second Antecedent to the judgment of the wicked, will be their meeting
with Devils: the righteous will meet with Angels to welcome them out of their
Graves; the wicked will meet with Devils to entertain them at their
resurrection: and then they will not appear to them, like Angels of light, as
sometimes here they have done; but like foul Angels of darkness, as they ever
were since their first fall: they will not then entertain the wicked with
pleasing baits, and sweet alluring temptations, and pretend to be their
friends, who consult their good and satisfaction, beyond God himself, the chief
good of mankind; as they did when their abode was in the world before: but they
will spit forth their venom, and malice, then, in their faces; possibly they
may buffet their bodies, and lay painful strokes upon them; surely they will
terrify their souls for those sins which they have drawn them unto the
commission of; O how will they mock, and deride their folly, and madness for
opening their ears to their whispers, for opening their heart so freely, when
they have knocked at the door, and entised them unto sin? then the damned will
perceive that the Devils design was their ruin and misery, when the pretense
and show was consultation for their good and happiness; that he labored to
please and delight them, not out of love, but malice, that he might undo them:
that he lul'd them asleep, that they might not perceive their misery, till it
was too late; that poison was in his sweetest baits; and that their softest
pleasures were Satan's silken cord s, by which he was drawing them unto endless
woe and bitterness: then they will perceive how the Prince of Darkness has
blinded their eyes, and deluded them; how the old Serpent has beguiled them
through his subtilty, and deceived them* how they have been gulled of a Crown
and Kingdom they had the proffers (...) and were in a capacity to obtain: then
they will perceive whose slaves they have been, whilst they were serving diverse
lusts: that the Devil was their Lord and Master, and led them captive at his
will; and now they will meet with their Masters, whom they have served, unto
their terror and amazement; how will they be affrighted at the apparition of
so many Devils about them? When they shall throw into their thoughts such
hideous apprehensions, and lash their spirits with horrible scourges, when they
shall seize upon their bodids, and tear them, and drag them to the
Judgment Seat, and there is none to rescue and deliver them.

3. The third Antecedent to the Judgment of the wicked, will be their meeting
one with another: as the Elect, so all the reprobates will be gathered together
into one company* O what an innumerable company of Rebel s, and Traitors, and
Villains, will then be got together! how fiercely and horribly will they look
one upon another? and if they speak, what language of Hell will there issue
froth of their lips? they may meet with their old companions and
fellow-sinners, but it will not be like such as they now call meetings of
good-fellowship, when they get together in a Tavern and Alehouse, or some
house of wickedness, to drink, and sing, and dance, and sin, and make merry in
the pleasing of their flesh: they shall not then have Ale, and Wine, and Women,
and Music, or any incentives to mirth and sensual pleasures: the last meeting
will be no merry meeting, but sad and dismal; the pleasing affections which
they formerly had to their friends will be changed: their love will be turned
into hatred; and the joy they have found in them will be turned into grief and
anger: O the angry countenances the wicked will have on that day! it is said,
the Nations shall be angry: O the angry speeches! how will they rage and storm
at one another? especially at those who have drawn them into sin, how will they
curse and ban one another: O the horrible noise that will be amongst the damned
crew when they have got together! It may be from words they fall to blows, and
tear one another hair, and spurn at one another bellies, and bite one
another flesh, and even (...) out one another eyes: we cannot conjecture so
much of the misery of the wicked, as will be on that day.

4. The wicked that are alive on the earth, at the second appearance of Christ*
shall see the righteous that are dead, arise out of their Graves with
mavelous beauty and joy: and those which are alive wonderfully changed in the
likeness and fashion of Christ; and all of them suddenly caught up together in
the clouds to meet the Lord in the air; which sight will be fearful and amazing
to them, when they perceive themselves to be left behind We read Rev. 11. 12,
13. When the two witnesses after they had laid dead for some time had the
spirit of life put into them, and they stood upon their feet, and were called
up, and ascended up into Heaven: it is said their enemies beheld them, and
great fear fell upon them: so when all the witnesses and servants of the Lord
have a spirit of life put into them, and stand upon their feet, and be called
up, and caught up in the clouds to meet the Lord: their enemies, and the wicked
on the earth will behold them, and great fear will fall upon them. But, O the
fear and trouble which will be upon the spirits of those unbelieving
Christ-less, graceless sinner s, whose abode shall at that day be amongst the
believers, and some of them linked in the nearest relations to them, when their
believing relations shall be caught away from them, and carried up into the
air, with the rest of the glorious train of Saints, when themselves shall
remain below upon the earth: It is said, that at the time of Christ's coming, L
uke 17. 34, 35, 36. Two men shall be in one bed, the one shall be taken, the
other left: two women shall be grinding together, the one shall be taken and
the other left: two men shall be together in the field, the one shall be taken
the other left Friends will be together at that day as at other times, not
expecting Christ's coming, and it may be less expecting it than before they did:
some will be in fields together, some in houses together, some will be in beds
together* some will be in Churches together^ ^^t may be Ministers (...) and
people hearing, as you are hearing me this (...) (...).

Suppose that the heavens should just now open, and you should hear the sound
of the last Trumpet, and Jesus Christ should descend with a glorious train of
Angels into the air; then all you that are believers, and have got an interest
in Christ, would immediately be caught up in the clouds, to meet with the Lord:
but all you that are impenitent and unbelievers, would be left behind: and
think what terror would fall upon you, to see us caught away from you; it may
be some of you might come hanging about me and others, when you see us arrayed
in shining garments, and suddenly changed into the glorious likeness of our
Lord, and called by the Angels to go up to him; O take us up along with you!
What will you leave us behind you! Alace, what can I do for you? I must say, I
told you of this time and things before: but you did not seriously regard it,
(...) as to prepare; I called you often to repentance, and preached Jesus
Christ unto you, and showed you the way of Salvation: but you would not accept
of him, ye refused him, and lived in the neglect of your own Salvation. I told
you, if you did not forsake such and such sins, they would be your ruin: and
yet you would not be persuaded to leave them, I forewarned you of the miseries
which would come upon you at Christ's coming, but you would not take warning
Fain would I have had you all along with me to meet my Lord, and if I could
have been instrumental to convert and turn you unto him, my joy and Crown would
have been the greater. O how glad should I have been of your company in this
Triumph: some did hearken and believe, some did awaken when they were called,
and repent, and reform their lives: some were (...) and did forethink, and make
provision for this day: (...) (...) see how they shine, see the mirth and joy
in their count (...) see the fruit of their tears, and self denial, of their
(...) (...) L ove an^holie walking: Now, now, we are going together to our Lord
whom we have sought, served, and trusted for our happiness: and ^^that you
would have hearkened, and been persuaded to have joined your selves to our
number, that we might* have gone together: and O that you would have joined
your selves to our L ord and have bad fellowship with the Father, (...) his Son
Jesus Christ, and broken off your fellowship wi^^^ th^^ unfruitful works of
darkness, and workers of iniquity: but you would go on in the broad way because
it was easy: the way to Heaven was too ^arrow, and difficult for you: If
profession would have been enough, and external joining your selves to Gods
people would have brought you to heaven, this some of you would do with
readiness sufficient: but when you must have a power as well as a form, and
when you must mourn for sin, crucify the flesh, mortify the deeds of the
body, deny your selves, take up the cross, be so strict in your lives, make
conscience of thoughts, words, and all your actions, this could ye not away
with: yea, could brook to be Religious sometimes by the by, and when you have
nothing else to do, but to make it your business to be Religious, you could not
endure: you could put on a form and outward vizard of Godliness on the S
abbath-days: but to be religious on the weekdays, and every day, to be holy in
all manner of conversation, this was too much, and a hard saying which you
could not hear: and if you did not like the terms of the Gospel, and would be
the servants of the Devil, whilst you seemed to be the servants of Christ, and
go on covertly in the way to Hell, whilst you seemed to be going in the way to
Heaven: What can I do for you now? I thought you would have shined and gone
with us, when you shined so much in profession: and is your Lamp now gone out,
when the Bridegroom is come? Alace! who can supply you now with Oil? I have
little enough for my self, and none to spare for you: and do you ask me for
O^le? Alace! If I had enough, I could not part with it, and put any into your
vessels: Now, now it is too late, I came with Oil often to sell from my Lord
and Master, and you might have had it for nothing, you might have bought it
without money, and without price: but then you slighted and refused all
proffers of Grace, which were made; you valued your lusts, which you must have
parted withal for it, at a higher rate; you refused the Oil altogether, or at
least, took (...) more then would light your Lamps: you would not receive any
into the vessel of your hearts: and do you think I can supply you with Oil now?
some of you had convictions once in the time of the Plague when death raged
amongst you, and some good work was beginning then in you: and is it now worn
off, and come to nothing, and dwingled into an empty profession? Alas! what
shall I do for you now? you know I ventured my life for you, to preach to you,
when the Arrows were flying so thick about you: I ventured my liberty for you
my health for you, and was often spent for you, and amongst you, that I might
be instrumental to call and save you: but when the thunder of Judgment was a
little over, and out of hearing, you quickly drop asleep, and the voice of
preaching could not enter into your ears and awaken you: Alas! why do you look
upon me now with such ruful countenances, and stand with such trembling joints,
and speak so earnestly unto me, as if something might yet be done for you, and
are loath to let me go from your company? Ala s! what can I do for you now?
should I stay and Preach unto you again, and call, and in^^ite you to Jesus
Christ, and open the treasures of the Gospel, and now you will open your Ears
and Hearts to receive? Alas! now the Mystery of God is finished, the treasures
of the Gospel are shut up and sealed, and the day of Grace is quite spent and
gone, and cannot be recalled: could not you have opened before, when you know I
knocked often, and hard, in my Masters Name for entertainment? I called, but
you refused, I stretched out my hand, and lifted up my voice like a Trumpet,
but you did not regard and follow the councels which were given unto you: and
now my preaching work is done for ever, should I stay and pray with you, and
for you, that God would pardon your sins, or d^fer your Judgment but a little
while, if it were but for a week or a day that you might prepare your accounts,
and O how presently you will make your peace with God, how readily would you
accept of Christ on any terms: do any thing, suffer any thing, deny self, take
up Cross: O how diligent would you be in the service of God, and resist Satan
and take heed of sin: alas poor souls! all these desires are too late: I have
prayed with you and for you, and you have had warning and time to prepare your
accounts, and have bin called to these Duties before, but now the Oath is sworn
by him that lives for ever and ever, that time shall be no longer; now the
(...) of God is shut, and no Prayer can enter.

Now Christ is come down from the Mercy-Seat* from the right hand of the
Father, where be made, Intercess^^^; and the Throne of Grace is now turned into
a J udgment-Seat: now there remai^eth no more sacrifice for sin, nothing but a
fearful looking for of Judgment to devour the wicked. Alas! why do you hang
about (...) with tears and weeping? What can I do for you now? can I carry you
all up with me in my arms? would not the load be (...) great for me? and if all
of us together could band and help some of you up into the Air with us, and
bring you into the Presence of our dear and glorious Redeemer; With what
confidence should you stand before him? with what face could you look upon him,
when you are so black and filthy, and have such guilt upon your Consciences?
would not your looks betray you to be none of our ^^^mbers? Would not your
black and trembling joints speak what you are? and would not Christ frown you
away from our company? and then we must of necessity let you fall from on high
amongst your fellow hypocrites and unbelievers. Could we carry you up with us,
if you should lay hold on us: would not the Angels snatch you out of your arms:
or would not Devils tear you away from us? and could I rescue any of you out of
S atan (...), when he comes to seize upon his Own? Alas! what can (...) for
you at this time? I must away, and be gone, and ^id (...) (...) due for ever:
The S aints are all risen, and have put (...) their glorious attire, and we are
called for: It is your o^w^ (...) that ye did not help to fill up this number:
and when such of us as belong to Christ should be caught up in the Clouds: O
how dreadful would it be for you, and all that should be found in the number of
them that are left?

5. The fifth and most dreadful Antecedent to the Judgment of the wicked will
be the sight of the Lord Jesus Christ himself Who will be revealed from Heaven
at that day in (...) ^ire to take vengeance upon them, 2 T hes. 1. 7. 8. The
sight of their Judge will affright them, Rev. 1. 7. Behol^ he comes with
Clouds, and every eye shall see him* and they also (...) pierced him, and all
kindreds of the earth shall wail because of him, Even so, Amen Every eye shall
see him, not only the righteou s, but also the wicked; and they also that
pierced him, that i s, the Jews which crucified him, as he says, Mat 26. 64.
Hereafter shall ye see the Son of Man, sitting on the right hand of power, and
coming in the Clouds of Heaven* O how fearful will the sight of Jesus Christ be
to Judas that betrayed him, unto the Officers that took him, unto the base
Servant that smote him with the palm of his hand, unto the People that mocked
and spit upon him, unto the Pharisees that accused him, unto Pilate that
scourged and condemned him, unto Herod that scorned him, unto the Soldiers
that mocked and crucified him, unto the Priests that stirred up the people and
Pilate against him, and in the midst of hi^^ Agony and anguish railed on him?
though they did not (...) him come down from the Cross, yet when they see him
come down from heaven they will believe that he was the Messiah, and O how will
this sight terrify them! then they will smite their breasts indeed, and b^
filled with horror* when they perceived that the same Jesus was the Son of God,
and is now the Judge of the World, and is (...) to call them before his Bar,
who then did (...) before theirs; the High Priest that rent his clothes, when
Christ called himself the Son of God, will be ready to rend himself in pieces
for not acknowledging it: and with what face will Judas look his Master in the
(...), when he ^ees him come in such glory: and if some Soldiers that kept
Christ^ Sepulcher did so shake, and become like (...) men at Christ's
Resurrection, when they saw the Angel, whose countenance was like Lightning,
and Raiment white as snow, come and roll away the stone from before the door
thereof, Mat. 28 2, 3, 4. O how will they all that had a hand in his death,
quake and tremble, when they ^ee the Lord Jesus Christ himself come with such
Power and (...), and all the holy Angels with him, to call them to Judgment?
Further it is said that all the Kindreds of the earth shall wail because of
him. So Mat. 24. 30. All the tri^^es of the Earth shall mourn, when they see
the Son of Man coming in the Clouds of Heaven: this we are to understand of the
wicked Kind reds and Tribes of the Earth: the sight of Christ will be matter of
the greatest joy unto his Disciples, but of the greatest sorrow unto the wicked
world: the mourning of the wicked, see how it is set forth, Rev. 6. 15, 16, 17.
And the Kings of the Earth, and the great Men, and the Rich Men, and the chief
Captains, and the Mighty Men, and every Bondman, and every Freeman hid
themselves in the Dens, and in the Rocks, and in the Mountains. And said to the
Rocks, and to the Mountains fall on us, and hide us from the face of him that
^^^teth upon the Throne, and from the wrath of the Lamb, for the great day of
his wrath is come, and who shall be able to stand. Then profane and wicked
Kings, who would not submit unto the Government of Christ, but break his bands
asunder, and cast away his cords from them, shall see this King of Kings, and
Lord of Lords, come down from Heaven to Judge them, and O! with what f^ar will
they then run and hide themselves in Dens, or under some great Rocks and
Mountains if they could, from the face of him who will then fit upon the Throne
of Judgment? and with what trembling will they stand amongst the meanest of
their subjects, divested of all their power and dignity? the Nobles and great
men of the Earth, who having been lifted up above the ordinary degree of men,
have lifted up their hearts also with pride and haughtiness b^^ond measure, and
let loose the reins unto licentiousness, and wallowed in ^^^lthy delights and
pleasures, shall see the Son of Man coming in the Clouds; and O how will their
proud heart^ then be brought down, and their haughtiness said low and their
sweet sinful delights be turned into bitter Gall and Wormwood; then they will
cry to the Rocks to cove^ them* and the Mountains to hide them; if they can
^^nd a my such place to receive them in this terrible day. The^ the chief
Captains, and mighty Men, who i^ployed the force and strength under the Banner
of the Devil, and (...) deavoured to promote, the interest of his Kingdom in
(...) World* and rebelled against the Lord of Hosts? shall (...) the Heavens
opened, and this mighty Captain come down with the Armies of Heaven attending
upon him in white, to execute vengeance upon them; and then their courage will
fail them, and the Wrath of the Lamb will make them tremble, and they would
creep into a Rock, or any hole to hide them: then the rich men who have placed
their hearts and confidence in their Riches, especially those who have heaped
up Riches by unjust and unrighteous practice, shall see the Son of Man coming
against them, and weep and howl for the miseries which are coming upon them,
and their Riches will be so far from profiting them in the da^ of Wrath, that
they will be Witnesses to accuse them, and aggravate their Condemnation: then
every Bondman and every Freeman that are slaves to the Devil and their own
lusts, shall see the Son of Man coming to judge them. and be in the number of
the Mourners, crying to the Mountains to fall on them. Then there will be
distress upon all Nation, and great perplexity, Sea and Waves roaring, and men's
hearts failing them for fear, when they are looking up into the Clouds; and see
the Son of Man is come down and his Throne is prepared for Judgment. The
Heathen Nations will mourn to see him, especially the wicked who have had the
name of Christians upon them, and have sat under the light of the Gospel; O
how will their faces be filled with shame and confusion, and their hearts with
t^rrour, and astonishment when they behold the face of the Lord Jesus Christ
shining with such beauty and glory, but looking on them with anger and disdain?
And is this glorious King that Jesus Christ whom we heard so much spoken of
when we lived upon the Earth? Was be indeed so great whose commands we
disobeyed, whose threat^ings we slighted, whose grace we abused, and whose
wrath we disregarded? Was it so excellent a person, who was described and set
forth to us by Ministers in such superlative expressions, all which be exceeds?
and yet could we see no form, nor c^mliness in him, nothing ^or which we should
desire him? Was this the Savior that was preached to us, and proffered ^o us?
That the Jesus Christ that we are pressed so frequently and so earne^^^y to get
an interest in, with so many powerful arguments, and yet could not be moved and
persuaded; Was it this person that did call us, and stretch forth his hand all
the day long to us, that did woe us, and entreat us by his Messengers, to
accept of pardon, and grace and salvation, and knock at the door of our hearts
again and again, by his Word and Spirit for entertainment? And did we shut our
ear and our heart against him, and refuse all his gracious tenders which were
made unto us? What, did we hearken to the Devil when he tempted us to sin, what
he might destroy us: and not hearken to Christ, who would have persuaded* us to
faith and obedience, that (...) might save us? Could we harbor base lusts,
which were like so many vipers in our bosoms, and give no entertainment to
Jesus Christ, who would have brought riches and glory with him? O what fo^ls
and madmen and women have we been! How have our cursed hearts deceived us, and
the Devil deluded us? How have we been bewitched, to prefer the vanities of
this World, and the satisfaction of the desires of our flesh before an interest
in such a Saviour^ Woe! woe! woe be unto us, for now the great day of the Lord is
come, and who is able to stand? This is the firth Antecedent to the Judgment of
the wicked, they shall see the Lord Jesus coming in the Clouds, and be summoned
to the Bar* and placed at his left hand; of which before.

6. The sixth Antecedent will be their seeing the Judgment, and hearing the
Sentence of the Righteous, Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom
prepared for you from the beginning of the world. And O how will they grind and
gna^sh their* teeth, and their hearts be ready even to burst with (...) and
indignation, to see those poor mean Christians, whom some of them have
separated from their company, and accounted as the offscouring of the earth,
and not worthy to fit with the Dogs of their flock, exalted to such dignity,
shining in such glory, and adjudged to such happiness, when themselves are
looked upon with such contempt, and stand waiting for the Judgment, and (...)
Doom to Torments and eternal misery. These are the Antecede^^ of the Judgment
of the Wicked.

CHAP. VIII.
COncerning the Judgment of the Wicked it self. I shall here speak of 1. The
Judge. 2. The Assessors. 3. The Malefactors. 4. The Crime. 5. The Accusers and
Witnesses. 6. The Conviction. 7. The Sentence.


1. The Judge of the Wicked, as of the Righteous will (...) the Lord Jesus
Christ. it Is said, Romans 3. 6. God shall judge the World; but it will be God in
Christ and by Christ, Acts 17. 31. God was in Christ reconciling the World, of
the Elect unto himself, 2 Cor. 5. 1^. and God in Christ will judge and condemn
the World of the Reprobates, The Father has committed all Judgment unto the
Son, John 5. 22. And he has given him Authority to execute Judgment* because
he is the S on of Man, v. 27. The same Jesus whom the Wicked would not submit
unto, and take for their King (...) rule over them, they must submit unto and
have for their Judge to examine and condemn them: The properties of this Judge
are worthy here of your observations.

1. Christ will be a most glorious Judge: (...) was there such a Judge seen on
the Earth* It will be the greatest judgment; there will be a general Assize of
the whole World; and Christ will be the greatest Judge; the greatest for
dignity, and glory that ever eye did beho^^* Christ will be most glorious, in
regard of his (...) (...) will appear to be the Prince and Lord of Glory, (...)
(...) admired, not only by the Saints, but also by (...)* (...), amongst whom,
before they saw him, he was despised. The Despisers shall behold the luster of
their Judge, and wonder and perish, as it is said in another case, Acts 13. 41.
Christ will be most glorious in regard of his retinue; all the holy* Angels,
those glorious Spirits who are about the Throne of God, shall attend upon him,
Mat. 25. 31. When* the S on of Man comes in his glory, and all his holy Angels
with him: yea, all the holy Saints also shall attend upon him in the Judgment
of the Wicked, Jude 14. 15. Behold the Lord will come with ten thousand of his
Saints to execute judgment upon all the ungodly, etc. Yea, he will come with
all his Saints, 1 These 3. 13. The whole innumerable company of Saints shall
attend upon Christ in white shining Garments, with Bodies like unto Christ more
beautiful and glorious than the most splendid Attire can make them; and Christ
then will be admired in all the Saints and Believer s, by the Wicked which
shall behold them: And Christ will sit upon the Throne of his Glory, Mat. 25.
31. I saw a great while Throne, and him that sat on it, from whose Face the
Earth and the Heaven fled away, Rev. 20. 21. We read of a glorious Throne when
^olomon made, 1 Kings 10. 1^ 19, 20. But the Throne and Tribunal Seat of Christ
will be far more glorious than Solomon,s or any Monarchs that ever lived upon
the face of the Earth.

2. Christ will be a most* powerful Judge: ^e will have power to raise all the
wicked out of their Graves unto life again; which requires as much power to
effect, as the giving them their Being and Life at the first; he will have
power to bring all the wicked to his foot, to keep them in awe, that they shall
not stir, nor lift up the hand in the least, in a way of Rebellion, which is
more than the most potent Prince that ever lived could do: He will have power
to execute vengeance upon all the wicked together, and inflict an in^^nite
punishment upon them; and he will put forth no less power in the destruction of
the wicked at the last Day, than was put forth in the first Creation of the
World; herein he will make his Power known, Romans 9. 22. When the wicked shall
be punished with everlasting destruction from the pr^sence of the Lord, and
from the glory of his Power; 2 These. 1 9*

3. Christ will be a most knowing judge: He will know all the persons of the
Wicked; not one shall escape his Eye; he will not know them in any way of
nearness, and familiar acquainting himself with them; but he will know them in
a way of perfect cognizance of their Persons; he knew them when they lived and
rebelled against his Laws; and he will know them again when they are raised; he
will not only have a general knowledge of them, but he will know them
particularly, none of the ancient Rebels shall be able to hide themselves,
either under Rocks and Mountains or in the ^roud and throng of the wicked,
which shall be gathered together before him on that day: Christ will find out
all his Enemies, and he will know all their Crimes; he will read them all
written in the Book of Gods Remembrance: and the Book of their own Consciences
being then opened, will present all their sins to his view* the Eye of the
judge will be a piercing all seeing Eye, which cannot be blinded, and ^^^^fore
there will be no mistake and error in the judgment* through ignorance or false
information, as there may be in the Courts of Judicature upon the Earth.

4. Christ will be a most holy Judge (...) He will be without any the least
stain of sin; he was so wh^^ he (...) amongst sinners on earth, and surely he
will be (...) when he descends from the Holy of Holies in Heaven: some
earthly Judges* are guilty in the same kind with the malefactors which are
brought before them; so that (...) they judge, others they condemn themselves:
but (...) will not (...) the least mote of sin in the eye of Christ; (...) of
defilement; and therefore ^s it will be impossible to blind him, because of his
knowledge: (...) it* will be impossible to bribe and corrupt him in judgment,
because of his ^^^^ness; and by consequence.

5. Christ will be a most impartial and st^^^t Judge: he will ^e most impartial
in regard of the persons whom he ^ill judge; the high degree and quality of men
upon the earth will be of no account with him; the rich will be no more
regarded than the poor: nor the highest Princes more than the meanest of their
subject s; Death levels all men, and puts a conclusion unto all earthly
dignity s; and in the resurrection all will stand upon even ground: now some
Lords and great men may murder, and oppress, and break Laws, and through favor
escape punishment; which crimes, if meaner persons had been found guitly of,
would have cost them their lives: but Christ will have no more favor for a
Lord, or a Knight, or a Gentleman, no nor for a King or a Queen, or the
greatest Lady, than for the most contemptible beggar; he will not accept of the
persons of any, and connive at the sins of some, which those that should
reprove them now can wink at, as if they were no faults: because the faults of
such persons are as high, whose favor they desire, and from whom they might
receive damage and dis-esteem should they be* plain and faithful: but Christ he
will neither need the favor nor fear the anger of any: and he will not court
and flatter any because of their Nobility and greatness; but impartially judge
the highest and greatest, by the same rule as he will do the lowest and
meanest: and Christ will be a most strict Judge in regard of crimes: he will
bring forth all the sin^ of the wicked to light; not one sin which they have
committed from the day of their birth to the hour of their dissolution, but
shall be had in remembrance, and be brought unto public view, when the Lord
shall, enter into judgment with (...) ungodly world: some of the wicked do sin
more secret^^^ they have sweet morsels rolling under their tongues, (...) are
not perceived: they have their Dalilahs in cor^^^ who are not known* they
shroud themselves under the shadow of the wings of the night, that they might
conceal some of their wicked lend practices, which should they (...) found out
in, would fill their cheeks with shame and blushing: but Christ will call them
at the last day to a ^^^ct account, and bring to light the bidden things of
Darkness (...) Cor. 4* 5. And O the contempt and confusion which they will
(...) covered with when all their shameful and abominable (...) shall be made
manifest.

6. Christ will be a most righteous Judge: he will (...) the wicked in
unrighteousness; some of them will be found to* have been unrighteous in their
judgment: and others righteous in their dealings; and all of them unrighteous
in their state: but Christ will judge them all in righteousness: he will judge
them according to their works: as he will be righteous in not inflicting upon
them a greater punishment than their sins have deserved, he will not punish
lesser sinners with more stripes, and greater sinners with fewer stripes: so
neither will he be unrighteous inflicting upon them a lesser punishment than
their sins have deserved; but will proportion their punishment to their
offense, Rev. 18. 7. How much she has glorified her self, and lived
deliciously, so much torment and sorrow give her. Christ will be exactly
righteous in his judgment, severely righteous, without the least mixture of
mercy: the wicked shall have from him the summum jus, and that sine ulla
injuria, they shall have the highest right and justice, without the least
injury: Gods justice requires satisfaction for their sins, and Christ will
satisfy the demands of justice to the full upon the ungodly, by distribution
of such punishments as are the just desert of their sins: Christ will even all
scores at that (...) between God and sinners: at least he will begin to (...)
(...) payment of that debt from them which they owe (...) (...) which they will
be paying unto all eternity. Christ will come with the Balances and Sword of
Justice in his (...) he will come to take just vengeance upon disobedient (...)
^^ners.

7. Christ will be a most furious Judge* he will be mo^^ gracious toward the
righteous, but (...) (...) against the wicked. He will come in flaming fire, to
take vengeance (...) them, 2 These. 1. 8. He will come (...) of love toward his
people: but in flames of anger against his enemies a Fire shall devour before
him, and it will be very tempestuous round about him: see Isai 66. 5. Behold
the Lord wi^^ co^^^ with Fire, and with his ^^^iots, as with a Whirl mind, to
render his anger with fury, him ^^^^elukes with flames of Fire. We read of such
wrath on that day in the Lamb, as makes the Kings and great men of the earth
to tremble, and call to mountains and rocks to fall on them and hide them from
it. Rev 6. 15,16,17. Never was there greater love, and more tender bowels of
compassion and pity, than is to be found now in the Lord Jesus Christ, toward
all them that apply themselves unto him, under a sense of sin, for Salvation,
here in this world: and never was there greater wrath and revengeful fury, than
will be found in the same Lord Jesus Christ, when sinners shall come before him
to be judg^d at the last day: He will be very furious, ten thousand times
be^ond a ^ea^e when she is bereaved of her whelps, or a Lion when she is
hunger-starved: How fiercely will Christ look upon the wicked? What scorn and
contempt of them will they see in his face? What dreadful frowns in his brow?
What fiery anger will there sparkle from his eye, in his looking upon them, as
if he would look them dead, or look them into Hell, before he has pronounced
the sentence? How fiercely will he speak unto them? There will be terror in
his looks, and there will he terror in his voice: he will speak to them in his
wr^th, and vex them in his hot displeasure. His anger then will break forth
into a flame: he will appear to be jealous and very furious, when he comes to
execute vengeance an his adversaries, and punish his enemies for their sins.

8. Christ (...) be an inexorable Judge. None is now more ^a^^e to be entreated
as a Savior: whosoever comes unto him may be welcome to him: he has promised
in (...) wise to cast out such. Joh. 6. 37. The most rebellious ^^^ers may find
entertainment with Jesus Christ now: and prevail with him to procure pardon,
and peace, and salvation, upon their repent^nce of their sins: but when ^he is
come down from Heaven to judge the world, he will be in^xorable: No prayers or
entreaties: no tears or arguments will in the least move him to take any pit^y
on such as shall then be found in their sins. When the Wicked at the day of
judgment shall have their eyes opened to behold the Lord Jesus Christ in his
Glory and Majesty in such excellency and ^^^^ing b^auty: then one smile of his
countenance will ^e really accounted of more worth than the whole World, and to
^e made like to such a Person, and to dwell for ever in his love and joy, they
will then clearly see to be unconceivably be^ond all the enjoyment of the
Creatures in their fullest delights: and to be thrust out of his presence, they
will account their chiefest misery; then they will have other apprehensions of
Hells Torments, when they are just ready to be cast into the burning Lake: when
they are awakened in the morning of the R^surrection, and are brought to
Christ's Bar, and they perc^iv^ how near they are to exe^ution, and great
distress* will be upon them, when they look about them, and all refuge fails,
and they see no way for them to escape: If now with their cries and
supplications they might prevail with the Judge for some commiseration, if they
had but the least ^opes of moving his Bowels, and pacifying his anger, and
obtaining the favor of admission into the Inheritance of the ^aints: O how
will they all fall down upon their knees before him with the lowest submission
and r^verence^ how would they cry and weep, intrea^ and beseech? how would they
kiss his feet, wash them with their tears, and wipe them with their hairs? how
earnest and importunate would they be with him for a Pardon, if importunity
would prevail? If there were but one promise left in the whole Book of God for
them, which might possibly bring unto them some relief: how greedily would they
all catch at it, and humbly woe the Lord for mercy! No, (...) the Judge will be
then inexorable: they m^^ cry, but it will be to no purpose: he will shut his
^ares against their prayers, and hide his eyes from their misery: they had
promises enough whilst they lived, but they did not regard them, they did not
believe and apply them: and now nothing but threatenings belong ^o them, and
remain for them: Christ often cried to them by his Ministers, and moved them by
his Spirit to open the Door of their hearts, and give him room and
entertainment: but they shut their ^ares and hearts against him: and now Christ
will shut his ears, and the Door of meter, and Heaven against them. He will be
inexorable. Thus concerning the Judge of the wicked.

2. The Assessors, or thos^^ which shall sit with Christ in the judgment of the
wicked will be the righteous. This promise the Lord makes particularly and
especially to the twelve Apostles, Matthew* 19. 28. Verily I say unto you, that
ye which followed me (that have denied your selves, and parted with all, and
taken up your Crose, and followed me) in the Regeneration, (or restitution of
all things, when the Day of Resurrection does come) and the son of Man shall
sit on the Throne of his glory, (when I shall sit upon my judgment Seat, and
gather all Nations before my Bar, to receive their doom) Tee shall sit on
Twelve Thrones, Judging the Twelve Tribes of Israel, and though the Apostles of
Christ will be especially honored, and exalted in the day of Judgment, and
have seats, or degrees of dignity above others: yet this honor so shall all
the Saints have, to sit with Christ in Judgment, 1. (...). 6. 2. Do ye not
know that Saints shall judge the World? They judge and cond^mn the sins of the
wicked world now, (...) their holy conversation: and they will judge and
condemn (...) (...) of the wicked at the last day, by their approbati^^ of
Christ's Judgment. The crimes of the wicked will be ^^an'd before the righteous:
their secret sins will be ripped up and made manifest unto them: they will not
only be brought in as accusers and witnesses against some of the wicked, of
which I shall speak by and by: but also they will join with Christ in the
examination of all the wicked: and they will also approve of Christ's justice
and righteousness in the condemning of sinners for their sins, and when Christ
does pronounce the sentence of condemnation upon them, Depart from me ye cursed
into Everlasting Fire prepared for the Devil and his Angels, they will join
with him, and approve of this sentence: it may be they will with one voice say,
even (...) (...) men: or with aloud shout accompany Christ's words, saying*
Depart ye cursed into Everlasting Fire. A strange turn and change of things
will there be at that day: Felix, who late on the Judgment Seat, when Paul was
at the Bar, will stand at the Bar when Paul shall fit among the Judges, The
Lord will bring down the mighty from their seats, and all wicked Princes and
Judges of the Earth shall be dis^thron^d, when the righteous, though of a low
degree, shall be exalted to sit as Judges upon them.

3. The Malefactors which shall be judged, will be,

1. Devils, 2 Pet. 2. 4. The Angels which fell, are said to be Delivered into
chains of darkness and to be reserved unto Judgment: they are punished in part
now, but their punishment is not yet complete: when Christ came the first time
in the flesh, and began to dislodge the Devils from their habitation in those
Persons whom they had got the possession of, they were afraid that he would
have completed their torment presently: and therefore they cry out, Art thou
come hither to torment us before the time? Mat. 8. 29. And let us alone, art
thou come to destroy us, Mar, 2. 24. But when Christ comes the second time in
his glory: then he will judge and condemn the wicked Angel^^ and the Saints
shall join with him herein, 1 Cor. 6. 3. Know (...) not that ye shall judge
Angels Then the measure of their (...) will be completed, and the time of
their torment will be (...) and their punishment shall be completed too: the
way and ma^^ner of their Judgment is not spoken of in Scripture, and therefore
I shall nor speak of it: but that they shall be judged to everlasting Fire, is
evident from the sentence pronounced on (...) Men, in which it is said, that
everlasting fire is prepared (...) the Devil and his Angels.

2. All wicked Men and Women, that ever (...), or (...) live on the Earth, from
the beginning of the Crea^^^, (...) the DISSOL UTION of the World, their have
no interest in Jesus Christ, will be the Malefactors, which shall (...) judged
by Christ at the last Day: this Day is called (...) (...) of Judgment and
Perdition of the ungodly, 2 Pet. 3. 7. And the Unjust are* said to be reserved
unto the Day of Judgment to be punished, Chap. 2. ^. 9. And the Apostle Paul
tells us, that the Lord Jesus shall be revealed from Heaven in ^^^ming Fire,
taking vengeance on them that know not God, and obey not the Gospel, 2 These. 1.
7, 8.

1. By them which know not God, we may understand the Heathen and the Gentile
Nations, this being the Character given of them 1 Thessalonians. 4. 5. Not in lusts of
Concupiscence, as the Gentiles which know not God. And the Ephesians, whilst
Heathens, before the Gospel came amongst them, were strangers to the Covenant
of promise, having no hope, and without God in the world, Ephef. 2, 12. All the
Heathen Nations shall be judged by Christ: but I shall not speak of their
judgment, (...) which we are not so much concerned.

2. By them which obey not the Gospel we are to understand all those Nations
upon whom the Light of the Gospel has shined, and unto whom the sound of the
Gospel has come: but yet have not yielded obedience thereunto, so as heartily
to accept of Christ for their Savior upon his own terms: all Christless,
graceless Persons, who have heard of Christ, and enjoyed the means of Grace,
will be the chief Malefactors in the Day of Judgment. I might here give a
Catalogue of the sinners which shall be Judged, take one in 1 Cor. 6. 9, 10.
The Unrighteous, Fornicators, Idolators, Adulteries, Effeminate, abusers of
themselves with mankind, Thieves, Covetous, Drunkard* Revilers, Extortioners,
and all other unjustified, unsanctified Sinners. But more of this when I come
to speak of the conviction of the Wicked.

4. The Crime for which the wicked shall be judged, and condemned by Christ,
will be sin.

1. Sin against the Law, and that I For sins of omission Mat 25. 42. I was an
hungered, and ye gave me no medt: I was thirsty, and ye gave me no drink, etc.
2. For sins of commission, and that 1. for sins of thought and heart, I Cor. 4.
5. When the Lord comes, he will make manifest the counsels of the heart, he
will condemn men for their wicked thoughts and contrivements, for their sinful
lust s, and desires, and delights. 2. For sins of word, Mat. 12. 36, 37. But I
say unto you, that every idle word that men shall speak, they shall gave an
account thereof in the day of Judgment: For by thy words thou shall be
justified, and by thy words thou shall be condemned If for idle words men shall
be judged, much more for taking Gods Name in vain, for hideous Oaths and
Blasphemies; if for unprofitable speeches, much more for corrupt
communications, for lying, slanderous, bitter reviling speeches. 3. Christ will
judge the wicked for their sins of deeds, Romans 2. 6. He will render to every
one according to their deeds, And v. 8, 9 To them that obey unrighteousness,
indignation, and wrath, tribulation, and anguish upon every Soul of Man that
does evil, of the Jew first, and also of the Gentile.

2. The sins against the Gospel, will be the chief condemning Crimes of the
wicked. No sins against the Law will be found so heinous, but if sinners be
found after the commission of them to have obeyed the Gospel, to have repented,
and believed, and yielded the fruits of new obedience; they will have a pardon
and absolution on that day; but final disobedience to the Gospel will be
unpardonable: final imp^^nitency, and unbelief in those which have been called
to repent, and to close with Jesus Christ will certainly bring men under the
sentence of condemnation; I might here give a more particular Catalogue of the
sins which the wicked shall be judged for by Christ, but something more of them
under their conviction by Christ.

5. The accusers of, and witnesses against the wicked, being the same, I shall
join them together, and they will be, 1. God. 2. Men. 3. Devils. 4. Themselves.

1. God will be an accuser of, and witness against the wicked, at the day of
judgment.

1. God's Justice, to speak after the manner of men, seeing this judgment is
set forth in such a manner, for our better apprehending of it, because we are
not able to conceive in this state exactly of Gods proceeding against sinners
in judgment on that day, will arraign the wicked before the judgment Seat of
Christ, and draw up as it were a Bill of Indictment against them. Whereas these
men and Women, who lived in such and such places and times, though they were my
Creatures and Subjects: were made by me and for me, and I gave them my holy,
and righteous, and good Law, to be the guide and ^^sle of their life and
actions, yet having no fear of me before their eyes: they did shake off my
yoke, and break my Laws, they did ca^t my Commandments behind their bac^, and
live^ in a course of rebellion and disobedience against me; committing such and
such sins: And when I sent m^ Son into the World to d^e for sinners, who gave
me sufficient satisfaction; and (...) him known, and the way of salvation by
him, and proffered him unto them, and entreated them by my Embassador^ to be
reconciled; but they shut their ear, and hardened their hearts and refused my
Son, trampled upon his blood: grieved my Spirit, and neglected the salvation of
their own soul s; therefore I now require satisfaction from themselves, and
that a condign punishment be inflicted upon them for their disobedience.

2. Gods goodness, and bounty, and patience will accuse them, when they are
thus arraigned and indicted by his justice which will aggravate their sins: I
nourished and brought up these creatures, like Children, and yet they rebelled
against me: I spared them as a man spares his Son which ^erveth him, and yet
they had no regard of me: I delivered them in six troubles, and in seven:
recovered them often from a sick bed; and brought them back from the Grave,
when they were ready to go down into the Pit: and yet they knew not that I
healed them, and were so much the more disobedient unto me: I loaded them with
mercies, and yet they loaded me with iniquities: I would have led them to
repentance by my patience and goodness s, but they were the more impenitent and
hard-hearted, and resolved to do evil: I stretched forth my hand all the day
long to these disobedient and gainsaying Creatures, and would have received
them, had they returned into the arms of my mercy, but nothing would win and
persuade them to leave their sins, and come unto me: and now my patience is
spent, and long-suffering is at an end, and bowels shut up against them for
ever: and let them now smart for all their abuses, affronts and contempts,
which they have offered to me.

3. Gods Omniscience will be a witness against the wicke^ the day of Judgment:
their sins have been all committed under the view of God's all-seeing eye: and
they have bi^^ noted down upon the Book of his Remembrance: and God will
witness against them, I saw these wretched sinners when they were born, and
traced all their steps; I compassed their path, and their lying d^wn, and was
acquainted with all their ways: I did beset them behind and before, and mine
eye was continually upon them: I perceived the first sproutings and buddings of
sin in their tender years: I took notice of their disobedience to their
Parents, when they were young: of their li^s and pride, and vanity, of their
idleness and sloth, and mis-spending their precious time: I was an eyewitness
to all their sins, from their youth to to their dying hour: I beheld them when
no eye besides was upon them: I saw their privy lewdness, and all their deeds
of darkness, which they committed in dark corners: when I kept silence and did
not speak, I was not blind so as not to see: and although I did not smite, I
did note: and what one of them all have the^ confidence to deny any one of
their sins which I have been a witness unto? The first accuser and witness
against the wicked will be God himself.

2. Men will accuse and witness against the wicked at the day of Judgment, and
that bath the Godly and the Ungodly.

1. The Godly, and that both Godly Ministers, and Godly Friends.

1. Godly Ministers, will be the accusers and witnesses against the wicked.
Ministers must give an account* then to their Lord of the souls which he
committed to their charge. Heb. 13. 17. And in some of their Flock they will
rejoice, because their testimony concerning Jesus Christ was ^^^eved; because
the Gospel which they preached amongst ^^em was obeyed: because the Word was
received as the Word of God, they will rejoice in them which have been
effectually wrought upon by then Ministry; in those which they have been
instrumental to regenerate and espouse unto Jesus Christ; to persuade to leave
their sins, and submit themselves unto the yoke and Scepter of the Lord; such
will be the joy and crown of rejoicing to their Ministers on that day; of whom
with unspeakable comfort they will say to their Lord, Behold the Children which
thou have given us, Thine they were and are, and thou did give them unto us,
and they have believed and kept thy ^^ord; and now as they have shared in thy
Grace, let them and us share in, and participate of thy Glory. But alas! what
a sad account will they have to give of others of their Flock, who have not
believed and yielded obedience to the Gospel, which they have preached; it will
be sad for them, when they must bring in heavy accusations against them. Lord
thou did send us upon thy E^^assage unto them; but they regarded neither
Messenger, nor Message; we preached often in thy Name, but either they would
not hear when they might, or they would not believe and yield obedience when
they heard: we often told them of their sins, and foretold them of their danger,
if they did not repent and reform; but they would not receive conviction, nor
be persuaded to repentance and reformation; if we spoke of sin more generally,
they did look upon themselves as concerned, and made no Application, except it
were to others: if we come more home and close, they shrouded their sins as
close as they could under the Veil of some thin excuses: they shut their eyes
and would not see: and if the beams of light brake in upon them, and in a
start they open their eyes a little: they were either offended, that we should
disturb them in their sleep, or they quickly shut their e^es again, and dropped
asleep faster than before: and soon wore off the convictions and troubles of
mind which sometimes they have had under the light and alarm of thy word. We
often showed them their face in the Glass, but they have gone away and
forgotten what manner of Men and Women they were: we have told them of the
works of the flesh, which would certainly exclude them the kingdom of Heaven,
Gal. 5. 19, 20, 21. That no unrighteous person, nor unclean person, nor
drunkard, nor covetous Person, nor Reviler, nor Extortioner could be saved,
without Repentance and S anctification: 1 Cor. 6. 9, 10, 11. And yet they would
not leave their sins: they would be unjust and unclean still; they would be
covetous and Revilers still: they would wallow still in their filthiness, and
hold fast their sin, whatever we could speak against it. We Preached unto them
of the day of Judgment, and foretold them out of the Word, of these very things
which are now come to pass: but they did not believe it, nor consider it, nor
take any care to prepare for this day: they thrust the thoughts of judgment out
of their mind, and put the evil day far from them. We preached unto them the
Gospel, opened the rich treasures thereof before them, made known the exceeding
great and precious promises of the Covenant of grace: the inestimable
privileges and unspeakable benefits, which belong to those that belong to
Christ: and proffered all unto them in thy name if they would accept of them,
and yield obedience unto thee: but all these things were slighted and
undervalued by them. We called and cried, we beseeched and entreated them that
they would be reconciled unto God: but they would not give ear unto us. We held
thee forth, Lord, to them, and studied to set thee forth in the best words we
could think of: told them of thy beauty and love, and desirableness above all
persons and things in the world: told them of their need and that they were
undone without thee: tendered to them thy blood, and the purchase thereof
pardon and peace, and happiness for ever: but they were like the dea^ Add^r
which will not hear, they were like Rocks unmoved, they refused thee and thy
treasures, trampled upon thy blood, and put both us and thee to shame by their
refusal, we invited them unto the Marriage feast, but they would not come: all
excused themselves with one consent: one had bought a Farm, and he must see it:
another was engaged in a great Trade, and he must fellow it, another had
married a Wife, and he could not, and none of them would come, and taste of the
Banquet: the ^^res of the World, the deceitfulness of riches, the pleasures of
this life, and the lusts of other things, did so over charge their thoughts and
hearts, that the Gospel and rich pr^visions thereof lay by disregarded.

Such will be the accusation^ of some Ministers such witness must they give at
the last day against those of their Flock, who shall be found in the number of
the wicked and disobedient to the Gospel; then their Sermons, now forgotten,
will be remembered, and be so many evidence* against them: O that our People
would remember them now! O that they would now consider and believe, and turn
and live, and avoid the accusations and witness, which otherwise we must be
forced to give in then against them.

2. The godly Friends of the wicked will be their accusers, and witness against
them: some of them are linked in near Relations to the Godly, who now are
endeavoring to be instrumental for their Salvation: but if they do not
prevail, they will hereafter be their accusers and Witnesses for their
condemnation.

1. The believing Husband will then accuse and witness against his unbelieving
Wife. Lord, she lay in my bosom, and was beloved of me as my self: I cherished
her, and was as tender of her as my own flesh, according to thy command but all
my love and kindness to her could not win her heart for thee: I told her often
of thy beauty, and thy love which was a thousand fold beyond what^ or any man
alive could possibly express: but she was stupid and unbelieving, and wholly
disregarded both thy Person and thy Love: I covered her faults with love, as
much as I could, from others: and used many entreaties and loving persuasions
to draw her to amendment: telling her the danger and destructive issue of a
sinful course, but she would not hearken to amend, her heart was set upon sin
and vanity, she was proud and foolish, she was wanton and froward, and would
not be reclaimed she did see my grief and sorrow for sin, she was a witness to
my ^ears and mournful complaints: and yet she could bear up under greater guilt
without any sense: she did see me often retire into my closet, and knew that I
spent time daily between me and thee alone: and yet, though her need was as
great, she would not be persuaded to an imitation: I have often in the secret
silent night, when sleep has fled from both our eyes, taken advantage of such
opportunities to discourse with her about her soul-affairs told her of the
sleep of death which ere long would sei^ upon us: the night we must ^^^nd in
the grave: of the morning of the resurrection: of thy second coming, and our
appearing before thy Tribunal Seat, but nothing would quicken her to make
preparation for death* and Judgment, she heard as if she were asleep, as indeed
she was asleep whilst awake, and dead whilst she was alive, asleep and dead in
sin and security.

2. The believing Wife, will then accuse her unbelieving (...) band. Lord, thou
know how I loved, and honored, (...) reverenced, and obeyed him in lawful
things, and was faithful to him according to my duty; but he would not love and
honor thee; he was unfaithful, and would not obey thy more reasonable commands
unto whom he owed a greater subjection; I have often sat alone like a Widow at
home, when he has been revelling abroad with his companions: I have been
pouring forth tears for him at the Throne of grace in my Closer, when he has
bin pouring in Wine and strong Drink in Taverns and Alehouses: I have been
troubled for him when he has sta^ed out so late; and troubled more with him
when he ^ath come in so full of drink and passion; and with much patience have
endured his soul speeches and behavior which he has used: I have watched the
most fit opportunity I could take to put him in mind of his sin and danger: and
I have done it with the greatest humility and meekness, and tender affection as
I could: but either he has not regarded my words, or flew out into a rage
against me: O how fain would I have persuaded him to draw in the same yoke of
Christ with me, but he would draw another way, do what I could: none of my
prayers, nor tears, nor arguments, no, not th^^ love of Christ, nor the love of
his own soul could (...) with him to change his course: he would not leave
(...) drunkenness and adultery, his worldliness and unjustice, ^^^lying and
overreaching, his swearing and bitterness again thy people, by no means would
he be perswade^.

3. Believing P arents will then accuse and witness against (...) ungodly
children and servants.

Lord, we endeavored to bring them up in the (...) and admonition of thee: we
labored to put good (...) betimes into them: we dropped many wholesome
instruction upon them: we prayed frequently for them, and with them and spoke
plainly and earnestly to them about their Soul concernments: we ^old them of
the immortality of the souls, the preciousness of their time, the evil of sin
the need of thee, the excellency of grace, their danger of (...) the way to
escape it; the glory of Heaven, the way to attain it: but alas, to the grief of
our hearts, they shut their ears against all our instructions, and would take
none of our reproofs or counsels, they would go foolishly and stubbornly on in
a course of sin, and neither thy Law nor our Fear would restrain them.

Thus these and other godly relations will rise up in judgment, and witness
against the wicked.

2. The ungodly friends and companions of the wicked will at that day be their
accusers and witness against them; especially those who have been drawn by them
into sin; however now they are very well pleased with them, and delight in
their company, because sin pleases them, and they do not feel nor believe the
bitterness which will be consequent: yet when they come to be judged, and
punished for those sins, they will with rage and madness accuse and curse those
wicked Persons which were their first tempters: Drunkards will accuse those
that drew thhm first into Taverns and Alehouses, and persuaded them by healths,
and other ways to drink beyond their measure: Adulterers and Adulteresses will
accuse those which first enticed them unto privy lewdness: ungodly servants
also will then accuse their wicked Masters, and ungodly children their wicked
Parents, who have been drawn into sin by their example. Thus men will be
accusers and witnesses against the wicked.

3. Devils will be the Accusers and Witnesses against the wicked; they are now
accusers of the brethren, then they will be accusers of the wicked; they accuse
the brethren ^^^^ly, they will accuse the wicked truly; now they please and
(...) the wicked, and persuade them to sin; then they will accuse them for
those very sins which they persuaded them unto: they have done the Devils
drudgery all their d^ies, and been his ^aithful slaves; and this is his
recompense, he will be their accuser at the last day.

4. The wicked will ^e accused by themselves their own thoughts shall accuse
them in the day when God shall judge the secrets of (...) by Jesus Christ, Romans
2. 15, 16. their own consciences will accuse them, and be as a thousand
witnesses against them: they will find all their sins registered in that book,
and that book will then be opened, and they will not be able to deny one word
of what they shall find there recorded. Thus of the accusers and witnesses
against the wicked.

6. Concerning the Conviction. And here I shall speak of the conviction of some
particular sinners; especially of such who have lived in the days and places,
where the Gospel has been preached, whom the Lord Jesus Christ with upbraiding
having so full evidence with convict of their ^ins To set this out the more
lively.

Suppose that this very day were the day of Judgment; and in this very Church
were the Judgment seat: that here were a great white Throne, and the Lord Jesus
Christ himself sitting upon it in his glory, with millions of holy Angels about
him, and all the Saints in white at his right hand: and on his left, all the
wicked gathered together into one body, as it will be at the last day: And the
Judge should cry with a loud voice, Bring the prisoners to the B ay, Bring the
sinners to judgment, and so summon and convict particular sinners.

1. Come forth all ye ignorant persons: who have not known the Father, nor me,
nor the mysteries of salvation, however clearly revealed in my Word; who lived
in darkness, and loved darkness, and hated the light, least your deed* should
thereby have been reproved: What dark in a (...) ignorant in L ondon! in a
place of so much knowledge and instruction! Did not Parents teach you when you
were young? how is it that you would not be taught? If Parents neglected to
instruct you, had you not Ministers, (...) were ready to do it? How is it that
you have not (...)? If knowledge did not offer it self to you, why did you not
seek after it? why did not you learn of your selves? was there any thing in the
world that did concern you more to know? was not the knowledge of me, and my
ways, (...) the looking after? had you a capacity for other knowledge, and not
for this? have not others learnt, who were naturally as dull, and had as few
helps, as you? had you time to spend about other thing s, in sports and sins,
and not time to spend in getting knowledge? had you an ear, and yet not hear,
so as to learn? had you an eye, and yet see so as to understand? And if you
were naturally blind, had not I eyesalve? could not I have opened your eyes?
was I not willing? did I not stand in the gates to call upon you, How long ye
simple ones will you love simplicity? and fools hate knowledge: Turn unto me,
and I will pour out my Spirit upon you, and make known my words unto you? Prove.
^.22,24 Have you neglected me through ignorance, is not your fault double,
because you have neglected knowledge too? have you committed many sins through
ignoronce, is not this an aggravation of your sin* did not you hate knowledge,
and therefore dis-regarded it? did not you love sin, and therefore shunned the
light, which would have discovered it, and disturbed you in your wicked
courses? have you liked darkness so well, and is it not fit then that you
should go to the place where there is blackness of darkness for ever? Take them
Devils bind them hand and foot.

2. Come forth all ye slothful and unprofitable persons. Had not ye Talents
committed to you for my use and service, and what have you done with them? did
you bury them in the earth? or lay them up in a napkin? what could you lie down
and slumber, when you had so much work to do? could you trifle away so many
hours, when time was so precious? could you sleep in the day, in the day of
grace? sleep in the Harvest, which was so rich and plentiful, were you lived?
could you stand idle all the day long in the marketplace? were you born for
nothing, that ye lived so unprofitable, and were good for nothing? would not
religion have found you employment sufficient, if you had followed its
direction? Did the difficulties of duties discourage you, and therefore you
would let them alone, though they were so necessary had the command of God no
force with you? would not your own good and happiness move you at all to
diligence? did fear of men, and suffering damage in the world, keep you off
from zealous profession, and a strict course of li^e: and should not the fear
of God and danger of Hell, have kept you more from sin and stirred you up unto
the most difficult hazz^rdous duty? was there a Lion in the way to Heaven (...)
were there no Lions in the way to Hell? did not some sin cost you pains and
labor? did you find no difficulty in the service of the devil, and your own
lusts? and was not holiness more worth your pains to get? would not I have
proved a better master, had you been diligent in my service? could you be
diligent in your callings, to get a livelihood for your selves and families?
and neglect the life and salvation of your precious souls? would not my work
have brought wages with it? was there not sweetness mingled with the
difficulty? and would not the fruits have been sweet? would not a Crown and
Kingdom, a weight of glory, and eternal pleasures, move you to undergo some
difficulty? was there so much difficulty in obedience to my commands (which
were not grievous to a spiritual heart) and is there not more difficulty in
suffering what you must unavoidably suffer for your neglect* if my yoke were
painful to an unaccustomed neck, could not I have fitted your neck to it, and
made it easy? if my burden were heavy to a weak back, could not, would not I
have put under my shoulder, and helped you to have born it? were not the most
difficult duties I required, for your own good, and so many privileges, and
the best work you could be employed in? were any of my servants so wearie^ with
my service, with the hardest work I set them about, as you were wearied with
your idleness, and doing nothing? did not the Earth groan under such
unprofitable burdens? did not Hell gape for you long ago, and Devils long for
this time when you should be delivered into their powers. Take them* Devils
bind them hand and foot.

3. Come forth all ye that have neglected Family worship, and never sought
after God in your Closets; Were not you Creatures, and did the Law of Creation
require no worship? were not you subjects, and should not you have shown
homage to your Sovereign? did not you live upon Gods finding and bounty every
day, and should act you have acknowledged your dependence? did not God bring
you in to your Family Relation, and did he require no duty Did ^o: he threaten
to pour out his wrath upon irreligious Families? and yet would not you set up
Religion in yours? had you any business to do in your Houses, of that
consequence, as Worshipping God in your houses? if you had not ability to pra^^
at first with others, might not you have attained it, had you used to pray by
your selves: would not God have helped you had you been wil^ing to have been
helped? had you been sensible of sin, would you have wanted words in
Confession? had you been sensible of your wants, would you have lacked
expressions to make them known? was it curiosity and el^ganci^ of words, that
God it much looked for? would not sighs and groans have been understood? would
not the Scriptures have furnished you with expressions, had you used to read
them? would not Sermons have furnished you with matter and expressions had you
used to repeat them? had you need of such and such things for your Families,
and had you no need of Gods blessing? and could you hope for this blessing, if
you did not worship him? might not you have prospered more in the World, if you
had used to pray more in your houses? might not you have had more comfort in
your Relation s, if you had daily engaged with them in the Duties of Gods
Worship might not Family Prayer have prevented much sin and sorrow which you
brought upon you? did not you fall into many snares daily, for want of the
Armor of Prayer? had your Children and Servants no need of religious
education? were they like to be obedient and faithful to you, if you did not
teach them to be obedient and faithful unto God? had not you the charge of
their souls put into your hands? and what account can you give? have not you
brought their blood upon your heads? have not you contracted to your selves the
guilt of their sins? can you endure to hear their curses and ^anning of you for
neglecting to give them such religious education, as might have been the means
of their salvation? And you that were under government in Families which had no
Religion, could you so w^hingly imitate the Governors, and the rest, in the
neglect of Gods Worship? Could you contentedly go to Hell for company? is it
any allevation of your grief and horror that all your Family is together? can
your Masters or Fathers answer for themselves, or you? had not you a greater
Master in Heaven, whom you should rather have obeyed? did not you understand
your dut y? and if you could not worship God more publickl y, should not you
have sought out retiring corners: if others would not pray with you, should not
you have prayed alone b y your selves: What if you had no example for it in
your House, had you no precept for it in the Word: what if you were under
command, and much business was required of you, and you were discouraged in
such duties, could not you have found time when business was over, or before
business began: could not you have red^emed time from sleep and recreations,
rather than have neglected Gods Worship dail y: would not God have encouraged
and rewarded you: what if you had been scoffed at, and reproached for this:
would not the favor and smiles of God have compensated the flours of men,
would not Heaven have bin worth all the reproaches you could have undergone:
could you eat, and drink, and sleep, and not to pray to God, which was more
necessary than any thing, which is most necessary for your bodies: and if there
was no worship of God at home, could not you have looked abroad: were there
none lived near you who would have been glad of your company in the worship of
God, and way to Heaven: could you find out no religious young men or women
suitable to your degree, who would have quickened you, and heartned you against
discouragements: did not you devote your selves rather to the service of some
lusts, and were glad of any excuse when Conscience would have minded you of
your duty toward God: Take them Devils bind them hand and foot.

4. Come forth all ye Sabbath Breakers, you that have spent the day in
sleeping, in eating and drinking to excess: who instead of holy meditations,
have been thinking and contriving your worldly business; instead of (...)
conferences, have discoursed only of earthly matters: (...) of going to Church
to worship God, have walked into the fields* and spent the time in recreation,
or if you have seemed to give God a half day service by your presence at Church
one part of the da y: yet have worshipped him only with your bodies, when your
hearts were removed far from him, had not you an express command for the
Sabbaths observation: and if the day of first institution were changed, was the
day and worship thereof laid aside, and ceased to be a dut y: if the Jews were
obliged to keep a day hol y, were not the Christians much more: Was not the
Sabbath made for man, was it not for his privilege to take (...) (...) for
holy rest and worship: and did the Gospel (...) men's Privileges: Did not the
Moral Law of which Sabbath observation was one precept, bind throughout all
generations: could you call other days holy which the Scripture gave no warrant
for, and not observe that holy day which you were enjoined: Did not God allow
you six days for labor in your callings: and was it unequal for him to take
one day for his own worship: had he eased you of the burdensome Ceremonies
under the Law, was the Sabbath so burden* ^^me to you: could you reasonably
hope to enter into eternal rest, and keep a Sabbath in Heaven, if you would not
celebrate the appointed Sabbaths on Earth: Were not the works of the Creation
and Redemption worthy your memorial: was not communion with God in Ordniances
defirable: had you no need of those spiritual provisions, which God did use to
deal forth on the Sabbath days to them that waited upon him for them: what: not
worship God either in your own houses, no^ in his house, neither on the work
day or Sabbath da y: could your sometimes cold and formal services be counted
worship: Did you think that (...) prayers would ever be heard by God that
searches and requires the heart: did you think that Sermons unminded,
un-remembred, which you did neither believe, no^ were affected with, would be
effectual to save you* Take them Devils, ^ind them hand and foot,

5. Come forth all ye swearers, and profaners of the Name of God* Did you never
read nor hear the third C^^^^^dment, which for had this sin! Did you (...) near
of my (...) Injunction: that you should not swear at all in your discourses,
(...) that your communication should be yea and ^ay? Were you never^ told that
swearers would fall into condemnation? Was the Great and dreadful Name of God
of so little regard, that you could not only use it irreverently, so
frequently: but also even tear it in pieces by your oaths: What profit did you
get by your swearing: and are you like to sustain no lo^s: what pleasure did
you find in your swearing: and are you like to reap no bitterness: was it for
your honor to swear by the Name of God: or rather was it not for your
dishonor but how did you dishonor God: What an affront did you offer to him
hereby? you called upon him sometimes to damn and s^^k you: can you speak in
that language now* now damnation is so near you: Worms! could (...) God have
trodden you under his feet* or crushed you as easily as you could do a f^ie,
every time you profaned his Name: and because he was patient, would you
presume: because ^e did not present^^e punish, did you dare him, and fli^ in
his face to (...) his fury: You have sworn in your folly, and have not repented
and God has sworn in his wrath, and will not repent, (...) (...) shall never
enter into his rest. Take them Devils, (...) the^ hand and foot.

6. Come forth all ye scoffers at Religion, and the zealous Professors
thereof: who thought and spoke of Religion as if it had been a fancy, and
cunningly devised Fable: and of the most holy, humble, and self-denying
Christians, as if they (...) the most mean-spirited, foolish, and contemptible
People (...) Earth: and have used the name of a Saint in derision, and (...)
verb of reproach. Have you the same mind now, that Religion was but a fancy: Is
your Resurrection, and my appearance, but (...) fancy: Is your punishment
eternally in Hell, like to (...) but (...) fancy: Had you not (...) sure
groun^ and bottom* for your faith (...) the Scriptures: Could you have desired
more reasonable evid^^^^ of things done before your age: Could you (...) (...)
Scriptures* threatenings: And can you laugh now (...) the (...): Could you
content Gospel-promises (...) they so contemptible now in your eyes, when now
you (...) of them before you: Against whom was it (...) while a (...): (...)
was it that you did (...) (...) Disciples! because they were ^eek and humble,
and did not take the pleasures of sin with you, and were strict in their
profession and conversation: What think you of them now: Were they so mean
spirited and contemptible: Were they so foolish, which made to wise a choice:
Did they well, or ill, in staying till this time for their happiness: Look upon
the Persons now, whom once you scorned, and thought unworthie of your company:
Was it so ridiculous a thing to be a Saint, as you imagined: Was not ^^ining
with them in glory, at all desirable: Would not you be glad to be ^^^^bred
amongst them now: Why do you not laugh and ^^eer at the Saints now: Ye fools
and blind sots, do you know what you scoft at: Could you see no excellency in
Holiness, and the Divine Nature, in my Image, which was engraven upon them: Did
ever any Man of understanding laugh at the light of the S un: They were lights
in the dark World, where they lived: what mock at Holiness: hereby you mocked
at God himself, who is so infinitely glorious in this attribute, and hereby
distinguished from all his Creatures: vile Wretches! Take them Devils, ^ind
them hand and foot.

7. Come forth ye Persecuters of my Disciples: Was it not enough for you to
mock them: but you must persecute them too: Was it not enough for you to
persecute them with the tongue, but you m^st persecute them with the hand:
What, could you betra^y them like Judas for a piece of moan y, or ou^ of
malice, which was worse: Could you disturb them in their service and worship of
(...), when they were praying for your Conversion and Solvation: Could you hale
and drag them to Prison, who endeavored to keep you out of the Prison of Hell,
could you seek the ruin of such as were the best Friends of your Souls: when
you never received injury from them, (...) you be so envious to them: do you
know whom you persecuted: It was me, it was me whom ye persecuted, when you
persecuted my Disciples: it was me whom you wounded through the sides, it was
me you betrayed in betraying them: it was me ye imprisoned, in imprisoning
them: it was me ye spurned at, when ye lifted up the heel against then: and did
you ever think to prosper in this way? You, you, have been above all other
(...) upon the Earth, my professed Enemies, and most like (...) Father the
Devil; come ye Wretches, gird up your (...) like men: gather your forces
together: put on strength and courage, if you have any: and lift up your hand,
if you dare against me; do you find strength to fail you now, and your forces
too weak to make resistance? and were you so foolish an to engage in Battle,
where you might have known, you should certainly be conquered at the last? Does
your Courage fail upon the sight of the Captain? (...) should you not have been
afraid to touch my anointed ones, my lifted Soldiers? you served the Devil,
and fought under his Banner against me and mine, and can be deliver you now out
of my hand? can he desend you against my rage and fury? Or would he do it, if
it lay in his power? Had you ever more spite and malice against my People,
than the Devil had against you, in setting you about persecution Work? Did not
he design your ruin hereby? did not he think of this day, and on purpose draw
you to this sin* that ye might be the more horribly tormented? and does not he
with his Angels wait now for you, that (...) may drag you into torments? Take
them Devils, bind (...) hand and foot*

8. Come forth all ye intemperate and licentious Persons, who have indulged
your flesh, and laid no restraint upon your sensual appetite; who have made
provision for your flesh to fulfill the lusts thereof: but made no provision for
my glory, and took (...) care to fulfill my commands: Did you never hear of such
a Duty as self-denial, which I required of all my Disciples and Followers? Were
you never told that if you followed the Inclinations and obeyed the commands of
carnal self, it would be to your ruin and destruction? that bitterness and
sorrow would be the issu^^ of flesh-pleasing? that lust, if conceived, would
bring forth sin, and sin when perfected would bring forth death? Did you never
read that if ye lived after the flesh, ye should die, and that your must,
through the Spirit, martifie the deeds of the body, otherwise life and
happiness could not be obtained? and yet would you (...) the (...) on the neck
of your lusts? if you had no faith, (...) (...) (...) reason neither, to keep
you from intemperance? if you (...) not live like Christians, would you not
live like men? would you needs be bruits, and live as if you were all body, and
had no souls of such high Capacity? were you so blind as not to see afar off
before this day of Judgment, when I should call you to an account? or to see a
little before you, to the day of your death, which would put a conclusion to
all your sensual pleasures: Could you bribe and muzzle Conscience, and lay it
asleep whilst you take your pleasures? Could you tread reason under feet, and
resolve you would not be controlled by any light, or law, or government, from
your eager prosecution of your carnal delights.

Come forth all ye Gluttons, who have prepared your flesh with delicious food,
but never had the least regard to feed your souls which had more need, who have
spent many hours and days in feasting your bodies, nourishing your selves
against the day of slaughter; but when you were invited by my Messengers to the
Marriage Feast, to the Feast I had prepared for you, of the richest and most
costly Spiritual dainties; you had no stomach, no appetite, and could not,
would not come: what! did you indeed make your belly your God? and can s^^h a
God save and make you happy? Did you think that food which perishes, could
give happiness to a never doing soul? did you not know that both meat and belly
would be destroyed? and that your bodies would become food for Worms? and yet
could you make it the chief business of your lives to feed your bodies? you
were allowed food convenient, and sometime for delight, that your bodies might
serve your souls with strength and vigor, and both, their Lord and Master: but
excess you were forbidden, which did distemper both body and mind, and unfit
you for the service of the Lord: and yet would you overcharge your selves? now
reap the fruit of this intemperance, and taste the Gall and Wormwood which your
sweet bits are turned into.

Come forth all ye Drunkards, who if you have not overcharged your bellies with
excessive eating, yet have often intoxicated your brains with the fumes of
excessive drinking: who have drowned your understanding, wit and fancy, your
natural parts and ingenuity, which might have rendered you ^^^^ful in the
Church, or Commonwealth where you lived, and made your selves mere sots by
drunkenness: and what account can you now give of the talents you were
entrusted withal? what excuse can you find for this sin? were you enticed to
it, and overtaken before you were aware but who could entice you to drink a
portion which would kill your bodies? and was not the death and damnation of
your souls more to be avoided? would you be enticed to that unto which a very
Beast will not be enforced? but were you not forward of your selves to the sin?
did you not like the company well that joined with you therein? did not you
overtake the sin by your desires? did not the liquor please your appetite? did
not you swill it in without persuasion? if you had been overtaken, would you
have been so often guilty? would you have come so often into the places and
company where you fell into it? was not your ^^^efest mirth amongst your cups,
and drunken Companions (...) were not you melancholy and troubled, when your
meetings of good-fellowship were disappointed? you would have your Cups, and
drink Wine in Bowls, and strong Drink without measure: and now also you have a
Cup to drink of, even the Cup of the Wine of the wrath of the angry Allmighty
God: now ye shall drink of the dregs of this Cup, which has ten thousand
times more bitterness in it, than your other Cups have had sweetn ess.

Come forth all ye Adulterers, you that have neighed like full Horses after
your neighbors Wives, and assembled by troops into Harlots house s: or if not
so, have committed this sin in secret corners: was there no shame in you, to
keep you from this nasty, filthy sin? could you delight so much to wallow in
mire and dung? was there no fear in you to restrain you? did not conscience
check and rebuk^ you, when this lust first conceived in you? did you never hear
that Whoremongers and Adulterers God would judge? and did you not think you
should be called to an account for this sin? Could you melt in filthy sinful
pleasures of the ^^^h, and not consider how you should consume in torments?
(...) your short pleasures comparable to an eternity of (...) (...) misery?
were there no pleasures of a higher nature, (...) sweeter relish attainable in
life, if you had foregone and denied your selves unlawful pleasures? have you
not lost them and the unspeakable eternal joys of Heaven by your intemperance.
Take them Devils bind them hand and foot.

9. Come forth all ye Covetous Persons, whose treasure, and heart, and hope,
and confidence has been in earthly things; who have made the world your God,
desiring, and loving, and delighting, and trusting in your wealth and riches,
as if they could yield the most contentment, and be the best defense unto you:
whose greatest thoughts, and care, and labor have been spent about getting and
keeping an estate and portion in the world, with little heart to use it for
your selves, much less for the good of others, and glory of God that gave it:
Did you not know that covetousness was Idolatry? and that no Idolater shall
have any admittance into the new Jerulasem? Did you not know that the love of
the world was inconsistent with the love of the Father? had you such mean
thoughts of God, that you chose the world before him? were the riches of grace
of so small esteem, that you preferred earthly riches? had the treasures in
heaven no more worth in your account, that you should neglect and disregard
them, and make choice rather of treasures on earth? When you had tried the
world, and found it vain and empty, would you still set your heart upon it?
when you felt such thorny cares, and piercing sorrows in your eager prosecution
of this world, could not this damp and deaden your affection to it? when your
own and others riches sometimes suddenly took flight as upon an Eagles wing, of
desire after them? did you not foresee how naked and bare death would strip you
of all: and yet would nothing wean your whorish heart from the love of the
world? were you never told that riches could not profit you in the day of
wrath? is not all your wealth consumed now? treasures there indeed prepared for
you* (...) they are treasures of wrath which your sins have deserved. Take them
Devils bind them hand and foot.

10. Come forth all ye unmerciful persons: whole (...) have been shut up
against the poor and needy who have spoken churlishly to the poor, and looked
upon them a far (...): or if you have spoken to them fair, and said to the
na^^d and destitute of daily food, Depart in peace, be ye warmed and be ye
filled^: yet have not given unto them things needful for the body, whatever
abundance you had by you, who have no pity on my distressed members, so as to
contribute any relief to their necessities? I was hungry, and ye gave me no
meat: I was thirsty, and ye gave me no drink: I was waked, and ye clothed me
not: I was a stranger, and ye took me not in (...) I was sick* and you visited
me not: I was in prison, and ye did not administer unto me. Did you not
understand it was your duty to relieve the* poor? had you not your riches given
to you for this (...)? was not this the best use you could put them unto? would
not works of mercy have brought unto you the best returns at last: might you
not hereby have laid up for your selves a good foundation against this day? if
you had laid o^t* your estate according to my prescription, might not you now
have (...) hold (...) eternal life? were you never forewarned, that such should
have judgment without mercy, that did not show mercy? And you that have had no
mercy to forgive, that know not how to pass by real, or conjectural injuries,
which (...) hare received: that were ready to take your brother by the throne
for a hundred pence, when you might have been forgiven your ten thousand
talents which you owed unto God: were ye never told, that the King of Heaven
would deliver you to the tormentors, if you were unmercifull? Take them Devils
bind them hand and foot.

11. Come forth all ye unrighteous (...)* (...) have wronged Widows, and
Orphans: who have overreached your Neighbors in your dealings; who have
heaped an estate together by unrighteous practices: who have sque^'d and
oppressed the poor, which have had no helper: was not the Law of right written
upon your heart: did you not read it more plainly in the Word did not men
condemn you: did not your own Consciences secretly (...) you for your
unrighteousness? and did not you think that (...) (...) God would condemn you
much more: (...) you not (...) that no unrighteous person should inherit the
Kingdom of Heaven that the Lord would avenge himself upon you for this sin?
(...) you wrong others so much as you have hereby wronged your selves: is the
gain of the world comparable to the loss of your souls: it a little Silver or
Gold (now taken away from you) comparable to the loss of Heaven, and eternal
Glory: Did you think such faults would be winked at: did you expect to hear of
them again at the day of Judgment: is it an unrighteous thing to punish you for
your unrighteousness* Take them Devils, bind them hand and foot.

12. Come forth ye liar:s you who have taught and accustomed your selves to
this sin; who have not only reported lies; but also made them: whose words have
been feigned and deceitful: Did you not know, that God who made you, and to
whom you owed all subjection and obedience, was a God of Truth, and that he
required Truth: that every man should speak Truth to his Neighbor: that he
abhorned Lying lips? that he threatened to punish Liars with the (...) death,
and give them their portion in the Lake of (...)? (...) had you no fear of God,
no fear of future (...) restrain you: might you not as easily have (...)
truth, as uttered falsehood? would you not hereby have (...) more credit in the
World: would not you have been more fit for society: would not you have had
more peace in your Conscience: did you excuse faults by your lies: but was it
not a greater aggravation of them: if you hid them by lies, from men, could you
hide them from God, who searched your heart: did you show kindness (...) by
your lies: and did not you injure your selves ^^ousand fold more: did you harm
others by your lies so (...) as your selves: Did you not know that the Devil
was the Father of lies, and liars? and were you so desirous tribe like him:
were you so forward to do him service: Take them Devils, bind them hand and
foot.

13. Come forth all ye Slanderers and Backbiters, who have walked about with
flanders, and carried about tales unto the reproach and injury of your
neighbors good name: Did you not know it was your duty to endeavor the
preservation of your Neighbors Reputation as carefully as your (...): were you
not commanded to speak evil of none: ^^uld you flatter others before their
faces, and alter your ^^eech so much when their backs were turned: did not our
own self-contradicting words condemn you: did you and good in backbiting, and
speaking evil of others: did you gain reputation by wounding others reputation:
or rather, did you not give occasion to others to speak as reproachfully of
you: did you not alienate affection and separate near friends by your slanders:
did you not know many things to be false, which you spoke to others
disparagement: could you with confidence have averred the same things to the
persons themselves: would they not easily have disproved you, and put you to
shame: and if you were privy to some real faults of other s, should you not
have concealed them: if you had had real love, would you not have covered them:
did you do as you would be done by: had you not as great faults of your own:
and could you be content to have them blazed abroad: you have accused others
falsely, and now you are accused trul y, and you shall be punished justl y: Take
them Devils, bind them hand and foot.

14. Come forth all ye proud and ambitious persons, you (...) have builded your
nests on high: that have taken many dirty steps to get into the seat of honor,
(...) hearts have been lifted up with high towering imaginations* and conceits
of your own excellencies, unto the scorning: and contempt of others: who have
had proud hearts, and (...) looks, and proud speeches, and proud carriage
toward others, especially toward them that have been of meaner degree, who
have looked upon others afar off, and have disdained the converse and company
of some, of (...) the world has not been worth y: were you acquainted with no
higher honor and dignit y, than the world could give unto you: might you not
have had seats in Heavenly places, if you had looked after them, and less after
the other: did you not know that the highest places on the earth were the most
slippery places: did you not foresee (...) turning of the wheel upon you: did
you not believe that God would cast down the mighty from their seats: that the
higher you were lifted up in dignit y, if your hearts were withal lifted up
with pride, the lower and greater would be your fall: And was the favor and
the pla^se of men so desirable: was it not an empty breath, an inconstant wind*
If you had been ambitious, should you not have been ambitious of the favor of
the King of glor y, which would have been so beneficial and lasting* And are
You the persons that once were so proud and scorn^ul* You proud: had you any
such reason: proud, when creatures! depending creatures! who had nothing, but
what was borrowed, and received from God! proud, when such mean creatures!
proud when fallen into the dirt, and so defiled! proud, when sinners, sinners
so vile! so full of sores! when you had such lothsom spirits! when you had such
leprous souss! could you lift up the plumes, when you had such black feet:
could you be proud when you had lost Gods Image, and were (...) (...) unto foul
devils: proud when such beggarly sinners! clothed in such filthy rags! proud
when such slaves and vas^^^ to the vilest and basest tyrants! proud in chains
and fetters of Satan and lust! You had reason indeed to be (...) and to look so
high, and speak so big, when you were (...) odious to God, and such low, mean
spirited, miserable wretches, who were drudging in mire and dirt, and were
(...) by the Devil in chains, like dogs, toward the Prison of (...): you had
need scorn the company of my Disciples; as (...) dirt y, dunghill beggars should
scorn the company of high^^^ noble Princes! but now you shall be debased, and
laid (...) indeed. Take them Devils, bind them hand and foot.

15. Come forth all ye envious and malicious persons, You that have grieved at
the good of other s, which they have (...), or done; that have grieved at the
good ^states of others, and that they have thrived faster than you in the
World; that have grieved at the sweet and comfortable Relations of others, and
that yours have not been like to them; that have grieved at the beauty or
strength of Bod y, the gifts and endowments of mind of (...) beyond that your
selves have had; that have grieved at the (...) (...) of others, that they have
been esteemed and presence (...) before your selves; that have grieved because
others ^^ve done more good, and been more useful than your ^^^ves; and hence
have secretly hated them; and have been (...) toward them in your minds: and
have entertained thoughts and desires of doing them some mischief: and were
glad when any mischief did befall them: You, you have been children of the Devil
indeed, and the likeness and lusts of your Father you have had: was your eye
evil because God was Good? Did not God put the difference between them and you?
and should not you have been contented was not God good to you, and had not you
reasons to (...) thankful? Did not you put a stop to the Current of (...)
goodness by your envy: did not you lose the comfort of the good things you had,
by this sin? did not you (...) (...) the benefit you might had by the good
things of others? should not you have rejoiced in their good things? If you had
loved them indeed, would not you have done it? Did not you rack and torment
your selves by (...) ^^vie? had you been humble, would you have been (...)
(...)? had your affections been set upon things above, (...) this sin have so
much prevailed? had you been (...) desirous to promote Gods glor y, would you
have been so much concerned, that your glory should (...) (...), whe^^ Gods
Glory was advanced, though by others more (...) your selves? Were you not
warned to (...) aside all (...) and malice, if you would be Christians indeed:
if you (...) put your spirits under my Government, would not (...) conquered by
my Spirit their inordinate motions should not you have found sweetness and
comfort in love, if (...) had labored after, and lived in the exercise of
(...) Grace: Did you not know that these were works of the flesh which would
exclude you the kingdom of (...) Take the Devils, bind them hand and foot.

16. Come forth all ye wrathful and Contentious persons: your that have (...)
fiery Spirits, and (...) tongues: whose tongues have been ^spand^ with you have
lashed and wound^^ others in your reproachful reviling speeches; who have had
the po^son of Asps in your hearts and lips, which has vented it self in
invirulent language; whose words have been bitter and clamorous, full of anger
and wrath, and contention: who have been incendiaries in the places where you
have lived; who have disturbed the peace of your families, and turned all
things unto uproar and confusion: did you not know the precepts of the Gospel,
which commanded peace, and gentleness s, and meekness, and easiness, to be
entreated? did you disturb others peace b y your contentions, and did you not
disturb your own! did you raise an uproar in your houses, and was not there a
greater uproar in your hearts: did you not taste the bitterness of such a
conversation, and yet would you persist therein: did not you receive some
blows, and wounds b y your contention sometimes: and yet would not you hearken
to such rebukes* were you angry with others without just cause, and (...) there
not good reason that God should be angry with (...): was not the fire of your
tongues kindled by the fire (...): And is it unreasonable that you should be
thrust (...) the place of burning for your contention: Take the^ Devils bind
them hand and foot.

17. Come forth all ye civil and moral persons, who have (...) moral
righteousness, and been upright in your dealings, but (...) strangers unto the
power of godliness, who have observed (...) precepts of the second table of the
Law in reference to (...) (...) and others externally; but have grossly
neglected the (...) the first table; which have had reference to God, who (...)
no knowledge of God, nor fear of him, nor love to (...), (...) delight in him;
who have never sanctified his name, or (...) in (...) hearts, nor worshipped him
in a spiritual manner (...) ^^cording to the prescriptions of his word, who
never yielded (...) (...) to the Gospel, never saw your need of me, obtained
interests and acquaintance with me, what ^ver calls and opportunities (...)
had: and do you think I should know you, and own (...) (...), when you are none
of mine: will your moral righteousness stand you now in any stead, when you are
to give so (...) (...) account: did not I tell you in my word, (...)
righteousness did exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, ye
should in no wise enter into the Kingdom of Heavens: that you must be born
again, or else you could not be saved: That you must be holy, or else you could
not be happy: did you not hear of the young man, who had as much moral
righteousness as you, and yet must of Heaven, because he would not obey my
other commands: has your moral righteousness been so perfect, that it has had
no flaw: have you lived free from sin in regard of the second Table of the Law:
besides your breaches of the first will not Conscience tell you of some slips,
some stumbles and falls as to your external walking: were you never guilty of
unrighteous dealings: never were lustful and wanton: never told any lies, nor
utt^ered any standers: and if you have been fair in your outward carriage and
converse, have you (...) had foul insides: had you not need of pardon for your
sin,s, (...) my blood to wash you from your filthiness: have not the best of
your works been sinful, in regard of the principal, and (...) (...) manner of
performance: Did you think the works of (...) would save you, when the works of
Grace cannot, without the imputation of my righteousness, because of their
imperfe^^^ must not Gods justice be satisfied for your sins: and (...) think it
should be done, but by your eternal punishment in (...)! had you believed in
me, and yielded obedience to me, my righteousness should have been yours, and
then you might have held (...) your heads with joyful expectation of glory on
this day, but (...) cleaved to your own righteousness, and were well and whole,
(...) did not see your need of me to be your Physician and Savior, (...) would
not submit unto, and accept of my righteousness, and (...) have you to say, why
judgment should not pass upon you? (...) (...) think such works as yours would
satisfy Justice when if you (...) done better, and kept the whole (...) for
the greatest part of (...) life, yet you had done but your Duty, and the (...)
of your (...) were enough to sink you into Hell: (...) was any of your
righteousness perfect: Did you think to (...) Heaven by such works do you think
you deserve a Crown of glory for your (...) (...) morality? where have you a
promise of it? and if you had (...) promise: could you think you should ever
attain it? what, (...) mouth ^^opt, and are you speechless new? Take them
Devils, bind them hand and foot.

18. Come forth all ye Hypocrites, who have made a show of Holiness; and have
born the name of zealous professors of Religion, but have been acted by carnal
designs and prin*ciples, who have used Religion as a Cloak for your
Covetousness, who followed me only for the loaves, who have, been hollow at the
heart, rotten at the Core, painted Sepulchers, blazing Comets, wandering and
falling Stars, for whom the mist of darkness is reserved for over? what did you
mean by your shows and outward appearance of Worship and Service? did you think
that the All-seeing, ^^eart^ arching God judged according to outward
appearance? ^id you think that lip-service, and bodily exercise would be
accepted by him, or was it acceptance only with men which you sought after?
that reward you had, and can you (...) any other reward, when you did not
desire it, nor design it? and what does it, can it now profit you, that (...)
accounted you religious? will their esteem of you (...) pardon and Salvation
for you? Could you be con^^^ cast away and lose all your external services for
(...) of sincerity, and an internal living principle? did not (...) think that
all your services would rise up one day in judg^^^ against you? did not you
affront the highest Majesty (...) the mockery of your shew-worship? did not he
very well understand which way your heart went, when you seemed (...) devout?
was not he acquainted with the secret lust which you harbored in your heart,
and secret way of wickness which you walked in, when you made a show of
^^^rti^ication, and self-denial, and a holy, and strict conversation? were you
not warned against hypocrisy, and told (...) ^^odious it was to God, and that
hypocrites portion would (...) in utter darkness, where there is weeping and
wailing, and gnashing to teeth? Take them Devils bind them hand and foot.

19. Come forth all ye Back-sliders and Apostates, from me and my ways: You
that turned back to ways of prophane^^^, and open wickedness, after some time
of profession, and joining your selves with my people; was my service so
burdensome that you could endure it no longer* was the way to Heaven so
unpleasant, that you would walk no longer therein? after some tr^al in show of
me, did you prefer and make choice of the Devil before me* after some washing
your selves, would you wallow in the mire again? after heaving some vomit off
of your stomach, would* you again lick it up? after some sweepings and
dressings would you open the door, and let in seven worse spirits of defile
your hearts? after you seemed to be escaped, were you again entangled; would
you needs put your foot again into the ^^re, and bind your selves even in fresh
bonds of sin? did you prefer the company of the wicked which were going
Hell-ward, before the company of my people, which were going Heavenward? could
not you now wish that you had held on, and held out with them unto the end?
would not you have rejoiced if you had now been found in their society? did you
repent of your repenting, and do you not now repent of your back-s^idings! were
not you told, if you drew back, my Soul would have no pleasure in you?

And you that have turned aside from me and my ways into ways of error, that
sucked in damnable Heresies from false Teachers. Did you not know that there
were damnable Heresies, as well as other damnable sins? were you (...) warned
that Satan sometimes appeared as an Angel of (...) would you so quickly turn
aside after some workings and strivings of my Spirit with you, and some hopes
which you gave of your conversion and reformation* did not you perceive how
Satan lay upon the catch, so soon as you began to be awakened, to prejudice you
against the truth, and draw you aside in another way to serve him? did you not
understand the mysteries of his delusions? if you had heartily loved the truth
as is was in me, would you have been to deluded? was not deep Humiliation and
Mortification of every lust too hard a Doctrine, and therefore (...) chose such
as would give you more scope, and ^^erty, and shroud your lusts under some
other name, and term^ your hatred and anger against my people by the name of
zeal for my glory? did you think if you gave Satan one hold, that it would no^
be sufficient to undo you? had you stuck close to my Ministry and Ordinances,
would you have been so deluded: did you think your selves wiser than my
Ministers, so soon as you got a little glimmering of light? could you so
readily open your ^are to slanders, and receive prejudices against them, though
Satan and his Instruments persuasions, to the shipwracking of your own Souls?
did you not find how wavering and unsteady you were, how like Children tossed
too and fro with every wind of Doctrine, when once you forsook my Ministry,
which I appointed for your establishment; did you conceit that you might live
above Ordinances in the World? did you imagine to get into a higher form, when
you went forth of my School? and when you expected perfection most, were not
you more imperfect than be^^^: when you fancied a clearer light, were not you
most full of darkness: when you thought your selves so holy, as none like you,
and none must be holy but those (...) your way: were you not most unholy, and
like a smoke in my nostrils: could I accept of your worship out of the way of
my Ordinances and Institutions: when you thought your selves most guided and
acted by the Spirit, was it (...) a spirit of delusion: did my spirit lead you,
and act (...) (...) a way which my word did not allow of: were not (...) (...)
renders and tearers of my Church: was it not (...) of you that the ways of
truth were evil spoken (...) Men: were not those without prejudiced against
(...) (...) ways, because of your delusions, which made so forward a
profession* Suppose I permitted some of mine so mistake in c^rcumstantial s,
was this a just excuse for your errors in fundamentals, when the word was open
for you to in form your selves in the truth: did not you wrest the Scriptures
to your own destruction: Suppose you dented your selves some things, were they
those things that I commanded: supp^^^ suffered some things in your way, do you
hope for a reward for sufferings, which I never called you unto, and which did
but so much the mo^^ harden your party, and promote your delusion: (...) know
what a share you were hampered in, so soon as your put your foot in the way of
error, and turned aside from that old strait, narrow way of my Word and
Ordinance s, which have brought so many to Heaven:

Were not you in a greater unlikelihood of being called effectually, than
Drunkards and Adulterers, and the most vicious, who lay more naked to the blow
of the Word, and were more ready to receive instruction: you were more forward
to reprove my Ministers, than to receive my Ministers, and conviction from
them; you could call them Antichristian and false Prophets, though they adhered
to and maintained nothing but the truths of my Word; and when I gave them so
many seals of their Ministry in the conversion of many souls: you could call
them Self-seekers and ^^irelings, though they gave such evidence of
self-denial, (...) many of them forsook all that they had rather than they
would make a brea^h upon their conscience s: you could, some of you entrench
upon their office, though you had no tall, nor commission from me, you had the
Scripture to discover to you the right way, but you shat your eyes against the
light, and chose ways of darkness, and is it not fit that you should go to the
place of darkness. Take them Devils, bind them hand and foot.

20. Come forth all ye Impenitent Persons and (...) believer s, all ye that
have yielded obedience to the Gospel; (...) you not called to repentance by
Ministers, and the Spirit, (...) Ordinances: and when a stiller voice was not
(...) called louder by God in his judgment: did you (...) except you repented
you would certainly (...) would be your ru^ne, unless your heart were (...)
from it, and yet were you, though you lay under the guilt of (...) much s^n,
could you ^e so impenitent and hard-hearted: (...) not you called to me by the
Voice of the Gospel* did (...) I (...) you, and stre^th out my band all the day
long to you: did not I stand at the door of your heart, and (...) hand for
(...) and ye^ could you shut the door against me, though you (...) need of me:
^ad you not commands and encouragement^ (...) believe: could you rationally
desire firmer ground and (...) (...) your faith: did not you give God the lie
by your unbelief; have you not hereby fastened the guilt of all your other sins
upon your selves, which I was willing to take off from you: would any son
against the Law have condemned you, had you turned from it, and yielded
obedience to the Gospel: were you not foretold of the wrath to come, and yet
would you not fly from it: were you not proffered a Savior, and yet would you
not accept of him; have you not treasures opened before you, and would you not
look after them: were you not shown the way to Heaven, and would not you walk
in it: how can you escape, that have been guilty of disobedience to the Gospel:
Take them Devils, bind them hand and foot.

Christ at the day of Judgment will convict the whole ungodly. World,
especially those who have lived under the ^^und of the Gospel, their Crimes
will be made manifest and evident, and every mouth will be stopped, when they
are found guilty before him, and they cannot deny it: then the wicked will be
speechless, and stand after their full conviction like so many Rogues in Chains
before the Judge. And think now with your selves what the behavior of the
Wicked will be, when they are thus convicted of their sins, and are ready to
receive their Sentence. I believe some of you have seen Malefactors at the Bar,
when the (...) bath found them guilty, and the Judge bath been proceeding to
give the sentence of Death, how their countenances have changed, and their
joints trembled, and unexpressible horror seized upon them: but O the dread and
(...) that will be upon the spirits of the wicked, when they are ^^cted of sin
by this Judg^ and with what (...) (...) expectation will they wait for their
Sentence?

7. And this is the 7 th particular to speak concerning the Sentence which the
Lord Jesus Christ will pass upon the Wicked in Judgment, see Mat 25. 41. Then
shall ^e say unto them on his left hand, Depart from me ye cursed into
everlasting Fire prepared for the Devil and his Angels. De^^^ from me, that ye
have formerly said in your hearts unto me, Depart, we will not have thee to
reign over us: that have said unto my Ministers, Depart, we will not hearken to
your words; that have said to my Spirit, Depart we will not yield to thy
motions. Now Depart (...) Depart from me, ye that would not come unto me, ye
have often been called and invited to come, but ye refused, n^w Depart! ye
shall not have one Call more; you shall not have one proffer of grace more for
ever; Depart! never shall ye hear my voice any more; never shall ye fee my
face any more; Depart! be gone out of my sight: Depart from me ye C^rsed! as
ye cared not for blessings, so shall it be far from you; as ye loved cursing,
so shall it be unto you; Depart with the Curse of the Law, with the curse of
the great God upon your; let the curse of God cloth you like a garment, and
bind you like a chain: let it enter into your flesh and bones like Oil, to
enrage so much the more the flames of Hell about you; and let it pierce into
your soul, and fill you with horrible anguish; Depart from me ye cursed into
everlasting fire. Ye shall not depart into your old habitation to spend an
Eternity in sinful sensual pleasures; no, Depart into Torments, Depart into
Fire, into the Fire of Hell; into the burning Lake; into Tophet ordained of old
for you, into a stream of Fire and Brimstone, enkindled by the breath of God:
Depart into Everlasting, Fire: Go dwell with devouring Fire, and inhabit
everlasting burdings: Depart into everlasting Fire, prepared for the Devil and
his Angels; ye served the Devil and diverse lusts, whilst you lived in the
world; now go and live with the Devil and his Angels in Hell fire for eve^,
partake of (...) Torments, primarily prepared for him, and belonging also to
you, because ye belonged to his Kingdom.

And when the se^^enoe is irreversroly pronounced by the l^dge upon the Wicked.
O what direful (...) will they give forth! With what horror will they cry out,
How shall we be able to endure the devouring flames, and everlasting* burnings
of Hell!

Thus have I done with the Judgment it self, both of the Righteous and the
Wicked, at the appearance of Jesus Christ.

CHAP. IX.
THE second thing is to speak of the Execution of the Sentence pronounced upon
both in Judgment, which you have spoken of together. Matthew. 25. 46. And these
shall go away into everlasting punishment, but the righteous into life eternal.

1. Concerning the execution of the Sentence on the ^^icked. Those shall go
away into everlasting punishment. Here I shall speak, 1. Of the wickeds going
away. 2. Of their going into punishment.


The former does imply the punishment of loss, the latter (...) punishment of
sense.

1. The wicked, when the Sentence is pronounced, shall go away; and here I
shall show, 1. From whom they shall go away. 2. From what they shall go away.
3. The aggravations, or vexing considerations, which Gospel, Sinners will have
in their going away.


1. From whom the wicked shall go away.

(...) They shall go away from Jesus Christ; the Righteous are at his side, and
shall remain with him; but the wicked shall go away from him; the righteous
shall go with him, and abide with him, where he is, there they shall be also;
they shall be for ever with the Lord; but the wicked, must go away, and be
eternally separated from his presence. The righteous shall behold his glory,
and share in it; they shall see the smiles of his face, and (...) entertained
by him with unexpressible love; but the wicked shall be thrust out of his
presence with frowns and indignation: it will be one great part of the misery
of the wicked, that they shall go away from so glorious a person as the Lord
Jesus Christ.

2. They shall go away from the Saints; now some of them are mingled with Gods
people, the Tares and the wheat grow up together; the sheep and the goats feed
in the same pasture; and though it was bitter to the wicked to dwell with the
righteous, because of the contradiction, which was in their lives, to their
lusts; yet then it will be more bitter to them to be excluded their society,
because then they will perceive their excellency with admiration: when they see
them shine with such beauty, and rejoice with Songs of triumph, and they must
be gone away from them; this will fill their hearts with racking envy, and
torme^r them unspeakably.

2. From what the wicked shall go away; they shall go away from happiness, from
the ^^ppiness of heaven; the doors of heaven shall be shut upon them; they
shall see Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacoh, and many come from the East, and the
West, and the North, and the South, even an innumerable multitude of all
Kind^reds, and Nations, and Tongues, and enter in and ^it down in the Kingdom
of God and themselves thrust out, and thrust down to Hell

3. Concerning the Aggravati^ns, or vexing considerations, which Gospel ^^^^ers
will have it their going away; as the sin of those is more heinous, who sin
against the light of the Gospel, than of those who sin only against the light
of nature: so their punishment will be more severe; all shall be, beaten, but
these persous with many stripes; as there will be degrees in glory, though all
will be filled with glory, yet some will have a larger capacity; so there will
be degrees of torment and misery, all shall be filled with torment, but some
will have a larger capacity, especially Gospel sinners will have stings beyond
what heathens will be capable of in their punishment of loss, when

1. They shall have a clear discovery of the glory and happiness which they
have missed; now they hear of heaven and the happiness which the Saints shall
have in the vision and fruition of God: but there is avail of unbelief upon
their minds, that they do not apprehend such a happiness as is spoken of; they
have mean thoughts of God, and of heaven: they think there is no heaven like
the Earth; and no happiness like the fruition of the Creatures; no glory like
the glory of the world, no treasures like earthly treasures; and no delights
like those which they find in the objects of their sense: but when their
portion in this life shall be spent; and the good things which they enjoyed
shall be taken away from them; when their honors shall vanish like smoke, or a
thin vapor; their riches shall ^^ie away like an Eagle, or sail like a ship
out of their sight; when their sensual delights and pleasures shall fail them,
and die like sweet flowers in their hands; when the bright cloud of earthly
things, which shadowed the glory of heavenly things from their view, shall be
blown away, and the vail shall be torn in pieces which was before them, and
hindered them from looking into the Holy of Holi^s; and the scales shall fall
off from their eyes: In a word, when the heavens shall pass away with a great
horse, and the elements shall melt with fervent hear, and the earth, with the
works thereof shall be burnt up; and they shall be awakened out of their long
sleep in their graves, and shall be summoned before the tribunal seat of
Christ, and stand there stripped and quite naked of all their enjoyments in the
world, which they had set their hearts upon; and they shall be examined and
condemned for their sins; Then, then, their eyes will be opened, and they will
clearly see their mistake of happiness; then they will perceive and be fully
persuaded of the fullness of joy and unspeakable pleasures at the right hand of
God, the least taste of which would ravish their hearts ten thousand times more
than all the full draughts, which they have taken in the sweetest of all their
sinful delights: I say, they shall see this happiness, and that which will v^x
them to the heart will be, that they shall only see it, not enjoy the least
share in it. O what high apprehensions will they then have of the glory of
Heaven; they will see the Crown which will (...) upon the head of the
Righteous, which will have more worth then in their esteem, than all the Crowns
and S^^pters of the greatest Kings upon the earth; then the will be clearly
conv^^ced that the choicest treasures were in Heaven, and the sweetest delights
were to come, and the thoughts of missing this Crown and glory, such treasures
and sweetness, will tear their very hearts: they must go away from Heaven and
Happiness.

2. In going away they shall remember the capacity which they had once of
obtaining this happiness; if they had been b^uits indeed, and had capacity for
a (...) life only; and grace and glory had been (...) so far beyond their
reach, that it had been in possible for them to attain, it; it would not much
trouble them to lose it, whatever other miseries they should endure; but they
were capable of the beginnings of Heaven in the life of grace, and the
completing of their happiness in glory; they will remember that they had souls
endued with reason, and hereby advanced to a higher capacity than beasts; that
they had minds capable of divine contemplations, and hearts capable of divine
affection; that they had wills which might have chosen God for their portion,
and Heaven for their heritance; that they had desires, and loves, and hopes,
and joys, which if they had wrought Godward, and Christ-ward, as they did
toward the creature, if they had wrought up-ward and heavenward, as they did
down-ward and toward the earth, and earthly things, they might have been happy
for ever; they will see that others, who had the same natures* as they had, and
were guilty at first of as great sins, as they had committed, yet repented and
turned, believed and reformed, were changed and saved; and with unexpressible
vexation they will think that thus it might have been with them, if they had
not been fools, if they had seriously endeavored to fill up the capacity, which
God has given them.

3. In going away they will remember the proffers which they had of this
happiness; that they lived in places where the light did shine, and the Gospel
did sound, and Christ was preached and tendered with all the benefits of his
purchase; they will remember how often they were called to repent, how
earnestly they were entreated to be reconciled; they will remember the
discoveries, which were made to them of future glory, and the invitations,
which they had to come unto Christ that they might have pardon and life, and
partake of the inheritance of the Saints in light; all which was little
regarded by them; they will remember how long, and how loud Christ knocked at
the door of their hearts for entertatnment; that he knocked by such a Sermon,
such a Motion of the Spirit, by such a Judgment, such an Affliction, such a
Deliverance; and yet that they barred the door, deaf^ed the ear, and if they
did not fully resolve to keep him out, yet they put him off with such tedious
delays, until on a sudden death knocked at their door and broke it open, and
drag^d them away to Hell before they had given entertainment unto Jesus Christ,
and had provided an eternal habitation for their souls: they will then remember
the opportunities and seasons of grace, which once they enjoyed; that once they
had a Day, a Day of grace, and that with some of them it was a long Summers
day; and that they had calls at the first hour, and the third hour, and the
ninth hour, and at the eleventh hour, and that all the Day long God stretched
forth his hand unto them; but they did not know the day of their visitation;
they were more foolish than the Crane and the Stork, and the Swallow, they did
not understand their, appointed time; they did not mind the things which
belonged to their peace, until they were hid from their eyes; they slept in
the Harvest, they loitered away, and sinned away their time, and wasted their
day, in which they should have made provision for their souls: O how will they
be then ready to tare themselves in pieces, that they should neglect so great
Salvation, in the day when Salvation was attainable? yea, that they should
refuse the proffers of grace and pardon and peace, and life and happiness,
which in that day were so frequently and earnestly made unto them: then they
will wish that they had opened their ear and heart, that they had regarded and
accepted such gracious proffers whatever they had neglected or parted withal:
then they will wish they had embraced and improved the opportunities which once
they had for Pr^ayer, and hearing, and attendance upon Gods Ordinances: that
they had been in the Church when they were in the Alehouse; that they had
associated themselves with Gods people, when they frequented the company of the
le^d, and ungodly; that they had been upon th^i^ knees with grief confessing
sin; when they took so much delight in the commission of it; that they had
taken time from their sports to make their peace with God; that they had
worshipped God in their Closets, and worshipped God in their Families, and laid
up for themselves treasures in Heaven; and horrible will their vexation be that
they did not so.

4. In going away, they will remember for what it was that they refused this
happiness; that it was only for the satisfaction of some foolish and
unprofitable lust: If two Kingdoms of equal worth and glory were proposed to a
Man's choice, it would not trouble him that he had refused the one, to obtain
the other; but if a Man were to choose whether he would be a King or a Slave; if
he should refuse the former, and choose the later, when he comes to feel the
misery of his bondage, this would rouble him, more than the bondage, that he
might have avoided it, that he has chose this thraldom, and parted with a
Kingdom for it: they will then perceive that they have chosen to beslaves unto
sin, and ^athan, rather than to be Heirs unto the Kingdom (...) Glory; I know
that though now they are slaves, and (...) diverse (...), and though their
bondage is a thousand fold, worse, than if they were Vassals to thee cruellest
Tyrant upon Earth; yet they are not sensible, neither are they weary of their
bondage; because their wills are in thraldom, and their affections are
cap^ivated; and through heirdome to the glory of Heaven, be the choicest
privilege upon Earth, and most desirable; yet they do not desire it, but
prefer their slavery before it; because they are blind, unbelieving, besotted
sinners, and judge of things according to sense; yet on the day of Christ's
appearance, all things will appear with a new face, and they will look upon
things with a new eye; they will then perceive that they were slaves all their
days; and that there was no such drudgery as that which they were employed in;
and that there was no such glory and happiness, as that which they refused, and
foolishly cast away; then it will sting them indeed to remember that they have
chosen rather to do the work of the Devil, and yield obedience to the basest
lusts, for which they must now be repayed with the wages of death and eternal
misery, than to do the work of the Lord, who would have rewarded them with
eternal life, and a Crown of glory and immort^l^ty, Then they will say, What
profit have we got by those things, whereof we are now ashamed! What fruit does
all our labor and toil in the Woold now yield unto us? What are we the better
for our riches and great estate on Earth, for our honor, and high esteem
amongst men, for our luscious pleasures and delights, (now varished and gone)
which we bought at so dear a rate, as the loss of our precious and immortal
souls, and the forfeiture of an Inheritance in the kingdom^ of Heaven? Then
they will cry ou^, O be witching world! O deluding D^vil! O d^c^itfull hearts
and lusts! O what fools and mad men have we been, that we should trample Jewels
under our feet like Swine, and in stead of them, put dross and dang into our
Cabinet! that we should so greedily drink the sweet poison of sin to the bane
and ruin of our souls; and refuse to taste of the Cap of Salvation, which all
our days was hold forth unto us! Then they will cry out of their
voluptuousness, their covetousness, their pride and haughtiness, and the like
lusts, which have kept Christ out of their hearts, and kept them O it of the
Kinddome of Heaven.

5. In going away, some of them shall remember how nearly they missed of this
happiness; that they were almost persuaded to be Christians, in deed as well as
in name, and to accept of Christ upon his own terms; that they were not sar
from the Kingdom of Heaven; that they were come even within sight of the
Heavenly candan, and yet died in the Wilderness; that they were come even to
the Gate of the new Jerusalem, out finding it too strait for them, and the
luggush of their sins together, there they stuck and could not enter in; that
they climbed up a great way of the Hill to Zion, but did not reach the top, and
tumbling down, their fall was the greater; they will remember the means of
grace which they enjoyed: the Ordinances which they (...) under; and the
treaties which the Lord did make with them by his word and spirit, about their
life and salvation; and the carriage of their hearts toward the Lord in those
treaties; some of them will remember what convictions the Lord wrought in them
of sin, and what tremblings of Conscience, for fear of Hell and wrath to come;
and if they had followed that preparative work, they might have quickly been
acquainted with Christ, and escaped the misery which they feared; but they
sti^^ed convictions, and shook of their troubles, they shut their eyes against
the light, and stilled the noise of their Consciences, and calmed their spirits
with the delights and pleasures of the World; and so grew more hardened in sin
than before, and gave such repulses to the spirit, that the spirit quite
departed from them: Others will remember that they were persuaded to ascend
some steps higher, under the Ministry of the Word: when they were reproved for
such and such gross sins, which they lived in the practice of, that they could
have no case in their Consciences, until they had broken off that wicked
course (...) that they left off their Drunkenness, and their swearing, their
uncleanness, and unrighteous dealings; and were in a great measure reformed in
their lives: but there were some lusts in their hearts which they hugged
secretly, and delighted in, and could not be persuaded to leave, which were
there undoing: Pride, Revenge, Uncharitableness, Covetousness, or the like
remained in their reigning power, which were inconsistent with the power of
godliness: others will remember what profession they made, and that, they went
with some kind of gladness in the company of Gods people, unto his House and
Ordinances, and heard the Word, and received some impressions thereof; yea
obtained some kind of graces under its influence; that they had a kind of
righteousness, repentance, faith, desires, love, joy, hope, that they had some
tastes of the heavenly gift, and the powers of the World to come, and thought
themselves as fair for Heaven as the best and who ever missed, that they should
not miss of glory: but O the confusion and vexation, which will be upon the
spirits of these Persons when the Lord Jesus shall disown them, and shut them
out of his Kingdom; O what tearings of heart will they have, when they perceive
that they were mistaken, and find themselves disappointed of the happiness
which they had such hopes of, and confident expectations to obtain: when they
find that their silver was but dross, and their graces were counterfeit, and
not of the right stamp, that they had not the Image and Superscription of
Christ upon them; when they remember that they had a Righteousness, but it was
like the morning Cloud, which the wind of affliction or temptation had driven
away; that they had some repentance, but it was legal, not Evangelical; that
the tears they ^^ad sometimes shed for sin, were like the early dew, which the
bright Sun of prosperity did quickly dry up; that they had a faith, but it was
a temporary faith, which wanted deep rooting in the heart and whatever
flourishing fruit it quickly sent forth, yet the hot Sun of persecution did
wither it, that it came to nothing when they were put upon the Trial; that they
had desires after Christ, and the favor of God and spiritual things; but they
were but faint velleities, they were like the untimely birth of a Woman, which
never came to any perfection; that they had love to God in show, or it may be
at sometime a passionate glow of heart under an Orninance, which was not
enkindled by a spark falling down from Heaven upon them, blown up by the spirit
of God; but a false or a more inferior ^ire, which arose from a sympathy with
Ministers or other Christians in the more inferior workings and expressions of
their love, which in the sincere arose from the right principle; that they had
some kind of hope, but it was like a spiders web, broken quickly to pieces, or
swept down by the ^eesome of destruction with them into Hell; that they had
some joys; but they were flashy and ungrounded; some tastes arising from
misapprehensions of Gospel-priviledges, and misapplication of Gospel-promises,
all which did quickly vani^h and come to nothing: They will find, if not
before, be sure at that day that they were mistaken, and have lost all their
pains and labor, for want of a through work of grace; for want of foundness at
the root; for want of hearts sorrow, deep humiliation; good-ground, and
deep-roote^ faith: supreme love; well-bottom'd hope: universal reformation and
mortification of the deeds of the body; that none of their actions were
accepted by the heart-searching God for want of a right principle and end; now
when these Persons are sentenced to Hell, and are going away from Christ and
the glory which once they had hopes of, and were so near unto, and had they
gone but a step or two further, they might have attained. O with wh^^
unconceivable grief and cuttings of heart will it be? they will remember then
that they did seek to enter in at (...) strait Gate, and they will wish with
all their hearts th^^ they had striven, that they had taken more pains, that
they might not have missed and fallen short of Salvation; a possibly then with
unutterable anguish they may say, There is a glorious Inheritance in Heaven,
which we are now departing from, we often prayed for it when we were upon the
Earth; and if we had been sincere and fervent, if we had resolved to take the
place by storm and would not have been, denied, we might have got it; we have
read of it in the Word, and heard of it in Sermons, and it has been proffered
to us freely; and if we had renounced the world, and forsaken sit, and chosen
it for our portion, we might have had it; we parted with some sins, if we had
left all, it should have been ^urs; once we had some hopes of it, when we had
some taste of it, and had done some things to obtain it; and if we had gone a
little further, we might have indeed obtained it; if we had taken pains with
our hearts before God to get them raised to things above; if we had denied our
selves, and mortified our members upon the Earth; if we had cast away all our
transgressions, and cast away our own righteousness, and r^wled our selves
wholly upon Jesus Christ, and acted faith upon him and the promises of this
Kingdom, and walked in the narrow way which we seemed to walk in, we might now
have been made possessours hereof, and shined amongst yonder glorious Saints,
some of whom were our companions, and hoped for our company, and wonder to see
us separated from them; But alas! we were ^^oathfull and carel^ss; we were
unwatchfull and idle, our pains was more to appear Religious, than be
Religious; we had some lusts which lay nearer our heart than Jesus Christ; we
did some things with seeming vigor, but carnal motives were the chief
incentives to our duties; and how ever lifeless, faithless, and empty of true
grace they were, yet we trusted in them, and made them our Savior, and never
were brought clear off from our own bottom, unto a closure with Jesus Christ,
and we have ^ool'd away our Salvation, and made our selves unworthy of e^^^
life, Deservedly, Deservedly do we lose this Crown; for our folly! O that we
had been sincere, and thorough Christians!

6. In going away it will sting the wicked to think that now this happiness of
Heaven is irrecoverable, once they might have obta^ned it, and that upon easy
^earms; yea after some refusals of it, they had fresh proffers and invitations;
the (...) of mercy, and gate of salvation and glory stood open a long time; but
now the door is locked upon them, and (...) never be opened more; they must go
away without any hopes of ever entering into the new Jerusalem, or obtaining
the least degree of the happiness of the Saints; they must bid adieu unto joy
and comfort for ever.

These considerations will sting Gospel-sinners in their going away.

Thus concerning the first particular in the execution of the sentence on the
wicked, they shall go away.

2. They shall go into punishment, and here I shall speak, 1. Of the punishment
which they shall go into. 2. Of their entering into this punishment.


1. Concerning the punishment which the wicked shall go into. Take two or three
places of Scripture which set forth th^^ punishment, Matthew. 25. 41 Depart ye
Cursed into everlasting Fire, Mark 9. ^3,44. Then to go into Hell, where their
worm dies not, and the Fire is not quenched Rev. 14. 10. 15. They shall drink
of the Wine of the wrath of God, which shall be poured out, without mixture,
into the Cup of his indignation; and be tormented with Fire and Brimstone, and
the smoke of their torment ascends up for ever and ever. The punishment then
will be Gods wrath, which the damned shall drink of, so as to feel the
immediate impressions thereof upon their souls; and Fire and brimstone kindled
by the breath of God, the impression whereof they shall feel upon their bodies;
but what tongue can express the punishment of the wicked in Hell? if some
expressions in Scripture concerning it be metaphorical, surely they fall short
of what the real punishment will be; the drops and sprinklings of Gods wrath
here are but small in comparison with the Ocean, which the wicked shall be cast
into; the top of the Cup has nothing of the bitterness which they will find in
the dreggs: never was there such a Fire on Earth, as the Fire of Hell; never
was there such a pain endured by those which have undergone the more exquisite
torments; as the pains and torments which shall be inflicted hereafter upon the
damned. Yet, though we are not able here to conceive how dreadful this
punishment will be, we may conceive it to be unexpressibly more dreadful than
any punishment on Earth; if we consider, 1. The inflicter of it. 2. The subject
of it. 3. The properties of it.


1 Concerning the Inflicter of the punishment which the wicked shall go into,
and that will be the most holy, just, powerful, and sin-revenging God; the
wicked will then fall into his hands immediately, and O how fearful a thing
will it he to fall into the hand of the living God? Heb. 10. 31. Wicked men now
have no fear of God before their eyes; though their sins and affronts to God be
great; and his anger and displeasure against them be great; yet because his
goodness and patience toward them is also great; because he keeps silence, and
does not speedily execute his vengeance upon them; therefore they are secure,
and insensible of his displeasure; and have slighter thoughts, and lesser fear
of him, than of weak dying worms like themselves: but when their eyes shall be
opened, at the last day. and a discovery of God shall be made unto them in his
infinite Majesty, and greatness, and power, and holiness, and fiery indignation
against them: O how fearful then will it be to fall into his hands? It will be
very sweet to fall into the arms of his Love; but very dreadful to fall into
the hands of his displeasure; when God does execute his vengeance himself, he
will do it very terribly, especially if we consider.

1. That he will glorify his infinite Wisdom in the punishment of the damned,
which will contrive such tortures for them, that if all the men in the world
should join their wits together, and take to their help all the Devils in hell,
they could not invent the like; dreadful ingredients will his wisdom find out
to put into the Cup which he will put into the hand of the wicked to drink.

2. That he will glorify his infinite Power, he will make bare his arm, and
smite with an infinite force; the blow of a child will take little imprission,
but if a Goliath (...) with a Goliah^s sword, he will smite to the ground; the
weightier the hand, the heavier the stroke; there is more difference between
the power of God and the strongest creatures, than between the strongest
creature and the wea^est child; It would be dreadful to be delivered up to the
power of some strong fierce and cruel creatures: what will it be to be
delivered up to the power of the omnipotent and most furious God. God will
glorisie the power of his anger in the destruction of the wicked, Romans 9. 21.
What, if God willing to show his wrath, and to make his power known, etc. God
will show what his power can do in the punishing of the wicked; his last work
of power in punishing, will be as glorious as his first work of power in
creating; and he will glorify the power o his anger in hell, as he will
glorify his goodness and love in heaven; in heaven he will open the treasures
of his love, and in hell he will open the treasures of his wrath. God will
inflict the punishment.

2. Concerning the subject of the punishment which the wicked shall go into,
and that will be both soul and body.

1. The Souls of the wicked will be punished; not only with the loss of the
glorious and comfortable presence of God, and the happiness of heaven; but also
I conceive that they will be filled with anguish through the impressions of
Gods wrath upon them; they will be filled up to the brim with the fierce wrath
of God; the Arrows of the Almighty will be shot up to the head in them, and
pierce them through and through; we read Ro^. 2. 8,9. Of indignation and wrath,
tribulation, and anguish, which at the day of wrath shall be upon every soul
that does evil. The impressions of Gods indignation and wrath on the foul will
effect tribulation and anguish: such wounds they will have in their spirits, as
well be unsupportable, such tribulation as will be horrible, such anguish as is
inconceivable, when the hand of the Lord is upon them, when they see the frowns
of his brow; when he strikes them with the blow of his anger. Christ rasted the
bitterness of Gods wrath in his soul, for the sins of others, which caused his
bloody sweat in the garden, and such roa^ings upon the cross: O how bitter will
the wrath of God be unto the wicked, when their souls taste of it for their own
sins; It will be Gods wrathful presence, which the souls of the damned will
feel the impressions of, which will make Hell to be Hell, as it will be the
glorious and comfortable presence of God, which the souls of the righteous will
feel the impressions of, which will make Heaven to be Heaven.

2. The Bodies of the wicked shall be punished, they have been sharers in sin,
and they must share in torment; they must lie in the Lake of Fire and
Brimstone, Rev 21 8. the torment of the ^od^es of the wicked will be dreadful;
besides the impressions which the anguish of Soul will make upon them, they
will have their own proper torment, through the sense of the fire which will be
kindled about them, and burn more horrible than Londons fire did, when it had
got into the heart of the City; their torment will be greater than if scalding
lead were poured into their bowels; than if they were torn in pieces with wild
horses; than if their b^e^sts were rip^ up* and their heart were plucked out
with burning pincers: it will be worse than if they were cast into a Caldron of
boiling pitch or lead; or put into Phal^ris Bull, or Ne^uch^^n^z^^ars fiery
Furnace: the torture of the damned's bodies will be far beyond the sharpest
pain now incident to humane nature by racking diseases, or have been inflicted
upon any of the children of men by the most cruel Tyrant; for the bodies of the
wicked when raised again, will be strengt^^ed unto a greater capacity for
punishment, when they will he made incorruptible and immortal, and punishment
will be the and of their resurrection; but more of this punishment under the
properties.

3. Concerning the properties of the punishment which the wicked shall go into.

1. It will be Universal, it will not only be in soul and body, but also in
every part of both: in every faculty of the soul, in every member of the body:
O the black thoughts! the dismal apprehensions! the grisly fancies! the heavy
griefs* the finking fears! the dreadful terrors! the hellish grapes* the utter
despair! the horrible ang^sh, and confusion! which the soul will have, when the
wrath of God shall be poured in upon it like water; the wicked will not only he
in Hell, (...) they will have a Hell in themselves; in their Consciences, th^^
will have a never dying worm, which will gnaw and tear them; they will have a
storm in their spirits raised by the wind of Gods wrath, which will blow most
fiercely^ upon them; every faculty of the soul will be^ afflicted according to
its capacity (...) and every member of the bodies of the wicked will be
tormented. O how will their eyes glare! their tongues roar! their bands and
feet fry! their flesh ro^t! (...) no part will be free from the devouring
flames of this horrible burning Fire. There are many diseases which the body is
exposed unto in this world, but very seldom do they meet together in the some
subject* if, the head ache, the members may be free; if the foot be pained, the
hand may be at case, and ready to contribute some relief unto the pained part;
and if the body be sick, the soul may gi^^^ some consolatory arguments to
alleviate the irks^meness of the disease; but in Hell the punishment of the
wicked will be universal, it will be in every member of the body, and every
fuculty of the soul.

2. The punishment of Hell will he Extreme; the souls of the wicked will be
filled with anguish, as full as they (...) hold; their capacity, will be
larger, and they will be filled it to the hight of their capacity; and their
bodies also will have the most exquisite pain, as it is possible for them to
(...) their sense of pain will be quicker, and their strength to endure pain
greater; and their pain will be in the uttermost extremity: some pains of the
body here are not very acute; and some troubles of mind may well enough be
born, but any disease in extremity is very irksome; the pain of the head, or
the tooth in extremity, the gout, stone chollick in extremity, especially the
troubles of the mind in extremity; will make a man weary of his life; but to
have every part afflicted in extremity, and that beyond our now capacity or
conception, this will be very dreadful.

3. The punishment of the wicked will be Continual, without any intermission or
alleviation; the wicked will have no rest day nor night, Rev 14. 11. there will
be nothing but weeping and wailing and gnashing of teeth, Matthew. 22. 13. The
most painful diseases here have their fits, which do not continue long; the
diseased find after their fits some case and asswagement; they have
intermissions sometimes; some lucida intervalla, lightsome intervals; but the
wicked in Hell will have no ease or asswagement; no lightsome intervals of
their grief and pains; there will be ^o mixcure of comfortable ingredients in
the cup of God's wrath, which the damned must drink of; there will be but one
fi^ in their disease, and this fit will always be at the ^e^ght; they will not
have the least drop of water to cool to much as the tip of the tongue, which
shall be tormented in flames; their grief will not have any allay, they will
not have one comfortable thought, no eye to pity them, none to bring any
relief unto them: O how bitter will their sins be unto them; here they are but
bitter swee^s, then they will be nothing but bitterness, and gall, and
wormwood, unto them; Their punishment will be continual.

4. The punishment of the wicked will be Remidiless; there will be no escaping
or flying from the wrath of (...) (...) sinners may f^ee from the wrath which
is to come (...) when it is once come, and has get hold on them; it will hold
them down, so that they shall never get loose (...) is: now they they agree
with their adversary upon (...) way; they may ma^e their peace with God in this
world; there is no sin for which they may not obtain a pardon, but the
unpardonable sin against the Holy Ghost, which carries men away from God; but
hereafter in Hell there will be no more sactifice for sin; the Savior of
mankind will be their judge, and pass an irreversible semen^^ of condemnation
upon them; it is possible now for the wicked to be delivered from this
punishment, but it will (...) impossible then to be delivered out of it; their
punishment will be remediless.

5. The punishment of the wicked will be Eternal, Hell fire will be
unquenchable, Mark. 9 43 Everlasting, Matthew. 2^ 4^* the smoke of the torment
will ascend up for ever and ever* Rev. 14 11. This eternity of punishment will,
be a fearful aggravation of it: If you saw a Malefactor to^^ to pieces with
wild horses, or thrown into a fiery furnace, and there burned to ashes; you
would say that either of th^^ were dreadful punishments, though the pain
possibly might not endure a quarter* of an hour, for death concludes all bodily
pains here: what then will it be to endure the torments of Hell for ever? a
small pain, if it should (...) long, would be very irksome; much more some
^^^ing pains by the stone, strangury, gout, cholick, an^ (...) like, if they
should continue for a year, or a moneth^^ together, how mis^^able would they
make the life (...) yea, if a man should hold but one of his! singers in (...)
fire but for a day, it would afflict him more, than all ^^^ward comforts could
delight him; the torments of (...) will not be in one part only, but in every
part; not (...) weaker degree, but in the greatest extremity; (...) for (...)
day, or a month, or a year, but for ever; the (...) will be always dying,
never dead; the (...) (...) will (...) upon them; and vet they (...) never give
up the Ghost; if they could die they would think (...) (...) happy; they will
always be roaring, and never breat^^ out their last; always sinking, and
never come to the ^^come; always burning in those flames, and never consumed;
the eternity of Hell, will be the Hell of Hell, When our S^viour ^endured
equivalent punishment to this of Hell, for his people, it had not this
circumstance of e^^rnity in it; the^e not being that need, because of the
excellency of his person; so that though the pains of Hell ^^at hold on him,
yet they could not keep him in hold, but he brake through them, and triumphed
over them, and could say in the conclusion, It is finished: but the damned will
not be able to break through their punishment; they will be compassed about with
them, and hedged in, and shut down, and never be able to lift up the ^^eid;
never shall they say of this punishment, It is finished, for their pains will
always be as it were beginning; when they have spent the time of as many years
in Hell as there are Stars in the Firmament, Sands on the Sea shore, and Moats
in the Sun, their torment will be as it were beginning, and no nearer a
conclusion, than the first day they were cast into that place. Who can express
this e^ernity? when we la^ch^ forth out thoughts in the consideration thereof,
we loss them quickly; it being such a deep which cannot be fathomed, such a
vast Ocean which cannot he measured; yet a little to extend your thoughts in
the consideration of the Eternity of the wickeds punishment. I shall, by one or
two suppositions illustrate something of the vastness hereof.

Suppose that this globe of Earth on which we tread were hollow, and that it
were filled with great folio Books, as full as it could hold; and moreover
there were Books; heaped up upon it to fill the whole circumference of the dire
round about i^; yea that the whole space of place to the uttermost^ verge of
the Empyrean Heavens were filled with Books; and all this vast number of Books
were filled with figures in the highest degree of multiplication; O what a
number of Books would there be in the whole space of place? what a number of
figures in these Books and what a vast number would there be deciphered by
these figures? A bit of paper half as broad as an half (...) penny will hold
the figure of the number of as many years as have been since the creation of
the World; what then would a whole leaf of a great folio hold? what would a
whole folio hold: what then would a room full of folios hold? but what would
the whole World full of folios hold? now if at the end of time, when the wicked
go (...) Hell, God should fill the whole space of the World with folios full of
figures of numbers; and tell the wicked that every thousand year one of these
numbers should be subtracted, and promise them when all the numbers were
subtracted out of all these Books, they should have a release out of their
torments; they would have a small spark of hope, that after the substraction of
so many Millions, Millions, Millions of innumerable numbers, in the revolution
of so many Millions, Millions, Millions of innumerable years, yet at last there
would be an end; there would be time then set and a wearing toward an end; yet
if we could cast our thoughts so far in a supposition, that all this number of
years, wherein all this number of figures were subtracted by one in a thousand
years were past and gone; yea wherein they were all subtracted, as many
thousand times as the number of figures in all those Books would a mount unto;
yet even then the punishment of the damned would be as far from ending, as at
the very first beginning of them.

Yea suppose further, that there were as many Worlds as the number in the Books
before supposed would arise unto; and these Worlds should continue as many
years as by this account there would be Worlds; and all these Worlds were
filled with Angels and Men; and all these Angels and Men should be employed in
nothing else from the beginning of these Worlds unto the end of them, but in
conceiving numbers of years unto the uttermo^^ conception which they could have
of numbers; what a-to-us-inconceivable number of years would there be conceived
by so many Angels and Men, in so many years, (...) so many Worlds? yet if all
that vast number of years were joined to the end of the time wherein all the
numbers in the figures of so many beforementioned Books, were subtracted by
one in a thousand years; and these multiplied as many thousand times as numbers
were conceived; such a vast number of years would reach a great way, but they
would not be so much as a hairs breadth in the measure of Eternity; and if we
should suppose the space of all these years too, to be spent by the damned in
torments, even then their torments would be as far from a conclusion, as they
were upon their first entrance into Hell. O Eternity! Eternity! Eternity! how
vast is Eternity! how infinite and immeasurable! how horrible will the thoughts
of Eternity be unto the damned! to be punished so extremely, and that without
any intermission, or hopes of a conclusion! to fall into such a horrible Pit,
and fiery Lake, and there burn for ever without any possibility of ever getting
forth! O dreadful! O blind World! O so^tish sinners! that take no more care now
to avoid, and get deliverance from such a punishment as this, which they are
exposed unto, and will be the certain consequent of sin without repentance.

Thus concerning the punishment which the wicked shall go into.

^. Concerning their entrance into this punishment; when the whole crew of
wicked and ungodly persons, together with the whole Flock of Devils are
departed from the presence of Christ, and the glorious Saints; and Heaven ^s
now upon their backs, and Hell before their face; and they are now come to the
very mouth of the bottomless Pit, unto the Doors and great Gates of Hell; and
now they are opened before them, and unto them, and for them; and they see the
black smoke ascending up from thence, and smell a horrible stink from the
sulphurious Fire; which they must be throw into; and when they behold the
horrible flakes of Fire flashing forth from the Furnace of Hell, ten thousand
times more dreadfully than those which were seen to arise from London on the
M^nday night; and now begin to feel the heat; and see others tumbling in before
them, and they following of them; and when they begin first to put their hands
and their feet into the Fire; and now they are in and covered with flames, and
begin to boil and fry, and when they perceive the Gates of Hell to be shut
upon them, and great Stones rolled before them which can never be removed, and
great Bars put upon them which can never be broken, and they are out of all
hopes of ever breaking Prison, and getting forth; O how will they sh^e^k, and
roar, and cry out in the the anguish of their souls, and torture of their
bodies, Woe, Woe be unto us miserable sinners! and is this the Hell which
Ministers warned us to fly from? and yet would we needs run out selves into
such flames? Is this the wages of our si^? ^^hath our drunkenness, and
swearing, and whoring and lying, and unrighteous dealing, such a dreadful
consequent as this? Is this the company we must take up our eternal abode,
withal? and this the place of our eternal habitation? must we then dwell in
this devouring Fire? and inhabit these everlasting burnings? O miserable!
miserable! forlorn wretches we! would God we had never been born! O that we bad
been Dogs or Swine! O that we had been Serpents or Toads! O that we had been
the meanest w^r^s, or Stones, or any thing without Souls who are now
annihilated! O that we had been nothing, or might be turned to nothing! O that
we could recall our time! how would we improve it. O that it were with us, as
once it was, when our being and abode was upon the Earth, when the day of grace
did shine upon us, and the means of grace were afforded to us! how would we
pray, and hears and watch, and strive, and live! how would we forsake sin,
accept of Christ, and deliver up our selves unto universal obedience! But alas
time is fled! the day is spent! the door is shut! we are bound up in Chains,
which cannot be loosened! we are now in torments, which cannot be remedied; and
are extreme and will never be ended! O the pains of my eyes! would I had none!
O the pains of my tongue! would it were out, and I were dumb! O the torture of
my hands and feet! would they were off, and my wh^le body were consumed! O I am
sick! I am sick! and here is no Physician! I am sad! I am sore troubled! and
here none is to pity me! my head does (...)! my heart does ache! O the terrors
which I feel! O the gripes and tearings of the never dying worm within me!

But who can conceive what the thoughts and complaints of the damned will be at
their first entrance into the punishment of Hell? Thus concerning the execution
of the sentence pronounced by Christ upon the wicked.

CHAP. X.
2. THE second thing is to speak of the execution of the sentence pronounced by
Christ upon the Righteous. Matthew, 25. 46. These shall go away into everlasting
punishment, There is the execution of the sentence on the wicked. But the
Righteous into life eternal, there is the execution of the sentence on the
Righteous. And here I shall speak, 1. Of the Righteous going away. 2. Of the
Righteous going into life eternal.


1. Concerning the Righteous going away, The wicked shall go away, and the
Righteous shall go away too; the wicked shall go, away from Christ and Saints,
and the happiness of Heaven; and the Righteous shall go away from Devils and
wicked Persons, and the misery of Hell, which with some considerations will be
unspeakably comfortable unto them.

1. The righteous shall go away from Devils; Christ does here redeem them and
deliver them from that tyrannical power which the Devil had over them before
conversion, yet they are not wholly freed in this life from all his assaults
and baits and snares; some of them are much buffered and oppressed by him most
part, if not all their days; but at the last day they shall all go away from
Satan; the Devil and all his Angels will be locked up in the bottomless Pit,
and the righteous will never be molested with any of them any more, however the
righteous sometimes are foiled by Satan here, and receive some wounds in their
spiritual combat; yet then they will be victorious, and triumph over
principalities and powers, and leave them bound in Chains behind them; they
shall go away from Devils.

2. The righteous shall go away from all the wicked Persons; some of the wicked
separated them from their company when they lived on Earth; now God will
separate them from the company of all the wicked; they were hated by the wicked
and troubled by them, and some of them suffered much under their reproaches and
persecutions; then the wic^ed will cease from troubling them any more: their
heart^ were grieved with their oaths and filthy lewdness and ungodly
conversation in the World; but now they shall go away from the wicked, no
Devil, nor wicked Persons shall be admitted into their society, or have any
room in the place whether they are going.

3. The righteous shall go away, from that place and state of misery which the
wicked shall go into; they shall be delivered from the d^mnation, and
punishment of Hell, and all fears of it for ever: and herein their joys will
be unconceivable, in that,

1. They shall have deeper apprehensions of the punishment of Hell, than ever
did here enter into their hearts to imdgine; they were told by the Word and
Ministers what a dreadful punishment was prepared for the damned; and they did
believe it, and fear it, and flee from it; but the one half was not told them;
the Fire which they conceived, was but as it were a painted Fire in comparison
with that which they will see the wicked cast into; the pains they fancied were
but fleabitings, in comparison with those which they will see the wicked
undergo: they guessed something at the wrath of God* by the little scortchings
thereof in their first conviction of, and contrition for sin; by the sweetness
of Gods smiles of love afterward, they judged that his displeasure and fury
would be unsupportable; but their thoughts were mean, and sh^r^ of that fiery
vengeance and dreadful wrath which then will break forth into a flame to
consume the ungodly: as the wicked will have high apprehensions of the glory
and happiness of the righteous beyond whatever entered into their hearts to
conceive here in this world, and it will be their unutterable grief; to be
deprived thereof, and shut our for ever from the Kingdom of Heaven, which the
righteous with joy and triumph shall go into: so the righteous shall have deep
apprehensions of the sufferings and misery of the wicked, beyond whatever they
did imagine here; and it will be no small part of their joy that they are
delivered from this misery, and saved from the torments of Hell, into which
they shall see the wicked go into, with such dread and horror. ^a^arns will
then see Dives tormented; the other Apostles will see Jadas thrust into Hell,
and all the righteous will be Spectators of the vengeance which the Lord Jesus
will execute upon the ungodly world, and O how will they then adore Gods
electing love? how will they vallue the blood of Christ, which was shed for the
redemption of them? how will they bless God for pardoning mercy? how will they
hugg the feet of their Savior, who has delivered them from this so dreadful
wrath, and fearful torments which they will see inflicted then upon the
damned? especially,

2. When they consider in their going away, that they were by nature Children
of wrath, even as others; Ephesians. 2. 3. That they had as soul natures as the
vilest; that the^ had as leprous, poisonous, odious hearts, until they we^^
renewed and sanctified, as those which they shall see condemned and tormented;
that they were sometimes foolish and disobedient, ^^erving diverse lusts, and
pleasures, hateful and hating one another, until the kindness and free love of
God was manifested in the regeneration and re^^vation of them by the holy
Ghost. Tit. 3 3,4 5. That they were dead in sin with others, and walked
according to the course of the World, according to the Prince of the power of
the Air, who wrought in them, as in other Children of disobedience, so that
they were as forward as others to fulfill the desires of the flesh and of the
mind, and ^n with others to the same excess of riot; until God who is rich in
mercy, for his great love, wherewith he loved them, had quickened them and saved
them by his grace, and hereby put a difference between them and the wicked, who
went on to the end of the sinful course in which sometimes they were running
with them in company. Ephesians. 2. 1,2,3,4, etc. yea some of them will remember, how
they out-stripped others in sin, and were guilty of more gross breaches of the
Law than many Millions of the wicked, whom they will see condemned; and that
they should escape, and be awakened to repent, and enabled to believe and
reform; and that they should obtain pardon and salvation through Christ, when
others were passed by, and let alone to perish under smaller sins; this will
fill them with astonishing admiration, and wondering joy: when they see some of
their near Relations going to Hell, their Fathers, their Mothers, their
Children, their Husbands, their Wives, their Brethren, their Sisters, their
intimate Friends, and Companions; however they are grieved now to see them take
such courses, and walk in the way to Hell, and they labor to Pull them out of
that way, and would ^ain persuade them to walk with them in Heavens way; and
are troubled to forethink of the torment which they must endure, if they go on,
yet hereafter relative ties, and those affections which now they have to
relations out of Christ, will cease; and they will not have the least trouble
to see them sentenced to Hell, and thrust into the fiery furnace; but rejoice
in the glory of God which will be manifested upon them in their destruction;
and, O the joy that they will be filled withal to think that they were not
passed by with the rest of their relations; that they are not under the same
deserved-condemnation with them; that God should choose but one or two in many
families, and they should be in the number of the chosen ones; that when his
chosen were comparatively so few, and the reprobates so many, that they should
be elected; when there was no motive in them to incline God to the choice of
them, that he should choose them freely; if he had not chosen them, if they were
now to change places with some of their wicked relations going to Hell; this
would be dreadful; but that they are going from Hell, when their relations are
going into it, this will fill them with joy unspeakable. Especially.

3. When they consider in their going away, that they were sometime so near to
H^ll; that whilst they were in a state of nature, and under the guilt of sin,
that some of them were near to death; that they were brought to the sides of
the pit, to the doors of the grave, to the very brink of Hell, before they had
repented, and accepted of Jesus Christ; some of them will remember how near
they were to death when they were young; how near they were to death by some
casualties; how near by some diseases; some of them will remember the great
Plaugue in London, which swept away so many thousands, how ill they were
provided for death at the beginning thereof; how nearly they escaped the
disease; and some which had the disease, how nearly they escaped death by it;
and if they had died then, that they should certainly have gone to Hell; O how
will they admire the ^^^ovidence of God in keeping them alive notwithstanding
(...) many dangers they were in of death all the days of their unregeneracy;
and when they more over consider how they tried Gods patience, and trampled
upon it, by their heinous provocations; how they abused his goodness, and
turned his grace into wantonness; how they did hasten in the ways of sin
toward Hell, and were come even to the end of the line; that some of their
were Drunkards, and Sabbath Breakers, and profane persons, and swearers, and
unclean persons, and persecutors of the people of God, and were arrived even to
the height of wickedness, and wanted but a step or two of falling into Hell;
and yet that the Lord should meet with them, with a flaming sword in the way of
sin, they were driving on so fast and furiously in, and stop them, and turn
them, and change them, and bring them home to himself; yea, when they had
dea^fned their ears against many calls, and stifled many convictions, and often
quenched the motions of his spirit, and were so unwilling to leave their sins,
and to come out of the way of destruction, and were so desperately bent upon
their ruin; that yet he should knock, and call again and again, and follow
them still by his spirit; that he should lay hold on them as the Angels did on
Lot and bring them out of Sodom even by force: and over power the contranitency
of their stubborn wills. and break open the door of their hearts, and overturn
the strong holds of sin and Satan^ and set up the throne of his Son within
them; that he should s^a^ch them like fire brands out of the fire; and pluck
them out of the snare of the Devil, that had almost drag^d them into Hell; O
how will they be astonished to remember Gods infinite pi^ty and love, and the
power of his rich grace that did work salvation for them? especially when they
perceive how dreadful the misery is which they were hastening unto? I have heard
of a man who, in the night galloped over a high bridge which was broken down
all but a narrow plank, which Gods providence directed his horses ^^at upon;
which if they had flipt never so little on the one side on the other, horse and
man had follen into the deep stream, and been drowned; which the man did not
known till the next morning; but then, viewing the place, and considering the
danger he had so narrowly escaped, was struck with such astonishment at it,
that he fell down dead in the place. When some of Gods people shall go away
from Hell at the last day, and look behind them into the bottomless-pit, and
take a view of the streams of fire and brimstone, which are running in the
burning lake; and remember how they have galloped over those streams, when they
were in the carreer of their sin; and by how narrow a plank they passed over
them; that if they had slipped but a little aside, they had fallen into the
lake, from whence they could never have got out; when they shall remember how
near they were to Hell, and how narrowly they have escaped such horrible
torments; surely they will be struck with such admiration and joy which now
they could not bear, but would over-whelm their spirits, and bring immediate
death upon them; but then their nature will be strengthened to bear this joy,
which might be enough to sweeten an eternity, if they had no other happiness
than the consideration of the misery from which they have been so wonderfully
delivered. Thus concerning the going away of the righteous from the wicked, and
the miseries which they shall endure.

2. Concerning their going into eternal life: and here I shall speak, 1. Of the
eternal life which they shall go into. 2. Of their going into eternal life


1. Concerning the eternal life which the righteous shall go into. Eternal life
is taken in Scripture frequently for the life of grace; but chiefly, and so
here, for the life of glory: by eternal life we are to understand the glory and
happiness which the righteous shall have in Heaven, of which happiniss in
Heaven I shall speak, 1. Subjectively, 2. Objectively. 3. Formally.


1. Subjectively. The subject of the happiness in Heaven, will be both the
bodies and the souls of the righteous.

1. The bodies of the righteous will be subjects of the happiness of Heaven.

1. They shall be most glorious bodies, 1 Cor. 15. 42 They are sown in
dishonor, when they die; they shall be raised in glory at the resurrection;
some glory and Majesty is put upon the bodies of men now, in comparison with
the bodies of inferior creatures; but the bodies of the righteous shall then
be made a thousand-fold more glorious; there is not so great a difference
between celestial bodies and terrestrial bodies; between the body of the
glorious Sun, and the body of the meanest fly or worm, as then there will be
between the bodies of the righteous on earth, and in heaven: they will be
celestial bodies; they will shine like Stars, Dan 12. 3. Yea, like the Sun in
the Kingdom of their father, Matthew, 13. 43 their bodies will be transformed,
whereby their dirty hue will be changed, more than if all the stones in the
street were turned into Diamonds, Phil. ^. 21. Their vile bodies will be
fashioned like unto the glorious body of Christ: Now their bodies are vile,
being so frail, especially as they are the instruments of sin; they are earthy,
as they bear the image of the earthy Adam: then they shall be glorious, because
they shall bear the Image of the Heavealy Adam: the bodies of some do now
shine with Gold and Pearls, and costly Apparel which are about them, and yet
under all, their bodies remain vile bodies; but hereafter the bodies of the
righteous shall shine with a mavelous brightness and glory through the
qualities which shall be in them, beyond what the richest attire can give.

2. And by consequence the bodies of the righteous shall be most Beautiful
Bodies: they shall have a perfect beauty, beyond whatever eye did behold, in
the fairest woman that ever lived upon the face of the earth.

Their bodies will have the most exact symetry of parts; those which were mis
shapen here, shall then he healed of that imperfection in their bodies; the
crooked back shall then be be made straight; the members which now are wanting,
shall be supplied, and the parts which now are dissolved shall be put into the
right place; and all joined so exactly together; especially the lineaments of
the face shall have such a figure and composition as shall render their feature
most lovely, and graceful, beyond what the greatest observers, and admirers of
beauty, can conceive in their fancy.

Moreover, the bodies of the righteous shall have a most sweet mixture of
colors; there will be no black skin, no swarthy complexion, no pal^ face, no
wan look; their color will be most lovely, without change or fading; there
will be no wrinkles of old age but they will be always young fresh, and
blooming; if the composition of these ^l^ments, which are so dreggish, does
give forth in same such l^v^liness of color, what will the more refined
composition of the bodies, of the righteous do, and when the Lord will fashion
their bodies after the pattern of his Sons body: and therefore I conceive
further that the bodies of the righteous shall have a most comely stature, not
dwarfish nor ^igantick; but according to the measure of the stature of Christ:
And lastl^, to complete their beauty, I doubt not but they will have most
graceful gestures and sparkling motions in their countenances; they will have
no grief to deaden their beauty, to anger or envy, or the like, to change and
transform their visage; But love and joy will continuall^ look out at their
eyes, which will marvellously add to the luster and sweetness of their beauty;
they shall have most beautiful bodies.

3. The bodies of the righteous shall be most Strong, that they may be suitable
to their great soul, and fit for such works as in heaven they must be employed
in; were they weak as new they are they world never endure such works and
motions, they would tire and faint, their spirits would quickly be spent; but
in Heaven there will be no lassitude and weariness; no fa^^ting, or failure of
spirits; all their motions, though never so great and conti^ual, will be sweet
and delightful; and therefore their bodies must be strong that they may be
suitable h^re^^ to: Moreover the glory of Heaven, which they shall have in their
eye would sink a weak body, and the ravishing joys and love, the transports of
their souls in the visions which they shall have, would crack a weak vessel to
pieces; they must be strong to hear the glory of the place; and when besides
they must endure unto all eternity; and all this without reparation, by meat,
or drink, or sleep; I conceive that no bodies visible to us are made so strong,
as the bodies of the righteous will be made at the last day.

(...) it follows, that their bodies will be most Healthful bodies, they will
be free from all pain, and disease, which may in the least weaken them; the
temperature of their bodies will be so exact, that there will be no fighting of
contrary qualities within them, no flowing of ill humors: In Heaven there will
be no plague nor^ague, nor feav^r, nor gout, nor stone, nor strang^^y, nor any
distemper, no need of food to preserve health, nor ph^sit^ to recover it

5. The bodies of the righteous will be Spiritual bodies, 1 Cor. 15. 44. not
absolutely, spiritual; for then they would cease to be bodies; but
comparatively, to what they are now, they will be spiritual, that is, I
conceive they will be quick and (...) in their motions, like spirits; now they
are dull, and slow and heavy, and a clog to the spirit; I conceive that (...)
they shall be like Angels for quick and nimble mati^^^ they may be so
qualified, as in a moment to move many (...) miles; why may not they move so
quick then, as well as the Sun and other Stars in the Firmament do so (...)
which are bodies of many thousand times greater magnitude.

6. The bodies of the righteous will be incorruptible and immortal, 1 Cor. 5.
42. It is sown in corruption, it is raised in incorruption, And v 52. 53. In a
moment, in the twinkling of an eye, at the last te^mp the dead shall be raised
incorruptible; for this corruptible must put on incorruption, and th^^ mortal
must put on immortality, And v. 54. Then shall come to pass the saying which is
written, Death is swallowed up, in victory. Now death is unavoidable, and unto
some is very terrible; death has all the Children of men in the chi^e, and
shoots his arrows at the righteous, as well as the wicked; and though they be
delivered from the sting (...) death which is sin, yet they are not delivered
from the stroke of death; but however death play the tyrant here on earth, and
spare none; yet he will have no footing i^ Heaven; the bodies of the righteous
when raised up a^a^n will be impassible and immortal; immortality will be
swallowed up of life, and the life of the body, as well as of the soul will be
everlasting.

^. The souls of the righteous will be the subjects, and the chief subjects of
the glory and happiness of Heaven; in their bodies shall be glorious, their
souls shall be must more glorious; as being their more excellent part, and
capable of more glory than their bodies, will be; We read, Romans 8. 18. Of the
glory which shall be revealed in us, that is, in the soul; and the Apostle
tells us, tha^ The sufferings of this present time, are not worthy to be
compared with this glory; the greatest sufferings and calamities in this World
have not that evil and misery in the least shadow of comparison, with the
happiness of the glory which shall be put into the souls of the Saints; indeed
the Apostle does compare them, and see how he makes this future glory to
ou^-b^llance, 2 Cor. 4. 17. These light afflictions, which are but for a
moment, do work for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory. The
afflictions are light, but the glory will be weighty; the afflictions are but
for a moment, but the glory w^ll be eternal; the weight of glory will be
exceeding, more exceeding, fat more exceeding; here the Apostle lays one high
expression upon the back of another, and another upon that, like so many great
Mountains upon the back one of another, and when he has got upon the top of
the highest of them, yet he is too low to look into the glory of Heaven, and
his expressions and apprehensions fall short of the glory which shall be
revealed in the soul, when it shall be received into the new Jerusalem, for it
is yet to be revealed: and therefore as the Apostle John says, 1 John 3. 2. It
does not yet appear what we shall be, but when Christ shall appear, we shall be
made like him; not only the body shall be made like his glorious body, but also
the soul shall be made like his glorious soul, for we shall see him as he is;
as the eye does receive the image of the object, which it look upon, so the
soul in its vision of Christ shall receive their Image of Christ, and have a
perfect similitude and likeness unto him; the soul will be made most beautiful,
the perfect lineaments of Christ will be drawn upon it: if grace make the soul
to shine here, how much more will glory, which is grace in the perfection of
it, make the soul to shine is Heaven? and therefore grace is called glory, it
is lory begun 2 Cor. 3. 18. We all with open face beholding, as in a Glass, the
Glory of the Lord, are changed into the same Image, from glory to glory, as by
the spirit of the Lord. The Vail, which was under the Law, is now taken away,
and with open face we behold the glory of the Lord, that is, I conceive the
Lord Jesus Christ who is the glory; of the Father, the brightness of the
Fathers glory; which glory was more dark to our view under the Law, represented
by the cloud, which filled the Temple; but now there is more clear revelation
of Christ without the Vail, and clouds of types and figures, whom we now see in
the Glass of the Word and Ordinances, and hereby are changed into his Image,
and receive from him impressions of grace, which is glory begun, through the
operation of his spirit in his Ordinances upon us; yet still we see him in a
Glass, and therefore there is a darkness, through this interposition; and the
eye of our faith which looks through this Glass upon Christ is weak, and
therefore our Graces are imperfect, and our similitude to him is imperfect; but
when the Glass shall be removed, and instead of the sight of faith, we shall
have an immediate Vision, then our souls will be changed into a perfect
conformity unto his Image, and it will not be from glory to glory, from one
degree unto another, but glory will be arrived unto its height, and the souls
of the righteous will be made perfectly glorious; their souls will then have
perfection of holiness without the least remainders of sin, which in this World
the most holy Persons are not wholly free from.

1. Their thoughts shall be holy; no blasphemous thoughts shall then arise in
their mind, no filthy thought, no envious and malicious thoughts, yea they
shall not have the least vanity or impertinency in their thoughts, all their
thoughts shall then be brought into perfect obedience unto Jesus Christ.

2. Their understandings shall be holy; their shall not be the least Cloud or
mist of ignorance or error to darken and sully them, when they appear before
the glorious Sun of righteousness, the brightness which will issue forth from
his face will dispel all clouds, and they will have a clear understanding of
all things which will be needful for them to know, to make them happy; God will
then unlock his treasures, op^n his Books, which now are sealed, and open their
understandings too, that they may conceive those mysteries of his word, and
that manifold wisdom of God, which now do exceed their comprehensions.

3. Their memories shall be holy; they shall be strengthened to retain and bring
forth continually out of their treasures whatever things, new or old, shall
tend to feed them with love and joy, and elevate their souls in the praises of
God.

4. Th^^ Wills shall be perfectly holy; there shall be a sweet harmony between
their wills and the will of God, a perfect compliance with the sweet Law which
they shall be under, without the least contranite^cy, or contradiction; they
shall not have day evil motion, or inclination of will in Heaven.

5. Their Hearts and affections shall be perfectly holy; the inner room of
their hearts shall then be swept clean of all cobwebs, there shall not be the
least do of sin remain; the roots of bitterness will be plucked up then, and
the stains which now are upon them shall be washed off; all the disorders and
distempers (...) their affections shall be removed, yea some affections which
now they have and are suitable to this estate of sin and imperfection, shall be
removed in their state of glory, such as grief, anger, fear, and the like; they
shall have no bitterness upon their spirits, no sorrow in their hearts, no
sinking and fainting of spirit, no discouragement and dispondency, no t^rrour
or per^lexity, no anguish or anxiety; all these shall flee away like a Cloud,
yea they shall have no hope in Heaven, nor desire as I conceive, because these
affections suppose the chief good to be absent, and imply imperfection; but
there they shall have a perfect enjoyment and rest of soul in the chief good;
which is the next thing to be spoken of, namely the object of the Saints
happiness in Heaven.

2. Objectively, The object of the happiness of the righteous in Heaven, or the
chief good which will make them perfectly and completely happy, will be GOD;
who is in, finitely good in himself, and infinitely blessed in the enjoyment of
himself, and in him will the happiness of the righteous consist; that which
fills an Ocean, surely will fill a Bucket, or but-shell; God will be the
happiness of the righteous for ever; it is but a thin and subordinate happiness
which is to be found in the creature; it is but an imperfect happiness which is
here to be found in God, because of our blindness and sin, and incapacity; but
in Heaven God will be a perfect happiness unto the Saints* It is said, 1 Cor.
15. 28. That God shall be all in all God will be the whole happiness of the
righteous, God in himself, God in his Son God in the Angels, God in other
Saints, God in themselves, God will be all in all, the only object of their
happiness.

3. Formally, the happiness of the righteous in Heaven will consist in the
union of the subject and object together, God will be united to their minds by
Vision, and to their hearts by Love, from whence will spring unspeakable joy.

1. The minds of the Saints, will have a perfect Vision of God, which will
infinitely transcend all the visions and sweetest discoveries of God, which
they have, or are capable of in this World; hereafter their capacity will be
enlarged, their minds will be elevated; here they see God darkly, there they
shall see him clearly; here they see him afar^^^, there they shall see him
nearly; here they see him as be is represented, there they shall see him as be
is; here they see him in a Gloss, there they shall see him immediately; here
they see aliquid de D^o, there they shall see Deam here they see his
footsteps, some impresses of God upon the Creatures, especially upon his
Children, chiefly they see his Image in Christ, whom they view by faith in the
Glass of the Gospel, (as was said) yet the uttermost they can here attain unto,
is to see his back parts, but in Heaven they shall see his face, they shall see
him face to face; they shall see him as be is. This, this will be the happiness
of the righteous in Heaven, to have the immediate fight, the bea^ifical vision
of God.

2. The hearts of the righteous shall be joined to God, who is their chief
good, by love. But who can utter the love which the Saints shall have unto God
in Heaven? it will exceed our now conceptions, much more will it exceed the
love which those of the most intimate acquaintance with God do here attain
unto; that it will be heightened beyond what now it is, we may apprehend, if we
consider,

1. That the righteous will have an immediate Vision of God, as has been
shown; now they live in a dark World, and have a Cloud upon their minds and see
but a little of God through the perspective Glass of his Ordinances, a little
in the works of his hands, and in the works of his spirit upon the hearts of
his Children; and if when they see and know him so little, they can love him so
dearly above the whole World, how will they love him when they behold his face,
when the Clouds shall be dispelled, and the Sun break forth? when they behold
his beauty, and the transcendent excellencies which are in him, beyond whatever
they could here imagine? how will their hearts be ravished with love to look
God in the face, when they see him in himself, when they see him in his Son,
when the Divinity of Christ shall appear in him, and shine so gloriously before
them, when they see the Angels so full of God, and the Saints so full of God,
and every thing in Heaven represent the glorious Jehovah unto them?

2. The love of God will heighten their love to him; to be loved by such an
excellent Person, and with such a superlative love, O how will this inflame
their hearts with love unto him? when they take a review of the past
expressions of his love, and find the love of God in many things, which they
did no^ mind, when they were in the World; and when they see a thousand fold
more love in those things which they did take notice of, but with low
apprehensions, and dull affections, how will it raise their hearts? when their
apprehensions of his love shall be raised; they will admire electing love so
free toward them without any previsions of merit in them; they will admire his
love in sending his Son to redeem them, and sending his spirit to convert them;
his love in pardoning their sins, in adopting them to be his Children; now they
admire his love sometimes, Behold! what manner of love is this, that we should
be called the Children of God! 1 John 3. 1. Then they will admire it ten
thousand times more; they will see Gods love in all his fatherly provisions,
protections, yea in his chastisements, and corrections, and all his providence
working for their good; but O what love will they see in his special
distinguishing mercies, beyond what now they apprehend; and Gods past love will
have a present and deep impression upon their hearts; further they will see the
treasures of his love open, the heart of God opened, and the glory which in
Heaven he will confer upon them, of which they shall never be deprived; and
what a demonstration of Gods love will this be unto them. Moreover then they
shall have no doublings of his love, which here do damp affections, they shall
know assuredly that he has loved them, does love them, and will love them
unchangeably, and eternally; and withal they shall have a full sense of his
love upon their hearts, which will make such an impression, as to raise their
hearts to an unconceivable height of love,

3. The righteous will have a higher capacity for love in Heaven, than here
they have, and they shall be filled with love unto the height of their
capacity; they will be able to love a thousand times more than now they can do,
and they shall love unto their utmost ability; they will see perfection of
loveliness in God and all that are about him and they shall have perfection of
love; here their love is sincere and growing, but it is weak and imperfect,
hereafter it will be grown up to the full height of it, and perfect love will
cast out all torment; here their love is mixed, the stream is divided, it runs
and wastes it self in many small rivulers, which empty themselves upon the
creatures; but then the whole stream will run forth unto God undividedly; not a
drop of their love shall be spilt on the ground; God will be the sole object of
their love: here their love is uneven and inconstant to God; sometimes it ebbs,
and sometimes it flows, sometimes they have a high and spring tide of love to
God, but at other times it is low water; hereafter their love to God will be
even and constant, and always at the greatest height.

3. And O what joy will there be in their hearts, through the union which the
righteous shall have unto God the chief good, when their minds shall be joined
to him in immediate vision, and their hearts in perfect love! O how sweet a
fruition of God will this be! what delights will spring from hence! if the
Saints can now rejoice exceedingly in God, when they see him so little, and
their love is so imperfect, what will they do when they see and love him
perfectly and fully? if they are now exceeding glad sometimes with the light of
his countenance, though they have but a glimpse thereof, what will they be,
when they shall have a constant view thereof, and live eternally under the
beams of that light I their love to God is sweet now, though it be weak; but
what will it be is Heaven, when the conjunction of their hearts to God by love
shall be so near and close? if the Saints can now rejoice in hope of the glory
of God, what will they do in the possession thereof, when faith shall be
changed for vision, and hope turned into fruition! O how will the Saints
rejoice and triumph when they are sailed quite through the tempestuous Sea of
this world, and are landed safely in Heaven, where there is rest, and peace,
with u^ any windy storm? when they have got the victory over the the Devil, and
sin, and are now placed out of the gunshot of temptation, and have conquered
through Christ the grave, and death, and are out of fear of his arrows; when
they see that they have escaped the terrible wrath of God, and find themselves
in the arms of his love; when they perceive that they are in Heaven now indeed,
notwithstanding all their sins, and doubts, and fears, and now they have that
blessed vision of God which they so much desired; and the full fruition of God
in love which they hoped for; when they shall look about them, and see so much
glory about them, and shall look within them and see so much glory there,
revealed, beyond whatever they could imagine; O how will they be transported
with joy! then they will have f^lness of joy in the presence of God, and their
pleasure and happiness will be perfect without interruption or possibility of a
conclusions. And the eternity of their happiness will be the Heaven of Heaven;
as eternity of misery will be the Hell of Hell.

Thus concerning the happiness of the Saints, or the eternal life of glory,
which they shall enter into.

2. Concerning the righteous going or entering into eternal life. The righteous
after the pronouncing of their sentence, and their seeing the execution of the
sentence of the wicked, shall pass away from them, and go with Christ into
eternal life; they shall go with singing to the Zion which is above, and
everlasting joy on their heads, they shall obtain joy, and gladness, and sorrow
and sighing shall flee away, Isai. 51. 11. It will be a most glorious train,
such as eye never has seen, which will go together unto Heaven. The Lord Jesus
Christ, will be in the head in shining glory, all the holy Angels will be with
him, and the whole company of the righteous will be together, that ever lived
in all generations; and O with what mirth and gladness will they move toward
Heaven together; with what ^^outings and Hosannah's will they attend upon the
glorious Triumph of our Savior, unto the new Jerusalem! but when they are come
to the gates of Heaven, and the everlasting doors shall be lifted, up to them,
and they Look into the place prepared for their eternal abode; when the Lord
Jesus shall bring them into the glorious presence of the Father, and they shall
have the beatifical vision of his face, and see the smiles of his countenance,
and are received into the imbr^cements of his love; Then, Then, they will find
themselves to be happy Indeed! then their heart will be filled with joy, and
their tongues with singing: then they will sing the new Song, the Song of the
Lamb, which now cannot be learned; then they will found forth the praises of
God, and cry with a Loud voice, as Rev 7 10,11. Salvation to our God; who
sits upon the Throne, and to the Lamb And worshipping God they will say,
Amen Blessing and Glory and Wisdom, and Thanksgiving, and Honnour, and Power,
and Might be unto our God for ever and ever Amen. And there shall they live and
reign for evermore.

Thus concerning the execution of the sentence on the righteous; and concerning
the second appearance of Christ, and end thereof.

CHAP. XI.
C Oncerning the Certainty of Christ second appearance.

I shall prove this by several Arguments.

1. A^g. If the Scriptures have clearly revealed and foretold Christ's second
appearance of Judgment, and the Scriptures are certainly true, then this second
appearance of Christ is certain: But the Scriptures have clearly revealed and
foretold this second appearance of Christ to Judgment; and the Scriptures are
certainly true: Therefore the second appearance of Christ is certain.

1. The Scriptures have clearly revealed and foretold Christ's second appearance
to Judgment. It is not a truth written in the Book of nature, it is not to be
found in the writings of the Philosophers, and those who have had the highest
speculations of natural causes, and effects, and products; this is a mystery
which the world by wisdom could never find out; it is a secret which has been
hid in God, and is revealed by his Spirit in his Word: this coming of Christ
was foretold by Enoch Jude 14,15. And Enoch also the seventh from Adam
prophesied, Behold the Lord comes with ten thousand of his Saints, to execute
judgment upon all, etc. So that it is of ancient, revelation. The first coming
of the Christ was foretold to Adam, in the promise, that the seed of the woman
should break the Serpents head; and the second coming of Christ was foretold to
Enoch. It is foretold by the Angels, Acts 1. 10,11. Whilst the Disciples looked
steadfastly upon our Savior in his Ascension, two Angels said unto them, Ye men
of Galilee, why stand ye ga^ing up into Heaven? this same Jesus which is taken
up from you into Heaven, shall so come down in like manner as ye have seen him
go into Heaven; however Devils are Liars, and the Fathers of Lies and Liars;
yet the good Angels are true, and Ministers of truth, and this is a true
testimony; further, this is foretold by the Apostles, who were employed to be
the Penmen of part of the holy Scripture, and were guided by an infallible
Spirit; the Apostle Paul speaks often of it, especially see his testimony. 1
These. 4. 15,16. 17. For this we say unto you by the word of the Lord, that we
which are alive, and remain unto the coming of the Lord, shall not prevent them
which are asleep: For the Lord himself shall descend from Heaven with a sh^^t,
with the voice of (...) Archangel, and with the Trump of God; and the dead in
Christ shall rise first: Then we which are alive and remain shall be caught up
together with them in the clouds, to meet the Lord in the air, and so shall we
ever be with the Lord; Thus he sets forth Christ coming in a comfortable manner
unto his people; therefore exhorts Christianes to comfort one another with
those words, and hopes of Christ glorious appearance, when they should be
caught up to meet with him and be with him for ever: and he sets it forth in a
dreaded manner, in regard of the wicked, 2 These. 1. 7,8,9. The Lord Jesus shall
be revealed from Heaven, with his Mighty Angels, in flaming f^^etaking
vengeance on them which know not God, and obey not the Gospel, who shall be
punished with everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord, and from
the glory of his (...) over this coming of Christ is spoken of by the Apostle
in every Chapter of both these Epistles, 1 Epist. Chap. 1. 10. And to wait for
his Son from Heaven Chap. 2. 19. What is our hope, or joy, or crown of
rej^ycing, are not ye in the presence of the Lord Jesus at his coming. Chap. ^.
13. To the end b^ may establish you, unblameable i^ holiness at the coming of
our Lord Jesus Christ Chap. 4. 16. The Lord himself will descend fr^^ Heaven
with a shout. Chap. 5 23. I pray that your whole spirit, and soul, and body be
preserved blameless unto the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ 2. Epist. Chap 1.
10. He shall come to be glorified in his Saints. Chap 2. 12. Now I bes^^^ you
Brethren, by the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, and by our gathering together
unto him; that ye be not soon shaken in (...) etc. Chap. 35. And the Lord
direct your hearts into the love of God, and patient waiting for Christ. I
might turn you to further testimonies of his. Tit. 2. 13. Looking for the (...)
hope, and glorious appearance of the great God, ^ed our Savior, Heb. (...) 28.
(...) them that look for him, shall (...) second time unto salvation. We have
also the testimony of the Apostle James, Chap. 57. Be patient therefore,
brethren, unto the coming of the Lord Of the Apostle Peter, 1 Epist. Chap. 5.
4. When the chief Shepherd shall appear, ye shall receive a Crown of glory
which sadeth not away 2. Epist Chap. ^. 10. The day of the Lord will come as a
thief in the night. Of the Apostle John, a Epist Chap. 3. 2. When he shall
appear we shall be like him, for we shall see him as he is. And, in his
Revelation frequently Rev. 1. 7. Behold he comes with Clouds, and every eye
shall see him, and they also that pierced him, and all the kindreds of the
earth shall wail (...) of him. Even so Am^n. To conclude, we have the
testimony of our Savior himself whilst on earth, to his D^ciples, Matt. 16.
27. The Son of man shall come in the glory of the Father, with his Angels, and
then be shall reward every man according to his works! Matthew 24. 27. As
lightning, so shall the coming of the Son of Man be. V. 30. They shall see the
Son of Man coming in the clouds of Heaven V. 31. And he shall send his Angels
with a great sound of a Trumpet to gather the Elect from the four Winds. Matt.
25. especially from (...) the end, where his judicial; proceedings are set
forth; and our Savior does restifie to his enemies, that he would, come again,
Matthew. 26. 64. Hereafter ye shall see the Son of Man sitting at the right hand
of power, coming in the clouds of Heaven. And our Savior testified by his
Angel to John his beloved Disciple, after his Ascension into Heaven, that he
would come again, especially, R^v. 22. where we have three promises of the same
thing. V 7 Behold I come quickly, Blessed is he that keeps the sayings of
this Book^ V. 12. Behold I come quickly, and my reward is with me, to give to
every man according as his work shall be. V. 20. Surely I come quickly, Amen.
Even so Come Lord Jesus. If any one word in the whole Book of God may be
believed, this concerning Christ's second coming and appearance may be
believed, of which we have such frequent and evident resti^^onies in the Word;
as surely as he came the first time in the flesh, according to the predictions
hereof in the Old Testament: so surely will he come the second time in glory,
according to the predictions in the New Testsment. God can as soon cease to be
God, as this Word concerning Christ's second coming fail; when the Sun goes down
in the evening, we believe it will return and arise at such a time in the
morning, and accordingly it (...) to pass: So now Christ the Sun of
Righteousness is gone into Heaven, whilst the night of this world does last,
though we cannot know the certain time, yet we may believe that he will
certainly return, and come down from Heaven in the morning of the resurrection;
it is more possible that the Sun when it is set, should abide for ever in the
other parts of the world, and never arise any (...) in our Horison, than that
Christ should abide for ever (...) Heaven, and not return to judge the World,
when the thing is evidently revealed and frequently promised, in the Scripture.

2. That the Scriptures are true is evident, because they are the Word of God;
who is a God of truth, and cannot die; who can as soon cease to be God, as
cease to be true; untruth in God would argue weakness and imperfection in God,
which cannot be, since to be infinitely perfect is his essential property. That
God does know whether Christ shall appear to Judgment, I suppose (...) (...)
will deny, who acknowledge the Deity, and by consequence his omniscience and
prescience, especially when the further of things does depend upon his
predetermination; an^ that his revelations of future things are true, I support
none will deny, who acknowledge his being and perfect (...) on, whence follows
an impossibility of Gods speaking (...) truths, and folshood; besides that he
heed not do it (...) But then the question will be, concerning the Divine
Authority of the Scriptures, whether they are indeed the Word of God, which (if
proved) will evidence the ^^tainty of Christ's coming to Judgment, which is
there ^^^vealed and foretold.

That the Scrip^nres are the Word of God, will appear^

1. From the Superscription and Image of God upon them.

2. From the mavelous power and efficacy of them.

3. From the Historical Relation in them of Prophesies fulfilled, and Miracles
whereby they were confirmed, and the rationally unquestionable certainty of
this History, as it is handed down to posterity.

1. From the supersciption and Image of God upon them, I mean i^ that, 1 They
hear the name of the Word of God. 2. (...) that they bear such evident marks
and characters of Divinity.

1. The Scriptures bear the name of the Word of God. 2. Tim. 3. 16. All
Scripture is given by divine inspiration. We cannot nationally imagine that the
all-seeing and jealous God should permit such an impious forgery and deceit to
receive credit for so many generations, amongst the most zealous worshipers of
him in the World; and by such wonderful providence preserve and maintain the
Scriptures against the rage and fury of an ungodly Word, who have opposed the
truths therein contained, and endeavored the suppressing of the Light, which
therein has shined, if so be that they had been a forgery and deceit indeed,
and the fancies and inventions of Men, fathered upon him as his Word, and will,
and proceeding from the inspirations of his spirit; but that he would have made
known their falsehood unto some, at least, who had the greatest love and respect
to his name and honor, and have been the most diligent enquirers after truth,
and unwilling to be imposed upon with deceits, especially in such things as are
of the highest concernment; which the Lord having given no testimony against,
but all along owned; and when none in the World, either worshippers of him, or
others of highest pretensions to reason have any evident and swaying reason to
believe that the Scripture are a deceit; (whatever some black mouths mutter in
corners) it is not irrational for us to believe, that the Scriptures and indeed
the Word of God, which they bear the Title of.

2. Moreover and especially, the Scriptures appear to be from divine
inspiration, insomuch as they bear such evident marks and characters of
divinity beyond all other Books.

1. The first character of Divinity in the Scriptures, in the clear discoveries
and high praises, which they give of God, and the chief design of the whole
Book, which is Gods glory. (...) Heathen Philosopher or Writer could think, of
speak so highly of God, as the Scriptures do speak. However God has put
characters of himself in the Book of, the Creatures to be read of all, making
known by his Works his eternal Being, his infinite Power, Wisdom and Goodness;
yet most of the wisest Men, who have lived in the Heathen World, and have been
the greatest Students of the Book of the Creatures, and have had no view of the
Book of the Scriptures, have been so gross in their conceptions of God, that as
the ^postle said, Romans 1,22,23. When they professed themselves to be wise, they
became fools; and changed the Glory of the incorruptible God, into an Image
made like to corruptible Man, and to Birds, and four footed Beasts, and
creeping things; They have figured to themselves and worshipped many Gods, unto
the dishonor of the true God: And if some of them have arrived by the light of
nature, unto the notion of one God; yet their conceptions of him have been low,
mean, and unworthy of him: and in no Book in the World is God set forth so
fully and highly in his glorious attributes, and superlative excellencies, as
he has set forth himself in the Book of the Scriptures. We may find in
heathen Writers high Elogi^m's and Panegyricks of some men and Women, famous in
their time, for their valor, and so^^^ moral virtues, whom they have deified
in after ages, and given room amongst their feigned Gods and Goddesses,
dedicating Temples, and giving worship unto them: but in no Heathen writings
shall we find the praises of the true God, and rules given for the service and
worship of him alone, as we shall find in the Scriptures. Large Volumes some
Heathens have left behind them, the design of which has been their own glory,
and (as much as in them lay) the eternizing their Fame, which is an evidence
that themselves were Authors of them; because we cannot rationally think that
any motive should induce others to make, and put forth Books in their names,
that they might obtain glory for them unto whom it did not belong: so this
little volume of the Scriptures, designing the glory of God, and the promoting
of his Interest in the hearts of Men, and the Penmen employed in the writing
thereof, not in the least pretending, that what they wrote, was the invention
of their own brain, does evidence God himself to be the Author of this Book.
Wherefore the Scriptures being so clear in their discoveries of the one true
God, and setting him forth more gloriously than any other Book, and ascribing
all praise and honor to him, and appointing all religious worship to be given
to him only, and designing his glory throughout the whole, does evince that the
Scriptures are indeed the Word of God.

2. The second Character of Divinity in the Scriptures is, the sublime
mysteries therein revealed; namely concerning the Trinity of Persons in one
nature and essence of God; the hypostatical union of the two natures of God and
Man in one person of Christ; the mystical union of Christ and his members, and
the like; which mysteries are so sublime, so high, that no mortal Man of the
highest reason, and most elevated understanding could possibly invent, in as
much as now they are revealed, they exceed the capacity of the most enlightened
to understand: especially if we further consider by whom these mysteries were
revealed; not by the great Scholars, and subtle Philosophers of the World; not
by them who were brought up in Schools, and had conversed with Books and
learned Men; not by Men of high parts, who had polished their reason, and
heightened their understandings by all possible humane helps; but the most of
the Penmen of Scripture, especially those by whom the greatest mysteries are
revealed, were Fishermen, Publicans, and the like; Men of mean education,
illiterate Men; Men of no reading, and of but m^an natural abilities; as
appears not only by the history, but also by the style of their writings; which
has not that politeness as is to be found in many humane Authors; which does
not run in such a golden stream of eloquence, neither is dressed wi^h* such
nea^nesses of Wit, nor garnished with such flowers of Rhetoric; which is not
methodized by the rules of Logic, nor enterl^rded with any peepings of humane
wisdom; which does not favor of high parts, and great natural ingenuity, or
give the least suspicion of cunning, and subtilty, which these Men had above
others; But some of highest mysteries of divinity are set forth by these
Penmen in a passing-mean and home-spun^dress; yea they are left even naked and
bare of such apparel, as the ingenuous Men of the World have clothed their
matter withal, which has given the light of the most glorious truths and
mysteries more evident discovery* not but that some parts of the Scriptures
have such a strain of divine eloquence, as does exdeed humane writings; but the
plainness of the style, especially of the Apostle John in his Gospel, and
Ma^thew, etc. Does evince that what they delivered was not their own invention,
but that they were acted by another spirit in the writing of them, even by the
Spirit of God, who did reveal all the mysteries, which they speak of in whole,
unto them.

3. A third Character of Divinity in the Scriptures is the wisdom which there
does appear, especially the wonderful corty^vement of God's wisdom in Man's
redemption and salvation by Jesus Christ, which i^ there made known; No Book in
the World does shine with such beams of wisdom, as the Word does; it does
teach Men wisdom, spiritual and divine wisdom, in comparison with which all the
wisdom of the World is but foolishness; It does irradiate the mind with the
most glorious light, and proposet^^^ to the understanding the most noble
objects; it discovers the greatest truths of the greatest concernment; it she
we^h the way to avoid the most dreadful effects which sin will produce, and to
obtain the highest happiness which humane nature is capable of; which is one
part of its divine stamp. Moreover the Scriptures do set forth the infinite
wisdom of God, in the wonderful Contrivement of the Salvation of fallen Man by
his only Son the Lord Jesus Christ, the only Savior of Mankind, which wisdom
being so transcendent, does evidence both the Contrivement thereof in Man's
salvation, and the discovery thereof in the Scriptures to be from himself: so
that as by the light of the Word we may know what this wisdom was, even so by
this wisdom we may know the Word to be the Word of God.

To clear this Argument, I shall show, 1. That the way of Man's salvation by
Jesus Christ, which the Scriptures reveal, must needs be the contrivement of
Gods wisdom. 2. That the revelation of this contrivement must, needs be from
God, which I suppose will be an evident demonstration of the Divine Authority
of the Scriptures.

1. That the way of Man's Salvation by Jesus Christ was the contrivement of Gods
wisdom, will appear, because it was impossible for any Man of the most
searching brain, and most notable invention to have imagined it. Man being
guilty of sin against the Law of God, inscribed upon the hearts of all Men,
which natural Conscience will accuse of, if sinners listen thereunto; and Gods
Justice being engaged to inflict a punishment proportionable unto the crime
without a satisfaction, which ^ight reason will say is but reasonable; and this
Justice of God being infinite; must in reason require an infinite satisfaction;
Now what created understanding could of it self have contrived or conceived, a
way how this should be done? Every thing that has a being, is either God or a
Creature; all the Creatures are ^^nice in their Beeings and Actions, and
therefore could not make an infinite satisfaction; It is God only who is
infinite, and he being the party offended could not make satisfaction to his
own justice, especially since his justice requires punishment for satisfaction,
which God as God, being impassible, is incapable of; not to say any thing that
the same nature which did commit sin should in justice suffer the punishment;
would not reason now conclude, that it were impossible for this satisfaction to
be made? Surely it was none but the wisdom of God that could contrive the way
of satisfaction to his justice, by the incarnation of his Son, by the union of
the divine nature in the second Person of the Trinity, unto the humane nature
in the Person of Christ that so by virtue of the hypostatical union, the humane
nature might not only be strength^ed to undergo the wrath of God, which was due
for the sins of Men, in the sufferings which he endured before, and upon the
Cross; but also that through the communication of attributes, the sufferings of
Christ might be of infinite value, because the sufferings of such a Person as
was God, as well as Man, that so they might be a full satisfaction unto Gods
justice for sin; and through Gods Covenant, with him, and gracious acceptance
of this satisfaction from the surety, instead of the offenders themselves, the
sins of Men might be pardoned and their souls saved. O the depth of the Wisdom
of God! here is the wisdom of God in a mystery! surely they are blinded and
hoodwinked by the Devil who do not acknowledge that this was the con^rivement
of Gods wisdom.

2. The Revelation of this Contrivement of wisdom, was from God: will appear in
that none could know the mind of the Lord herein, unless he himself had
discovered it; What Man, said the Apostle, knows the things of Man, but the
spirit of Man which is in him even so the things of God knows no Man but the
spirit of God. 1 Cor. 2. 11. And the spirit of God searches all things, even
the deep things of God; and unless the spirit had revealed these things, we
must have remained in our ignorance of them, since it could not have entered
into our hearts to have conceived them: seeing then none could have discovered
the deep contrivements of Gods wisdom, unless God by his spirit had revealed
them, and seeing these contrivements are revealed in no other Book, but the
Book of the Scriptures, it is evident that the Scriptures must needs be the
Word of God: which also will further appear, if we consider the manner of the
Revelation of the mystery of Man's redemption and salvation by Jesus Christ,
that it was revealed by pieces, and more obscurely at first; and that diverse
Men were made use of in the discovery thereof in diverse ages, who spoke hereof
mostly in dark sayings; and where they spoke most clearly, yet themselves had
not a clear understanging of what they were moved to speak by the Holy Ghost;
but searched what, and what manner of time the Holy Ghost which was in them did
signify, when it testified of the sufferings of Christ, and the design of them;
whence it is evident that they were not, neither could be the Contrivers of
what they revealed, but that the Revelation was from the spirit of God, which
did inspire the Prophets, and was the same in all the Penmen of the holy
Scriptures, whom Men of insight in the Scriptures may plainly perceive to be
guided and acted by the same spirit in their Revelation of the contriv^ment and
way of Man's salvation by Jesus Christ.

4. A Fourth Character of Divinity in the Scriptures is the Furity and Holiness
of them; the Scriptures, are like Silver of Gold purified, and seven times
tried in the Fire, wherein no dross does remain, Psalm. 12. (...) the Scriptures
are pure and holy, from the beginning of them to the end: In do Histories shall
we find such examples of holiness, as the Scriptures do record; in no Writings
of moral Philosophers, shall we find such precepts of holiness, as in the
Scriptures are enjoined: Indeed, the light of nature has been improved by some
Heathens so far, that they have given excellent rules for the restraining of
vice, and obtaining of moral virtues, and the ordering their conversations in
such a virtuous way, that those persons, who have observed these rules, have
been illustrious in their generations, and have shined with some kind of
brightness in the dark places where they have lived; but in no Book that ever
^ssued from the brain of man shall we find such exact rules for holy living as
in the Book of the Scriptures: In this Book we find the moral Law summarily,
comp^ehended in the Ten Commandments, which was written by God himself on the
Tables of Stone, when Moses was with, him in the Mount; in which there are such
holy precepts, as no Heathen Author can show the like; the Heathens were blind,
as to the duties of the first Table of the Law, which have a reference unto
God, and in observance of which, man holiness does chiefly consist; in the
second Table duties they had some understanding, yet they were much mistaken is
some things, accounting some sin^* ^s ambition, self-murder in some cases, and
the like, to be virtues; and they had not so deep an insight into sin, they did
not apprehend the inclination of the heart, and the previous motions to the
consent of the will to evil, (which the Scriptures do discover) to be sinful
and offensive in the eyes of a pure and holy God.

Moreover, in the Scriptures we find the holy precepts of the Gospel, which the
Heathens were strangers, unto; and a way discovered not only for the obtaining
the pardon of for, but also for the subduing and mortifying of sin: where means
are made a known, not only for the restraining of a vicious nature, but also
for the changing of it, for the regenerating of the soul of man, and forming it
after the Image of the holy God, in knowledge, righteousness, and ture
holiness, the making men partakers of the divine nature, which Heathens never
understood the meaning of; the Scriptures show the way of obtaining the
sanctifying graces of Gods Spirit; which do further exceed the moral virtues
of the Heathen in luster, than the Sun does exceed the lesser Stars in
brightness and glory.

Mavelous is the purity and holiness of the word, such (...) does not savor
of any thing terrene and (...); yea, it i^ such as is directly opposite to the
natural b^^ss of the hearts of all men and woman in the world, whilst they are
in a state of nature; such as does contradict carnal affections, and against
which the carnal mind has a natural enmity; and unto which all such and none
but such have a liking and love, as are regenerated by the Spirit of God;
whence it strongly follows, that the Scriptures could not proceed from men, but
that this holy Book did proceed from the immediate inspiration of the holy
Ghost, in those holy men which were the Pen men thereof.

2. It will appear that the Scriptures are the word of God from the mavelous
power and efficacy of them. Such a power and Spirit has and does accompany the
preaching (...) the Gospel, which in the Scriptures is contained, as do (...)
evidence them to be from God alone: we read 1 Pet. 1. 12. of them which
preached the Gospel with the holy Ghost sent down from Heaven. This has been,
this is unto this day.

1. The wonderful power of the Gospel in the first preaching of it, does evince
that it was from God, when so great a part of the world was in so short a time
subdued unto the obedience thereof; when the Gospel prevailed not only amongst
many of the Jews after Christ Ascension, and the effusion of the holy Ghost
more largely upon the Apostles, so that three thousand people were converted to
the faith by one Sermon of the Apostle Peter. Acts 2. 41. and five thousand
more, Act. 4. 4. but especially, in that it prevailed amongst the Gentiles and
Heathens, and so many Churches of Christ were planted and brought, not by
carnal weapons but by Spiritual, to the subjection and obedience of the Lord
Jesus. This power will appear to have been from God, if we consider,

1. How few men were employed in the first preaching thereof; there were not
many which we read of, besides Paul and Barnabas who preached unto the Gentiles
at the first. If there had been multitudes of witnesses, it might have given
the more credit to the Doctrine, when the testimony of a few is not easily
believed and received.

2. That these men were but of little esteem in the World; that they were Jews
whom the Gentiles had an antipathy against; and so were not so ready to believe
there report, and entertain their message; that their persons were contemptible
in their eyes; that they were like crucified persons to the world, and
therefore unlikely to find acceptance.

3. That whatever humane Learning and Wisdom any of them were endowed withal,
yet they did not make use of it in their preaching, they did not come with
excellency of speech and wisdom in declaring the testimony of God, but used all
plainness, which was not likely in it self to produce such great effects.

4. That the doctrine which they preached was,

1. New to the world, and tended directly to pull down the old religion, and
superstitious worship of the Heathenish gods, which they had brought up in, and
wedded unto, which could not be done by any humane power.

2. Strange, they preached such things as were above reason, and therefore the
world might have had much show and pretense of reason, to have excused
themselves from yielding obedience thereunto.

3. Strict, severe, and contrary unto natural inclination and interest, they
taught the world to deny themselves, to cruci^ie the flesh, to mortify the
deeds of the body, to take up the cross, to mourn and weep for sin, to endure
hardship, to forsake father, and mother, and wife, and children, and houses,
and lands, if they stood in competition with Jesus Christ; to venture
imprisonments, yea to lay down their life for Christ, as many of necessity must
and did d^, that would be Christians indeed in those days; and when the
Doctrine of the Gospel was such, surely it was not likely of it self to receive
entertainment, unless the power of God, had accompanied it.

5. The power of the Gospel in the first preaching appears, in that it met with
so much opposition; the Devil stirred up it struments against it, the powers of
the Earth were against it, as well as the powers of Hell! great men did oppose
it, Philosophers were against it, Learned men did oppose it; the Jews were
against it, and raised up persecution against the Apostles, and the hearts of
all men naturally were against it; and when there was such an opposition
against it; surely it was none but the power of God which could cause it to
prevail and conquer, and cause so many Nations to bow and yield obedience
hereunto.

2. The wonderful power and efficacy of the word, where it is preached unto
this day, is a strong Argument that it is the Word of God.

1. The power of the Word the search the heart, and convince of sin. Heb. 4.
12. The word of God is quick and powerful and sharper than any two-edged Sword,
piercing even to the dividing asunder of the soul and spirit, and is a
discerner of the thoughts and intents of the hearts; there is a light in the
Word, which discovers the dark filthy corners of the heart, and convinces of
secret sins; and there is a sharp edge in the Word to cut and wound; no word in
the world searches and pierces, like the word in the Scriptures.

2. And especially the power of the Word does appear in the work of Conversion
and Regeneration, which it effects; it is called the incorruptible seed, by
which men are born again (...) Pet. 1. 23. Of his own will begat he us by the
word of truth. Jams. 1. 18. there is a great power goes along with it, to
break r^^kie hearts, to how stubborn wills, to spiritualize carnal affections,
to subdue strong lusts, to work a gracious* and through change in the heart of
man, which exceeds the power of nature, or moral suasion; and in so much as
all are not wrought upon by it which read or hear it, yea sometimes the more
disposed subject receives no impression, thereby, and the less disposed
subject is effectually changed: which shows, that the power does proceed from
God, and that the work is effected by his Spirit, and proves the divine
Authority of this Word.

3. The Word is powerful, not only for the first working of grace, but also for
the increase thereof, for the building up believers* Acts 20 32. for the
perfecting of the Saints, and the edifying the body of Christ; there is Milk in
the Word for babes* and strong meat for strong men; wholesome words, which have
much spiritual nourishing virtue in them: the Word is powerful, for the
quenching Satan's fiery darts, for the repelling and driving back the tempter;
for the comforting and rejoicing of distressed and disconsolate souls, when
they are brought even to the brink of despair; there are no such joys in the
world, as those joys which Christians sometimes finde^ in the reading and
applying the Word, when they mingle it with faith, and have the breathings of
the Spirit therewith; and there is no Book in the world that can produce such
powerful effects, as the Scriptures do, wherefore it must needs follow, that
these Scriptures are indeed the Word of God.

3. The Scriptures appear to be the word of God* from the Historical relation
in them of Prophecies fulfilled, and of miracles, whereby they were confirmed,
and the rationally unquestionable certainty of this History, as it is handed
down to posterity.

1. In the Scriptures we have relation of Prophecies, and the fulfilling of
them which does prove those writings to be from God alone; because he alone can
certainly foretell future things, indeed wise men may guess, and through
prudence foresee the effects of some things in their causes, and foretell some
things that are not very far off, yet not certainly, and with all their
circumstances; But it is Gods prerogative to foresee and foretell such things
(certainly, and with their circumstances; and long before the time) for which
no cause in nature can be assigned, such as many of the Prophesies of the
Scriptures were. By this Argument God does by the Prophet Isaiah prove the
Heathenish gods to be no gods, because they could not foretell future events.
Isai. 41. 21, 22 23. Produce your cause says the Lord, bring forth your strong
reasons: Let them show is what shall happen, and declare to us things to come:
show the things which are to come hereafter, that we may know, that ye are
Gods. And v. 26. There is none that shows, there is none that declares* etc.
Therefore be concludes, v. 29. Behold they are all vanity* their* works are
nothing; their Molten Images are wind and confusion: The Prophesies of
Scripture, as they prove the Lord, who spoke them by the Prophets to be God; so
they prove the Scriptures in which they are spoken, to be of Divine Authority.
It would take up two much room in this small Treatise, to enumerate all the
Prophesies of Scripture; take two or three instances. See Genesis 15. 13, 14. God
foretelling to Abraham that his seed should be strangers in a Land, which was
not theirs, and serve them, and be afflicted by them four hundred years, (...)
that afterward they, should come forth with great substance. This Prophecy is
fulfilled Exodus 12. So also the return of the children of Israel from the
Baby^onish captivity, after seventy years, was foretold, Jere* 2^. 12. and the
same of Cyrus, who should deliver them* before he was born, Isai. 45* 1,2. So
also the name of Josiah, who should destroy the Altar which Jero^oam had
reared, and burn the* bones of the Priests upon it, was foretold three hundred
thirty and three years before be was born, the Prophecy is in 1 King ^^. 2.
the fulfilling of it, 2 King. 23. 17. But especially the Prophesies in the
Scripture concerning the Messiah, are remarkable, of his birth, life, death,
and the fulfilling of them in the History of the Evangelists; the Prophecy of
the destruction of the Temple and Jerusalem by Daniel, and especially by our
Savior, and the fulfilling thereof, before that generation wherein our Savior
lived, were all in their Graves.

2. In the Scripture we have relation of Miracles, whereby they were confirmed:
such as the Plague of Egypt; the dividing of the Sea for the Israclites to pass
through; the raining of Manna from Heaven; the standing still, and going back of
the Sun: the preservation of the three Children in the fiery Furnace, and the
like, in the old Testament; especially the Miracles wrought by our Savior and
his Disciples, which the new Testament do record, such as healing the sick, the
lame, blind, deaf, leprous, by a word, the feeding many thousands with a few
Loaves of bread, the calming of the Sea, the raising of the dead after burial,
and the like, all which did exceed the power of nature; and however wonderful
things, might be wrought by Men in a praestigiatory way, which God may permit
some to be deluded withal; yet all true Miracles, as these were, could be
wrought by none without his immediate power, which he would never put forth for
the confirmation of lies and deceits; therefore we may strongly argue from
hence, that the Scriptures which have been confirmed by these Miracles, are
indeed the Word of God. I know the great question then will be, whether there
were ever such Miracles wrought, which the Scriptures makes mention of, whether
the historical relation both of Prophesies and Miracles be not a forgery, for
the introduction of the worship, which the Scriptures calls for? therefore,

3. I might show at large the rationally unquestionable certainty of
Scripture-History, as handed to posterity; But in brief, when these things were
so notable, and remarked in their times; when they were not done in corners;
when they were* the object of sense; when they were so many; when they had so
many spectators and witnesses; when there are diverse records of the same
things, and all in the main agreeing; when the way they are declared i^,
speaking so much simplicity in the relators; when there were so many Copies of
the Records dispersed into so many diverse places; when Enemies could not deny
the truth of things recorded, only imputed them to other causes; when mention
is made of these things in profane Histories; when we have the Writings of the
ancient Fathers by us, who lived in all the Centuries between us, and the time
of Christ, and wi^h one consent acknowledge these things, who might easily have
found ou^ the deceit, had there been any, when they lived some of them so near
to the days wherein the chief of these things were done; when we cannot
rationally assign an end, which should move Christians to deceive themselves
and posterity, since they expose themselves to such losses, persecutions,
reproaches and afflictions by their profession of Christianity; neither can we
rationally imagine how all the Christians in the World could meet together from
so many Countries, for the forging of things which were never done; much less
how they should agree together about it; and least of all how they should keep
this secret, but their adversaries would have found it out, and made it known,
some hint of it would have been given in History; all these things being laid
together, we may rationally conclude, that the History of the Scripture is as
certain, yea more certain than any profane History, which we have the least
doubt of; and if the Histories of Prophesies fulfilled, and Miracles wrought be
true, it is a strong Argument that the Scriptures which hereby are confirmed,
are indeed the word of God. These Arguments for the Divine Authority of the
Scriptures may be sufficient to stop the mouths of gain-sayets, but without the
testimony of the spirit in and by them, none will be sufficient to effect a
saving faith. Thus it is evident from the truth, and divine Authority of the
Scriptures, which do so clearly reveal and foretell it, that the Lord Jesus
Christ will certainly appear to Judgment.

The second Argument to prove the certainty of Christ's appearance, may be drawn
from the certainty of the Resurrection.

2. Argu. If all the dead shall certainly be raised at the last day, and the
Lord Jesus Christ shall raise them, then the appearance of the Lord Jesus
Christ to do it is certain; but all the dead shall certainly be raised at the
last day, and the Lord Jesus Christ shall raise them, therefore the appearance
of the Lord Jesus Christ is certain.

1. That all the dead, which are or shall be brought into that state, shall be
raised at the last day, is a truth so clear in the Scripture, that nothing is
more clear. The general Resurrection of the dead is one great Article of our
Christian Faith; one Principle of the Doctrine of Christ made mention of by the
Apostle: Heb. 6* 1, 2. The dead small and great shall be ^atsed, and stand
before God: Rev. 20. 12. We read of the Resurrection of the Just* Luke 14. 14.
Of the Resurrection of the Just and Unjust* Acts 24. 15. I might multiply many
Scriptures to prove this Doctrine of the Resurrection, but I shall further
speak but of two places which purposely treat thereof, and being so full of
Arguments, I shall make use of no other than there I find for the evidencing of
this truth.

1. The former Scripture is in Matthew. 22. from verse. 23. ^o the 34. The same
day came the Saddnces to him, which say there is no Resurrection, and asked
him* saying Master, Moses said, ^f a Man die having no Children his Brother
shall marry his Wife, and raise up Seed to his Brother. Now there were with we
seven brethren, and the first when be had married a Wife, deceased, and having
no issue, left his Wife unto his Brother. Likewise the second also, and the
third unto the seventh; And last of all the Woman dyed also. Therefore in the
Resurrection, whose wife shall she be of the seven* for they all had her: Jesus
answered and said unto them, Ye do err, not knowing the Scriptures, nor the
power of God: For in the Resurrection, they neither marry nor are given in
marriage, but are like the Angels of God in Heaven. But as touching the
Resurrection of the dead, have ye not read that which was spoken unto you by
God* saying, I am the God of Abraham* and the God of Isaac, and the God of
Jacob? God is not the God of the dead, but of the ^^^ing. And when the
mullitude heard this, they were astonished at his Doctrine. And verse 34. it is
said, He put the Sadduces to silence.

Here we have a Disputation concerning the Doctrine of the Resurrection,
wherein we may take notice of,

1. The opponents, and they were the Sadduces, who denied the Resurrection,
they denied the immortality of the Soul, for they said there was no Angel nor
Spirit: Acts 23. 8. And they denied the Resurrection of the body.

2. The Respondent; and that was the Lord Jesus Christ, the wisdom of the
Father; he that when he was but twelve years old, did dispute with the Doctors
in the Temple, and filled all that heard him with astonishment at his
understanding and answers, Luke 2 46, 47. And much more now, when he was so
much increased in wisdom, was he able to deal with the Sadduces, and answer
them about this truth, of which (he coming out of the bosom of the Father, and
being acquainted with his secrets) he had so perfect knowledge; he had answered
the Herodians before most wisely to their ensnaring question, whether it were
lawful to pay tribute to Coe^ar; and he was able to give answer to the Sadduces
about the Resurrection.

3. The Objection of the Sadduces. Master, Moses said, etc. their Argument
against the Resurrection, is this: If there were a Resurrection, then there
would be a confusion in Relations, insomuch as seven Men having been in this
World married to one Woman, all of them would claim a propriety in her, and to
whom should she belong, would not this breed a discord? Must not six of them
with grief be deprived of her, who once was their Wife? And could this agree
with the state of perfection and happiness, in which all the just should be
raised? The Sadduces thought now they had out Savior upon the hip; they
thought now it is likely, that they should confound him with this Argument,
that they should gravel him and shame him before the People; they could not
answer it themselves, and they thought that our Savior could not answer it
neither; and truly the objection has subtilty in it.

4. The answer of our Savior lies in verse. 30 In the Resurrection they neither
marry, nor are given in marriage, but are like the Angels of God in Heaven.
Hereby he gives them to understand that there would be no confusion in
Relations at the Resurrection, that there would be no enjoyment or deprivation
of conjugal Relations there, because such Relations would then cease; and Men
and Women would then be like Angels, which neither have such Relations, neither
do stand in need of them; the end of such Relations will then cease, and the
Relation will cease too.

1. One end of the conjugal Relation here, is, the propagation of Man kind
insomuch as the number is incomplete, and will be incomplete till the end of
the World, and the number is completing by Generation* but at the Resurrection
the number of Man kind will be complete; the number of the Elect will be
perfect, and in this regard they will be like to Angels* whose number was
complete at the first and therefore this end of marriage ceasing, the Relation
should cease also.

2. Another end of marriage is mutual help; and this end also will cease; at
the Resurrection the wicked they shall have no help, the righteous shall have
no need of (...) from such Relations; God will supply All, they will be perfect
in him; God will be All, and in All: God will be instead of Father, Mother,
Husband, Wife, and all unto them, like Angels they shall behold the Face of
their Father, and have no need of conjugal Relations.

3. And with this Answer to the Sadduces Objection, we may take notice of
Christ's Discovery of their error, and the grounds thereof, namely their
ignorance of the Scriptures, and the power of God; whereby, our Savior does
suggest a strong Argument, to prove the Doctrine of the Resurrection, drawn
from the power of God, and the Scriptures; the Argument is this. If there be
power in God to raise the Dead, and in the Scriptures he has revealed that he
will do it, then there will certainly be a Resurrection of the Dead; But there
is power in God to raise the dead, and in the Scriptures he has revealed that
he will do it.

1. That there is Power in God to raise the Dead, is evident, and none which
acknowledge his Deity can rationally deny; he that had power to make the World
out of nothing, ^ath power to raise the Dead out of their Graves; he that had
power to give life, has power to restore it; he that has all power, has this
power; he who is infinite in power, who is omnipotent, unto whom nothing is
difficult, he can raise the dead, and join soul and body together after a long
separation. There is little doubt, but God can raise the dead* but the great
question lies in his will, whether he will or no, Therefore,

2. The Scriptures reveal his will herein; be that in the Scriptures has
promised that he will raise the dead, being (o powerful and faithful, he will
certainly do it; but God has promised in the Scriptures, that he will raise
the dead. And though in the old Testament the Doctrine of the Resurrection be
spoken of more obscurely yet our Savior fetches a proof of the Doctrine out
of the Book of Moses, which the Sadduces (as is observed) did only acknowledge.
Verse. 31, 32 As touching the Resurrection of the Dead have y^e not read what
was said to you by God, I am the God of Abraham, etc. God is not the God of the
dead, but of the living; our Savior proves the Doctrine by strong inference
drawn from this place, which needs a little opening to perceive the Argument.

It is not unlikely but our Savior cleared the thing in more words, (for we
have but the heads in Scripture of many things which were delivered in large
discourses) he made it so clear that it fatisfied the people, and silenced the
Sadduces.

The Argument formed up is this: If God be the God of Abraham, and the God of
Isaac, and the God of Jacob, when they are dead, then Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob
will rise again from the dead; and so there shall be a Resurrection from the
dead; but God calls himself the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac; and the
God of Jacob, when they are dead, as they were, when he spoke those words to
Moses out of the bush; therefore they shall rise from the dead. The consequence
our Savior proves, because he is the God of the living, and not of the dead
(...) if that Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, be living before God, in regard of
his purpose to raise them from the dead, because he is their God, when their
bodies lie rotting in the grave, and therefore they may be called living when
dead, by him who quickneth the dead, and causes those things which are not
(but shall be) as though they were. Romans 4. 17. then Abraham, and Isaac, and
Jaoob shall be raised from the dead, as certainly as if they were actually
living; but they are living before God, in regard of his purpose and promise to
make them alive; which is evident from the nature of the covenant which he has
made with them, which does include a promise of blessedness, and perfect
happiness, which he will give unto them. If God be the God of Abraham, and the
God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob, he is their God in covenant, and by
consequence will make them perfectly happy, not only in regard of their souls,
by receiving them into glory, when they die; but also in regard of their bodies
too, by raising them from the dead at the last day, till which time their
happiness is but in part, and imperfect; and therefore hence may strongly be
inferred* that they shall be raised; and by consequence all in covenant shall
be raised, to receive the perfect happiness promised in the covenant; and by
parity of reason, that all out of covenant shall be raised to receive the
complete punishment threatened to sinners for their sins; and by consequence
that there shall be a general Resurrection. Thus our Savior confirms this
great doctrine of the Resurrection, whereby he stopped the mouths of the
Sadduces; his answer made the people astonished, and the Sadduces confounded;
they came with their mouths open, but they went away with their mouths shut;
they came with full cry, but they went away in silence; he put the Sadduces to
silence.

2. The second Scripture to prove the Resurrection, is in 1 Cor. Cap. 15.
thorowout; It seems, that some amongst the Corinthians who called themselves
Christians* did deny the Resurrection; now the scope of the Chapter is to
refute this dangerous error, and to prove the truth, which the Apostle does by
several Arguments.

1. The first Argument is drawn from the Resurrection of Christ; If Christ be
risen from the dead, then believers which are his members, shall be raised
also; he will not suffer his members to lie for ever rotten in the grave,
because his mystle I body then would never he grown up unto perfection: Christ
is the first fruits of them that sleep, V. 10. As certainly as he was awakened
out of his sleep in the grave on the third day, so certainly shall all those
that do, or shall sleep in Jesus, be awakened out of their grave at the last
day: But Christ is certainly risen from the dead, which the Apostle proves,

1. From the Prediction thereof in the Scriptures, as his death was foretold,
so also his resurrection was foretold in the type of Jonab's being cast out of
the belly of the whole on the third day.

2. From the testimony of those persons to whom the Lord Jesus Christ did
appear after his Resurrection, namely of Cephas, all the Apostles, above five
hundred brethren at once, who law him before his Ascension; and last of all, in
that he was seen by himself upon the way to Damascus after his Ascension: all
which witnesses did with one mouth confirm the truth of Christ's Resurrection.

3. From the absurdities which would follow if Christ were not risen.

1. The Apostles would then be found false witnesses and the Spirit of God
which spoke in them, would be a false spirit, which is impossible.

2. Then their preaching would be in vain, and the whole doctrine of
Christianity, which was built partly upon this foundation, would fall to the
ground.

3. Then their faith would be i^ vain: because if Christ were still dead, he
would not be a meet object for their faith, for then he could not be the Son of
God, nor a Mediator between God and man.

4. Then Believers would be yet in their sins; their sins would remain
un^ardoned; because satisfaction to Gods justice would not have been
completed, had the bonds of death still held our Savior.

5. Then they which were fallen asleep in Christ would be perished in regard of
their bodies, like the beasts when they die; because if Christ were not risen,
it would be impossible that they should ever rise any more.

6. Then believers should have hope only in this life; because if Christ were
not risen and ascended into Heaven, to prepare room for them there, they could
not have any good-grounded hope of ever being received into that place; and by
consequence it would follow, that believers, the best of men, upon the earth,
would be the most miserable men of all others, because they are exposed to so
many sufferings for the sake of Jesus Christ: If they had hope only in this
life, they would be most miserable in regard of sorrow, (though not in regard
of sin) for their hopes of future glory do support and comfort them under all
their afflictions; if they should loose their hopes, they would loose their
comforts, and be of all others the most forlorn and sorrowful; it would break
their hearts, and bring them to despair. Certainly then Christ is risen, and as
certainly shall the dead be raised.

2. The second Argument whereby the Apostle proves the Resurrection, is drawn
from the Parallel between the first Adam, and Christ the second Adam, V. 21.
etc. Since by man came death by man also shall come the Resurrection; for as in
Adam all die, so in Christ shall all be made alive. By Adam sin came into the
world, and death by sin, and death passed upon all his posterity, because all
have sinned, at least in him: By Christ came righteousness into the world, and
by righteousness life* and all his posterity shall be raised by him unto
eternal life at the last day, because all are partakers of his righteousness.

3. The third Argument is drawn from the reign of Christ at the right hand of
the Father, until all his enemies be put under his feet; and the last enemy
which shall be destroyed is Death; and death is no ways perfectly destroyed,
but by the Resurrection of the dead out of their graves, and the putting
immortality upon the body: then when this corruptible shall put on
incorruption, and this mortal shall put on immortality, death shall be
swallowed up in victory; therefore since death, with other enemies, shall be
put under Christ's feet, it is of necessity that there should be a Resurrection.

4. The fourth Argument is in V. 29. Else what shall they do that are baptized
for the dead: if the dead rise not, why are they baptized for the dead? The
words are difficult; various are the interpretations which are given; (...)
like Caloins best; if it will hold with the words, Why are they baptized for
the dead, or for dead? that is, why are they that are dying, and given over for
dead? baptized? if the dead rise not; why will any when they are going one of
the world be baptized in the name of Christ? if they did not hope for a
Resurrection at the last; that as they are buried with him by baptism unto
death, (...) they should rise with him not only unto newness of life here, but
also unto everlasting life and glory hereafter.

5. The fifth Argument is drawn from the Jeopardie and sufferings of
Christians, which they would not undergo unless they had hopes of the
Resurrection.

6. The denial of this Doctrine opens a door to Licenciousness. People would
eat and drink* and let loose the reigns to sensual delights, and commit sin
with greediness, if they must die, and there were no hopes of a Resurrection to
glory and happiness, and no fears of a Resurrection to torment and misery.

Besides Scripture testimony and Argument, which is the (...) firm proof of the
Resurrection. I might add for illustration, ^^me. Emblems of the Resurrection
in nature*

Naturalists tell us of a Phoenix which rises out of the shes, into which she
had burned her self before; but i^ (...) more certain, that some birds lie in
holes dead all the win^^, and get life again in the Summer; we see Plants,
Herbs, ^lowers, and the like wither in the Winter, and spring forth gain when
the cold weather is gone; we see the Sun (...) night, and arise again in the
morning; and we ourselves as we have an Emblem of death upon us when we are
asleep, so our awaking again, and arising from our beds, it an Emblem of our
Resurrection at the last day. It is certain that the dead shall be raised*
which has been proved.

2. And secondly, it is as certain that Christ shall raise them. I will raise
them at the last day. Joh. 6. 40. this is spoken of believers; but it is spoken
also of all, Joh 5. 28,29. The hour is coming, in which all that are in their
graves; shall hear his voice and come forth: they that have done good to the
Resurrection of life, and they that have done evil, to the Resurrection of
damnation.

Hence it strongly follows, If the dead shall certainly be raised, and the Lord
Jesus shall raise them, that the appearance of Christ to do it, is certain.

3. Argu. The third Argument to prove the certainty of Christ's second
appearance may be drawn from the certainty of the last general Judgment.

If there will certainly be a day of general Judgment, and the Lord Jesus
Christ will be the Judge; then the second appearance of Christ is certain: But
there will be certainly a day of general Judgment, and the Lord Jesus Christ
will be the Judge; therefore Christ's appearance is certain.

1. The certainty of the last judgment is evident from Scripture, Heb 6 2. 2
Pet. 3. 9. Rom 25,6,7. and elsewhere frequently, and I shall further prove it
by Scripture Arguments.

It does appear there will be a day of Judgment,

1. From Gods appointment. Acts 17. 31. He has appointed a day wherein he will
Judge the world in righteousness. God appointed the Creation of the world,
which accordingly he effected: he appointed the reconciliation of the world to
himself, which he brought to pass; and having appointed the Judgment of the
world it shall as certainly be brought (...) pass in its day. Nothing can
frustrate God's appointments, God being so infinite in wisdom, does not appoint
any thing about which there shall be any reason to alter his determination; and
God being so infinite in power, nothing can hinder the effecting of what he
has determined shall be done.

2. From Gods Supreme and Universal Sovereignty; he is the blessed and the
great Potentate, which rules over all the Kingdoms of the earth; He is the King
of Kings, and Lord of Lords, 1 Timothy 6. 15. All the children of men are not only
his creatures, but also his subjects. As it is the work of earthly Kings to
judge their subjects, and to dispense rewards and punishments: so God being the
supreme Sovereign, will judge all his subjects; Kings are but Gods Vicegerents,
they rule under him, and they must give an account unto him; God will judge the
judges of the Earth; men do often judge unrighteously, sometimes through their
own wickedness and partiality; sometimes through ignorance and false
information; the righteous are condemned by some, and notorious offenders are
acquitted; and those which judge most righteously, cannot find out all that
should fall under the lash of he Law, and the strictest laws of men do not
reach all offenses against God; therefore there is need that the Sovereign Lord
and King should call the whole world to another judgment, which will be at the
last day.

3. From Gods most excellent Wisdom in the mannagement of his government over
the children of men; the wisdom of God now is much out of sight, and is little
taken notice of in the world: there seems now to be a great disorder and
confusion in the government of men; the most faithful subjects of the King of
Heaven in most places are trodden under foot, and have many bitter cups put
into their hands; and the most vile Traitors and Rebels* against the highest
Majesty, are lifted up into the seat of honor, and spend much of their days
in mirth and jollity; we read in Scripture of the various and great afflictions
of Gods People. Heb. 11. 36 37. Some there were mocked, and scourged, and
tortured, they were sawen asunder, they were slain with the Sword. they
wandered about in Sheepskins, and Goat skins, being destitute, afflicted and
tormented, and yet such as the World was not worthy of; whereas it is said of
the wicked, Psalm. 73 5,7,10. Their eyes stand out with fatness, they have more
than heart could wish, and Waters of a full Cup are wrung out unto them; and
they are not in trouble like other Men, neither are they plagued like other
Men. See also Psalm. 17. 14. Job. 21. from the 7 verse. to the 14 th.

So that if there were not another Judgment, God would seem to have been an
ill-contriver of Government for the welfare of his people, and to have
ill-consulted his own glory in the World; yea his enemies would seem to have
outwitted him; therefore it is needful there should be a day of Judgment, when
all things shall be set at rights, and put in order* when Gods wisdom all along
shall plainly appear in the view of all, and his glory be made manifest; when
his people shall be exalted, and his enemies debased.

4. From the infinite holiness of God, now the holiness of God i^ trampled
under foot by ungodly sinners; they scorn and deride it, where ever they see
any Image or appearance thereof; they scoff at the name of a Saint; they hate
holiness, and many do their uttermost to banish it the World; which is a high
affront, which such Persons offer to the highest Majesty in this high
attribute; it is therefore necessary that there should be a day of Judgment,
that God may redeem the honor of his holiness, which now ^i^s under such
contempt; then he will make his holiness to shine with an amazing excellency in
the eyes of all those that did despise it.

5. From Gods justice and Righteousness; God has given unto Man a most just
and righteous Law, and annexed threatenings of everlasting punishment, which he
will inflict upon the breakers thereof; Gods justice cannot be satisfied
without execution of his vengeance in the punishment of all transgressors,
except it be of such who have an interest in the satisfaction, which was made
by the Lord Jesus Christ; and all the Children of Adam being transgressors,
and very few of them having an in^^^^^ in Christ and his merits, and none
receiving condign punishment for their sins in this life; therefore there will
be a day for the revelation of the just and righteous judgment of God, Romans 2.
5. This righteousness of God does engage him not to punish the wicked for their
sins, but also to give his people that reward which the Lord Jesus Christ has
purchased and prepared for them; therefore there must be a day for him to do it
in.

Thus it does appear, that there will be a day of general Judgment.

2. That Christ will be the Judge* is also evident from Scripture, Acts 17. 31.
He has appointed* a day wherein ^e will judge the World in righteousness by
the Man whom he has ordained, whereof he has given assurance unto all Men, in
that he has raised him from the dead. And Romans 14. 10. We shall all stand
before the Judgment Seat of Christ. And 2 Cor 5. 10. For we must all appear
before the judgment Seat of Christ, that every one may receive the things done
in this body, according to that he has done, whether it be good or bad. And
Christ's judicial proceedings is set forth at large, Matthew. 25. Hence then it
follows, that the Lord Jesus Christ shall certainly appear to Judgment. I might
add other Arguments drawn from the faith, and hope, and expectations of the
righteous, and Christ's faithfulness, love, and the engagement of his honor to
appear again, but so much concerning the certainty of Christ's second appearance.

CHAP. XII.
3. T He third thing proved, is to show that the Lord Jesus Christ will quickly
appear, that is, 1. He will come within a short time. 2. He will come suddenly
and unexpectedly, when he does appear.

1. Christ will come quickly, that is, within a short time. Heb. 1. 37. Yet a
little while, and he that shall come will come, and will not tarry. He that
shall come will come, there (...) the certainty of his coming, and (...) a
little while, he will come, and will not tarry, there is the speediness of his
coming. The Lord is at hand, Philip. 4. 5. The ^^^ing of the Lord draws,
nigh, James 5. 8. The Judge sta^^eth at the (...), ^ers. ^9. The end of all
things is at hand, 1 Pet. 4. 7. Therefore our days are called the last days.
2 Timothy 3 1. And upon us the ends of the World are come, 1 Cor. 10, 11. We live
in the end of the World, in the last days, in the old age thereof. The World
has as i^ were three ages, the youth, the middle age, and the old age 3. the
Youth of the World was from the creation to the Flood, the middle age from the
Flood to the first coming of Christ; the old A^^ from the first coming of
Christ to the second* coming, the old age and last days of the World began in
the Apostles time, now many of them are spent, and we are come not only to the
declining years, but also to the decrepit age of the World; and if the Lord
Jesus Christ were to come shortly in the days of the Apostle, much, more
shortly will he come now, when so many years are past since the Scripture was
writ, and these things foretold.

If any should doubt of the certainty of Christ's appearance, because the
Scripture speaks of the speediniss thereof, as if Christ had been in those
days presently to come, and yet above sixteen hundred years are past, since
the promise was made.

I answer, that the Apostle Paul who in his first Epistle ^o the Thessalonians
spoke of Christ's coming as if it might be in his time, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 16, 17. The
Lord himself will descend from Heaven with a shout, etc. And the dead in Christ
shall rise first; then we which are alive and remain shall be caught up in the
Clouds, etc. The same Apostle tells the Thessalonians in his second Epistle,
Chap. 2. 3. That the day of the Lord should not come till there was a falling
away, and the Man of sin should be revealed, etc. And verse. 7. That there was
then a let to the Revelation of the Man of sin, which was the Heathenish
Roman Empire which let was not likely in haste, neither was removed till some
hundred of years after; and therefore it is evident from that place, that the
coming of the Lord was not to be until several ages after the writing of the
Scriptures. This may be sufficient to give satisfaction concerning the length
of time, since the Scripture tells us that the Lord Jesus would quickly appear.

If any profane Mockers shall scoff at this answer, and say, where is the
Promise of his coming? Do not all things remain as they were since the
Creation? Do not the Sun, and Moon, and Stars keep their constant course? And
what likelihood of the darkning of the Sun, and falling of the Stars, and the
passing away of the Heavens with a great noise? Is not the Earth established
upon sure foundations, and what likelihood of moving it and burning it, with
the works which are upon it? and if Christ would have come so quickly, would
not he have been here before now? I answer,

1. That the Apostle Peter foretells, that in the last days such scoffers should
arise. 2. Pet. 3. 3,4.

2. That all things are not as they were from the Creation, for the World in
the time of Noah was drowned with the Flood, Noah only excepted, and those
which were with him* in the Ark; surely there was a great transformation of
things in that age, Verse. 5,6.

3. That by the same word of command, whereby the old World was drowned with
Water, by the same Word, the World that now is shall be burned with Fire at the
day of Judgment and perdition of the ungodly, Verse. 7.

4. That though many hundred years be past since the promise, that the Lord
would come quickly, yet there is not a failure, in regard of God; for though
the time be long, in regard of our account, who are of so short continuance;
and time seems tedious to us, because of the miseries of our short life; yet in
regard of the eternal God, the time is but short, for in his sight a thousand
years is out as one day, and by that account there are not yet two days past
since the promise. Verse. 8.

5. The reason of Gods protracting this appearance of Jesus Christ to Judgment,
is for our sakes; it is from his longsuffering to us ward, that hereby he might
lead us unto repentance, Verse. 9. The Lord has a number to be called, some of
which may be unborn, others not yet newborn, but scatterred amongst the
wicked; but when the Elect* are all called, and persuaded to repent, and
believe, and are gathered into Gods Family, I doubt not but the Lord Jesus
Christ will be here immediately. The Lord Jesus surely now will come within a
short time; the certain time of his appearance is unknown, Matthew. 24. 36. But
of the day and hour knows no Man, no not the Angels, but the Father only;
this is a secret which God has locked up in his own breast, it is written in
the Book of this Decree, and however other things are revealed and unfolded to
Men, yet the leaf where this i^ written is folded up and sealed, so that none
can read it; yet surely it cannot be long before the mystery be finished, and
Christ be revealed from Heaven; yet a little while and he will be here, he
stands at the Door, and the Door will quickly be opened, and then he will make
his appearance.

2. The Lord Jesus Christ will come quickly, that is suddenly, and
unexpectedly, especially in regard of the ungodly World. The day of the Lord
will come as a snare upon all them that dwelt on the face of the whole Earth:
Luke 21.34.35. And sudden destruction will then come upon the wicked, as pains
on a Woman with Child: 1 Thessalonians. 5 3 The Lord will come in a moment, in the
twinkling of an eye; 1 Cor. 15. 52. As lightning comes out of the East and
shines unto the West, so shall the coming of the Son of Man be: Matthew 24. 27.
Further, this coming of the Lord Jesus is set forth in Scripture.

1. By the coming of a Thief in the night, Rev. 16. 15. Behold I come as a
Thief: 1 Thessalonians. 5. 2. For your selves know perfectly, that the day of the Lord
so comes as a Thief in the night: 2 Pet. 3. 10. The day of the Lord comes as
a Thief in the night, in which the Heavens shall pass away with a great noise,
etc. The Lord will not come like a Thief, in regard of any wicked purpose and
design; but he will come like a Thief, in regard of the suddenness and
unexpectedness of his coming. Men do not think of, they do not know of, they
are not aware of, they do not desire the coming of Thieves: so the Lord will
come at a time, which Men do not know of; when they (...) not think of it, when
they are not aware of it; and he will be more unwelcome at his second
appearance to the greatest part of the World, than a Thief, who comes suddenly
in the night, and breaks in upon their Houses, to steal their goods* and take
away their lives; when the Lord Jesus shall suddenly unfold the Doors of
Heaven, and come down in his glory, and summon the wicked to Judgment, how will
they start, and be affrighted out of their deep sleep of security, and be
filled with horror and amazement!

2. Christ's coming is set forth by the coming of a Bridegroom at midnight, in
the Parable of the ten Virgins, Matthew 25 6. At midnight there was a cry made,
Behold the Bridegroom comes, go ye forth to meet him. The Virgins were all
asleep, the Wise as well as the foolish, they did not expect the Bridegroom at
that time; the coming of Christ will be sudden and unexpected, as to the
particular time unto his own Disciples; yet they will quickly arise, and trim
their Lamps* and receive him with joy, when the Lamps of the foolish Virgins,
for want of Oil, will go out, and they shall be shut out of the Bride-chamber
of Heaven for ever.

3. Christ's coming is set forth by the coming of the Flood upon the old World,
and Noah's entering into the Ark: Luke 17. 26,27. And as it was in the days of
Noah, so shall it be in the days of the Son of Man; They did eat, they drank,
they married Wives; they were given in marriage, until the day that Noah
entered into the Ark, and the Flood came and destroyed them all. The old World
was very licentious, and secure in the days of Noah; though universal ruins
and destruction were so near, yet it being a thing which was unseen, they did
not expect it, nor take any care to prevent it. It is said of Noah, Heb. 11. 7.
That by faith being warned of God; of things not seen as yet, moved with fear,
he prepared an Ark to the saving of his house: By faith he knew that the Flood*
would come, when there was no appearance of it, nor possibility, in regard of
the ordinary way of the working of second causes; he believed it, because God
who could effect it, and who cannot lie, had foretold it; and therefore he
prepared, according to Gods direction, this great Vessel, to defend himself and
Family, and some living Creatures of every kind* against the Waters, which he
foresaw were coming upon the Earth; but the ungodly World, having no eye of
says, could not discern this unseen thing; it is most likely they heard often
of it by Noah, who was a Preacher of righteousness; but they did not believe
it, therefore they did not expect it, nor fear it, nor prepare for it: they
a^e, and drank, and slept, and ^in^d as if no such thing had been coming upon
them: It is likely, when they saw Noah build the Ark, such a large and
capacious Vessel, on the dry Land, that they scoffed at him, and accounted him
no better than a madman, as we should do a Man that should build a Ship on the
top of a Mountain, and expect that Waters should come up thither, and waft it
away.

But when the days of a hundred and twenty years, which the Lord had appointed
the old World to continue, after his threatening of their destruction, were
expired; when the decree had brought forth, and the year of Gods recompense was
come, and the day of his fierce anger, wherein he sent the Flood upon the
Earth, O the terror and amazement which did surprise the secure sinners of the
World at that time! when the Windows of Heaven were opened from above, out of
which God looked forth upon sinners, with such a furious countenance, and
poured forth his anger in such streams of water; and the Fountains of the
great deep were opened from beneath, and the Flood began to arise, and lif^ up
the head, and swell about them; when the Valleys were filled with running
Waters, and the Plains were covered, as if they had been a S^^; when this enemy
did combine so many Forces together (having a Commission from God to destroy)
and strengthened it self on every side, and environed these rebellious sinners
round about, and assailed them in every quarter; when not only smaller Cottages
were over turned, but also the streams brake in with irresistible force upon
the strongest and greatest edifices; when great Doors were lifted off of their
hinges, or broken to pieces, and the Water (like a Thief) climbed in at the
Windows, and roaring all about with a hideous noise, pursued those which fled
from it, following them up stiars, even to the highest room until it had
overtaken them, and devoured them without mercy; think what a hurry and
affright the World was in at that time; how every one shifted for himself, if
possible, to preserve himself from the fury of this Conqueror; how they forsook
the lower grounds, and flocked together to the Hill-Countreys in great have,
leaving their substance behind them, with a sad heart; how they were drenched
with the Rain from Heaven, and wet to the skin as they went along, and scarcely
were able to take breath, the storms was so impetuous about them; and when
they perceived the Flood to beset the highest Mountains, (whither some of them
were fled, and upon the top of which some of them had climbed, hoping (it may
be) that they had got unto an inaccessible place) and that the billows were
mounting toward them; and now the whole World sees their death and ruin to
be inevitable, that there was ^o contending with, no resisting or flying from
these armed Waters, which God had sent to execute his vengeance upon them for
their sins; we may imagine something of the horrible perplexity of their
minds: O how did they look one upon another, when such a judgment as this was
come upon them which they never looked for! how did they speak! how did they
weep! how did they cry and shreek! what distress was there then upon all
Nations, and how did their hearts fail them* and sink within them through fear,
when they looked upon the flood that was come upon the earth; when they heard
the winds blowing, and waves roaring, and saw no way of escaping? Then they
which had heard Noah foretell and threaten them with this judgment* too late
believed the truth of his words, which before they did not regard* then they
which had seen Noah b^ild the Ark, and had accounted him no better than mad,
were convinced of their own f^lly and madness, that they did not with him take
some course for the defense of themselves at this time; the^ thoy were
persuaded of Noah ^s wisdom above all others on the earth* and could have
wished that they had imitated his wisdom, in building for themselves such
another Ark, or that they were with him in his; and possible some, when the
waters were come, and Noah was shut in by God i^ his Ark* might run to the
place and endeavor to clamber into it, and he washed off with the stream.

Thus will it be at the second coming of the Lord Jesus Christ to judgment,
his coming will be sudden and unexpected: the wicked of the earth will be
eating and drinking, marrying and giving in marriage; they will be as sensual
and sinful, and as secure withal, as they are at this day; they are told
frequently, by the preaching of the word, that the day of Judgment is
appointed, and that it hastneth greatly; that the Lord Jesus Christ will come,
and that he will come quickly; but they want faith to believe it, and therefore
they do not expect it, nor fear it, nor prepare for it: It is said, Luke 18. ^.
When the Son of Man comes, shall he find faith on the earth? Some interpret
this place as spoken not of Christ's second personal coming to judgment; but of
his coming in a way of eminent deliverance of his people from the cruelty and
oppression of their enemies, which will be so strange and unexpected, because
they shall be brought so low, insomuch that there will hardly be faith in any
to believe a deliverance. Others interpret this place, as speaking of Christ's
last appearance to judgment; that the earth will then be generally secure* and
that wicked men, and unbelievers, and oppressors of Gods people will abound,
and that true believers will be rare, and very hardly to be sound: I shall not
determine which is the true sense of the place, but sure I am the wicked will
be many, and very secure at the day of Christ's appearance; though the wicked
be forewarned of this day, yet they do not believe this thing, than which
nothing is more certain; the wicked, which are mingled amongst Gods people,
think strange that they do not run with them unto the same excess of riot; they
look upon them as no better than fools, and people besides themselves, when
they see them deny themselves, slight the pleasures and profits, and vanities
of the world, and are so sollicitous above all other things to prepare and Ark
for the saving of their souls, to get an interest in Jesus Christ, typified by
the Ark, that under his shelter they may be defended from the storm of Gods
wrath, which shall beat upon the head of the wicked at the last day. The wicked
do expect Christ's coming no more than the old world did the Flood in the
^^^yes of Noah.

But when the time which the Lord has appointed the world to continue, is
expired and the Angel has lifted up his hand to Heaven, and sworn by him that
lives for ever and ever, that time shall be no longer; when the mystery of God
is finished, and all the things to be done in the world are accomplished, and
the day of judgment of old ordained, is now come* and Christ has received his
commission from his Father to summon all to his judgment seat: O the dread that
will on that day fall upon the wicked tribes of the earth! when they shall see
the heavens opened above, and such a glorious Majesty, with such a glorious
Train appear in the air; and when the earth and the graves shall be open
beneath and all the dead bodies of all generations shall be raised and come
forth and some of them shall be caught up to meet the Lord in the Clouds, and
themselves with the most to be left behind; and when they feel the wrath of God
to begin to assail them like a flood, and to be poured into their souls like
water; when they see Christ coming in flaming fire to take vengeance upon them
for their sins: O this will be an unexpected and terrible appearance, and so
much the more terrible, by how much the less expected: Then they will not
endeavor^r to climb up mountains, but to creep under them to bide them from the
wrath of the Lamb* but all to no purpose, no mountain will receive them, for
all the mountains, and earth it self, with the heavens, will flee away from the
face of the Lord Jesus Christ, when his Throne is set for Judgment, Rev. 20.
11. they will then look about them, and perceive all refuge to fail them, and
no way of escaping for them; then they will with grief remember the warnings
which they had of these things, and be ve^^^d at the very heart that they did
not take warning; then they will wish for an Ark; and O that they had a^
interest in Jesus Christ* and they will account believers, whom once they
esteemed as fools and mad men, to have been the wisest people upon the earth;
and O that they were in their condition! possibly some may endeavor to clamber
up into the Air with them, when they are ascending to their Lord; but they will
have weights sufficient to keep them down. The dread of sinners at the last
day* when Christ does come so suddenly and unexpectedly will be far greater
than the dread of the old World in the days of the Flood.

4. And lastly, to name no mo^e, the suddenness and unexpectedness of Christ's
coming is set forth by the raining of Fire and Brimstone from Heaven upon
Sodom, and Lots going out of that wicked place, Luke 17. 28,29,30. Likewise as
it was in the days of Lot, they did eat, they drank, they bought, they sold,
they planted, they builded: But the same d^y that Lot went out of Sodom it
rained Fire and Brimstone from Heaven. and destroyed them all: Even thus shall
it be in the day when the Son of man shall be revealed. The Sodomites were
notoriously wicked, they were worse than beasts, they would have effected
violence, and buggered the very Angels which were sent 10 Lot; they were
generally wicked, there were not so many as ten righteous persons in the place,
though righteous Lot dwelt amongst them; it is likely there was not one
righteous person, besides what was in Lots family; and though they were so
wicked, and the cry of their sins was gone up to Heaven and the Lord was
provoked unto so great displeasure by them; yet they are jovial and secure;
they did not think in the midst of their peace, that sudden destruction was so
near; Abraham with his servants had not long before delivered them out of the
hand of Chedorlaomer, (against whom they had rebelled) and Am^aph^l, and the
other Kings which had conquered them, and sack^ the place; they did not think
of a more furious enemy, who was arming himself against them, even the King of
Heaven, against whom they had worse rebelled, and out of whose hands none could
deliver them: They ate, and they drank, they did not think that their flesh,
and all the provisions thereof should so soon be deaoured by fl^mes; they
bought, and they sold, they did little expect that both money and merchandise
should be consumed so suddenly; they planted and they builded, they did no^ in
the least imagine that instead of showers of Rain from Heaven to water their
Plants, to them make grow, they should have showers of Fire and Brimstone to
(...) up their plants, and burn down their houses to the ground. The Sodomites
did not in the least look for such a Judgment as this: it is said, Genesis 19. 14.
That Lot went out and spoke to his sons in Law, which had married his
daughters, and said up* get you out of this place, for the Lord will destroy
this City: but he seemed as one that mocked unto his sons in (...) His words
were unto them like idle tales, which they did not believe, other ways they
would not have remained in the place until they had been consumed; and if Lot's
sons in Law, (who in likelihood were some of the best of the place) did not
believe nor expect the judgment; though they were forewarned by their Father;
much less did the rest of the Sodomites expect it, that had not before heard of
it. This Fire from Heaven was altogether unexpected in Sodom.

But the same day that Lot went out of Sodom, it rained Fire and Brimstone upon
them, and destroyed them all. The morning was clear, when Lot went forth, and
the Sun did shine with a glorious brightness, when he got into Zoar; but then
we (...) imagine that a strange darkness did quickly fill the Heavens, when the
Lord came down clothed with vengeance as with a garment, and wrapped in thick
clouds of the sky; when the Lord thundered in the Heavens, and the highest gave
his voice, Hailstones and coals of fire; when the Lord rained. Fire and
Brimstone upon the place; Who can utter the horrible perplexity of the
Sodomites on that day, under this ^n bought of, unexpected, sudden* and so
dreadful un-heard of Judgment? when they opened their windows and doors of
their houses in the morning, and perceived the fashion of the Heavens to be
altered and the tempest of Fire and Brimstone to beat in upon them so forely
and suddenly; when the air was strangely converted into fire, and such scalding
sulphurious matter enkindled by the breath of God did fall upon them; when the
whole place was put into flames together; and every house was set on Fire by
this Fire from Heaven; when they saw if they went forth of doors, they should
be burnt by the fire of Heaven, if they stayed within, they should be burnt by
the fi^e of their houses; when-there was such a dreadful burning heat by the
Fire, accompanied with such a stinking, noisome, suffocating smoke by the
brimstone; when there was a little kind of Hell in that place born for torment
and sin; O the Dread of the Sodomites at that time! then those beasts which
would have forced themselves into Lots doors, to commit leudness, and were
stricken by the Angels with blindness, when they began to feel the violence of
this Fire, and their pampered flesh began to be roasted by these flames, how did
they howl like Dogs, how did they roar and yell with anguish and horror? Then
all the sinners of the place, whose sins before went up with such a loud cry
into the ears of God, what a loud cry did they send forth out of every house
under the sense of their torments? then the sons in law of Lot, who were
forewarned, I believe, were above others perplexed and filled with unspeakable
vexation, that they did not hearken to the voice of their Father, and remove
with him from that place before the Fire came; then they knew he did not mock
them, but was in good earnest, and that his words were not idle tales, but the
truth of Gods intention, which he was sent to give them notice of: Sodom is now
made a fiery Furnace, and all the wicked of the place are consumed together
suddenly and unexpectedly.

Even thus will it be in the day when the Son of Man shall be revealed, when
the Lord Jesus Christ shall come to Judgment. The world is very wicked, and the
longer it does continue, the worse it grows; the fins of the wicked world, like
the sins of Sodom have gone up with a loud Cry of God; and the Lord has
exercised his patience a long time to lead them unto repentance; and if there
had not been some righteous persons on the Earth, the day of Judgment would
have been long ago; if there had not been some Lots in Sodom, I mean some Elect
Persons in their sins* that are yet to be called, and some as yet un-born, that
must be gathered, the World would ere this have been consumed for the
wickedness thereof; there is a measure appointed for the Worlds sins, which
will be filled up* and there is a number appointed of chosen Persons, who ere
long will be brought in, and so soon as Lot is got into Zoar, God rains Fire
and Brimstone on Sodom; and I conceive that so soon as all the Elect Persons
are got into Christ, (...) then Christ will appear to Judgment; and as it was
in the days of Lot, so will it be on the day of Christ's appearance; the wicked
of the World will be secure, eating and drinking, buying and selling, planting
and building.

The day before Christ comes will be a merry day with some ungodly sinners,
they will be eating and drinking, feasting and carouzing, singing and
rejoicing, and putting the evil day far from them; even when it is so very
near* but how will their cheer be changed the next morning* how will their
singing be turned into howling, and their joy into heaviness and dreadful
terror?

The day before will be a gainful day, it may be with many in their buying and
selling, possibly they may have got a good bargain in their buying and got good
profit in their selling; and it may be a busy day with others in their
planting and building, which may fill their time and thoughts with Worldly,
care and contrivements for many years to come, little thinking that the World
is not of a years, nor two days standing longer, but O what terror will seize
upon these Worldings the next morning, when Christ does appear to judge them!
and they find, that whilst they have gained something in the World, which they
cannot now keep, and will yield no profit in this day of wrath, that then have
lost their souls and happiness for ever, which they cannot regain; that whilst
they have been busy about trifles, they have neglected the one thing
necessary; then they will wish, that instead of planting Trees in their Ground,
they had spent their time in getting grace planted in their hearts; that
instead of building Houses for their bodies, they had laid a good foundation
for this time, and got a title to the building of God, the House not made with
hands, which is durable and eternal.

The day before Christ's coming will be a sinning day with all the wicked, and a
day of general security; some will be swearing and cursing, others will be
oppressing and grinding the faces of the poor, others will be reproaching and
persecuting of Gods people; and the very night before, it may be many wicked
Persons may be got together Carding, and Dicing, and Drinking all night unto
Drunkenness, and others may be got into the unclean Bed, and there lie in their
filthiness, and all will be sleeping in sin and security; but the sound of the
last Trumpet will startle and awaken them all; when sinners open their eyes on
this morning, and see the Heavens open before them, and the Lord Jesus Christ
des^^nd in such glory as has been described, none can utter that their
perplexity will be at that day; and the suddenness of Christ's coming will make
their horror the greater; some of them were told of this day of Fire, when the
Heavens should pass away with a great noise, and the Elements should melt with
fervent heat* and the Earth ^with the works thereof) should he burnt up* and
what course they should take to escape the vengeance of this day; they were
persuaded to leave their sins* to (...) from the wrath to come, to hasten out
of Sodom, if they would not be consumed in its flames, to get away* and not
look ^^ck to flee presently into Z^ar where only they could be hid, to get into
the City of refuge, if they would escape the vengeance which did pursue them
which had them* upon the chase; they were invited into Gods Family, and into
the arms of his mercy; they were invited unto Christ, and to partake of his
grace fre^l^; they were told again, and again, if they did go on in the way of
sin that iniquity would be their ruin, that so long as they did abide in a
state of impenitency and unbelife, that the wrath of God did abide on them;
they were told how sweet a Savior the Lord Jesus Christ was, and how ready he
would be to receive them, if they ^^^plyed themselves by faith, with repentance
for sin unto hi^; and they were told how furious and inexorable a Judge he
would be, and what vengeance he would take upon them at the last day, if they
did not take warning in the day of grace, which they had allowed them; they
were told that Hell Fire was very hot and intolerable, and that Heavens
pleasures were very sweet, and m^st desirable, and they were earnestly
entreated to (...) from the former, and accept of the latter, upon the most
reasonable t^rmes on which they were proffered* But they were like Lot^s Sons
in Law they did not believe: Ministers which warned them, seemed in their eyes,
as if they had mocked them* their words seemed like idle tales; whatever have
the Lots made* out of Sodom, they would not (...); they did not look after a
Z^ar to fly unto; they hug^^d their sins and would not leave them; they heard
of Christ, (...) they neglected, slighted refused him; the did not apprehend
(...) need, which they had of a Savior; they were fearless of future wrath and
careless of the salvation and happiness of their souls. But when Christ does
come down so suddenly and unexpectedly to judge and condemn them, and shall
cast them into the Lake, which burns with Fire and Brimstone; then they will
remember these things with vexation far greater than that of Lots Sons in Law,
(when Fire and Brimstone was rained from Heaven upon them) who would not
hearken to the counsel of their Father to escape it.

CHAP. XIII. The Application.
T He Lord Jesus Christ will certainly and quickly appear. The day is appointed
by the eternal and unalterable decree of God, and he has revealed the thing,
though not the time, in his word of truth; the day approaches, it cannot be
far off; time is flying away upon swift wings; the day of the World is almost
spent, the shadows of its evening are stretched forth to a great length; yet
a little while, and Christ will be here; he will appear in his glory; never did
eye of Man behold such glory and majesty in the greatest earthly Potentate, as
will be seen in the Lord Jesus Christ on this day; all the state and pomp, and
splendour, and glittering glory, which some Princes have been decked withal in
their Triumphant shows, is no more to be compared with the pomp and (...) of
the Lord Jesus Christ in this appearance; than the shining of a Candle, or
Glowworm, or rotten stick in the night, is to be compared with the shining of
the Sun in its noonday glory: Ere long the great Gates of Heaven will life up
their heads, and those everlasting Doors (within which Christ does, for the
present, remain) will be opened; and then this King of Glory will come forth,
and come down with mavelous splendor and brightness of Majesty; It is said,
Psalm 47. 5. God is gone up with a shout, the Lord with the sound of the
Trumpet* then God will come down with a shout, the Lord with the sound of a
Trumpet, (...) These. 4. 16. The Chariots of the Lord are twinty thousand, even
thousands of Angels: Psalm. 68. 17. All the holy Angels shall attend upon him,
and blow the Trumpet before him, at this last Assize, to awaken and summon the
World to judgment: then the Sun in the Firmament will be darkened, when this
more glorious Sun does appear; then the whole frame of Heaven will shake* and
the foundations of the Earth will be moved, the everlasting Mountains will bow,
and the perpetual Hills will shrink; yea the Heavens will pass away with a
great noise, and like a s^roll be rolled together, and the Elements will melt
with fervent heat, and the Eeath will be on Fire, and every Mountain and Island
will flee away from before his sace; then the Sea will roar, and all living
Creatures, likely, will be in a strange consternation; the^ the wicked Tribes
of the Earth will mourn, and the Saints will rejoice at this glorious
appearance of the great God, and their Savior.

But who will be alive on this glorious day? who will be the Spectators of
these treat things? whose eyes shall behold this blessed fight? who will see
the Lord Jesus come in such glory? many Kings and Prophets, and righteous M^n
desired to see Christ came in the flesh, and did not see him; and to hear the
things which he taught, but they did not obtain their desire; many Generations
were asleep in their Graves before Christ's first appearance; the righteous saw
him afar off, and darkly in types and figures; few lived in the days when our
Saviors abode was upon the Earth* he had not many Disciples when be made happy
with his personal acquaintance and abode with them; A great access there has
been since Christ's departure unto the Church who though they have loved him,
and believed in him, yet they never saw him with bodily eyes; Three things one
desired to see, Christ in the flesh, Paul in the Pulpit, and Rome in its glory;
but past things are out of sight, and the wishes of such things are to no
purpose; death has closed the eyes of many millions of Christ's Disciples, who
have heard the report of him, but never saw him: And is not their hopes of
seeing Christ perished in the Graves with their bodies* which are turned into
rottenness and putrefaction? and are not we all hastening toward those dark
Chambers, where ^o beam of light does shine, and nothing can be seen? the
righteous indeed which remain, when Christ does come down, will be happy, when
they see their Lord in the air, but if we die before the time, what shall we be
the better?

Beloved, let me tell you, or rather believe the Word of God, which does tell
you, that all of you will be spectators of the great things which shall come to
pass at the last day (...) all Generations of Men and Women that ever lived
upon the face of the Earth, and are sleeping in the d^st, shall then be
awakened, and raised, and be alive together, and you shall be found alive
amongst them: that which our Savior spoke to the chief Priests and Elders of
the Jews, before whom he was accused, and (...) as a prisoner. Hereafter ye
shall see the Son of Man fitting at the right hand of Power, and coming in the
Clouds of Heaven: Matthew. 26 64 The same may I say unto all you that hear me
this day, hereafter ye shall see the Son of Man coming in the Clouds of
Heaven: Rev. 1. 7. Behold he comes with Clouds, and every eye shall see him.
These very eyes with which you look upon me, or one upon another, shall fee the
Lord Jesus Christ come in the air; these very ears with which you hear me
preach this Doctrine unto you, shall hear the sound of the last Trumpet, and
the great shout with which Christ will descend out of his Fathers Palace into
this inferior World; these very bodies which are standing or fitting in this
place, must stand before Christ's Tribunal Seat a^ the last Day.

Death has a Commission from God to pull you out of your habitations and drag
your bodies into its Prison, and this enemy is upon the way and has you all in
pursuit, and how near he is come to your Doors you do not know; his arrows are
flying about your ears, and you will be smitten sooner or later either when
you are younger or elder, no^e can escape his stroke; ^ow time is wasting, your
Glass is running, and ere long you will be expiring your last breath and these
bodies which you are clothing and feeding and providing for every day, will
lie a dying and be carried by your mourning friends, to your Graves; And as
certain as Death, so certain will your Resurrection be at Christ's coming*
Christ has received a Commission from God to judge the World, and he will come
down from Heaven with the Keys of Death and Hell, and open the Doors, where
you shall have your lodging, and bring you forth to judgment; I must awake on
that day if I fall a sleep into my Grave before; and arise, and give an account
of my self, and the souls committed to my charge unto my Lord and Master; and
you m^st awake also, and give an account of your selves and actions, un to this
glorious Judge: your lives then will be reviewed, your actions will be
examined, and it will be known then what you have been doing ever since you
came into the World, how you have spent your time; how you have improved the
seasons and means of grace; then it will appear who are Christ's sh^^^ and who
the Goats, however they now flock together sometimes in one Company; who are
wise, and who the foolish Virgins, however now all have Lamps shining; then it
will be known who have been wise unto salvation, who have made their peace with
God in the way who have furnished their hearts with grace laid up their
treasure in Heaven, and improved their talents for their Mast^rs use upon the
Eearth, and who have foolishly slipped and sinned away the Harvest, and day of
grace, neglecting Christ and the things which belonged to their peace and
happiness, unt^ll^^hey were hid from their eyes, who have been hypocrites and
unbeli^v^rs* and served diverse lusts, instead of serving the Lord of life and
glory; and all ungodly sinners will be found out and punished: then all of you,
yea the whole World will believe the doctrine, which we now preach concerning
the vanity of the Creatures the evil of sin, the necessity of Christ* the
excellency of grace, the happiness of Gods Children; and O what will the pardon
of sin, the favor of God the least measure of grace be worth then? our
doctrine concerning these things is as true now, and the worth of Christ and
grace, and salvation as great, though then M^ns valuation will be greater,
because the worth will be more apparent*

But give me leave to apply this Doctrine concerning the certainly and
speediness of the coming of Christ to Judgment.

1. To Sinners. 2. To Believers. 3. To B^th.
1. I shall speak to sinners.

1. To discover them. 2. To awaken them. 3. To exhort them.
1. For the Discovery of sinners.

Will the Lord Jesus Christ certainly and quickly appear to Judgment? and must
the whole World be summoned unto his Ba^? surely then it does above all things
concern all of you to sit down, and consider how you are provided for this day;
all of you will be spectators of Christ, and his glory on that day; but you
will not be idle spectators* as some times you have been of great shows in the
City, whilst it (...) yet standing, which have passed away, and you have gone
away without much regard of the things you have seen No, you will all be most
highly concerned in this appearance of Christ, more then Person s, who are to
be tried for their (...), are concerned at the appearance of the Judge, who
comes to pass sentence upon them; you will all be tried on that day, and your
everlasting weal, or woe, will depend upon the account you shall give, and the
sentence which shall be pronounced upon you by the great Judge: therefore let
me, beseech you all to examine your selves, whither you are prepared for this
day of Judgment; it will be a woeful day to such sinners, whom the Lord Jesus
will condemn unto everlasting torments; and are there no such Persons amongst,
you? are there no ungodly ones gathered together into this place? are all of
you Saints and Children of God? if you are not such, you will wish you had been
such at that time? but are you all such now? the worst of you may be such, if
you seriously, diligently, and timely (...) such a privilege but are you such
yet? are there not (...) here, whom the Lord Jesus Christ will come in flaming
(...) to take vengeance upon? It would take up too much room to speak of all
these sinners whom Christ will condemn; especially having already* spoken
particularly of them under the conviction* But briefly and more summarily for
the discovery of such Persons that you may examine your selves whether you are
in their number; The sinners which Christ will condemn at his appearance may be
known by these Charactors: They are, 1 Carnal. 2 Sensual. 3 Earthly. 4 Devilish.


1. Christ will condemn such as are Carnal; I mean such as are in the flesh,
such as a^e in the state of nature, such as never were regenerated or born
again by the Word and Spirit; as never have had experience of a work of grace
upon their hearts; such as are blind, and never had their eyes opened to see
their sin, and their Savior, who are ^^^^filed up in the darkness and
hoodwinked with the vail of ignorance and unbelief, and upon whose eyes there
are such thick scales, that the glorious light of the Gospel has never been
discerned by them in a spiritual and saving way; such who are asleep, and never
had their consciences awakened out of their carnal security, whose consciences
are feared as with a hot I^on, and permit them to sin with little check o^
control: such who are dead in sin, and never were quickened by the Spirit of
life; such as are slaves to their losts* and under the reigning power of sin,
and never were delivered from this worse than Turkish bondage; that never were
converted, and savingly changed; never were humbled and emptied of themselves,
never truly repented, and mourned for sin, never were powerfully drawn unto,
and savingly closed with Jesus Christ; that never were renewed in their minds
and hearts, transformed after the Image of God, transplanted into the garden of
the Lord, (...) engrafted into the new stock; such in whom all old things
remain, and are wholly carnal, in the same state in which they were first born;
their persons will all be conde^^^^ by the Judge* John 3. 3. Matthew. 13. 3. Romans
8. 13. 2 (...) 5. ^. Ephesians 4 22,23,24. 1 Cor. 15. 50. Matthew. 5. 8. Heb. 14. 14.
(...) 13. 3. (...). 21. 27.

2. Christ will condemn the Sensual: I mean such who are (...) from denying
themselves, crucifying the flesh, mortifying the deeds of the body, taking up
the cross, walking in the narrow way of strict obedience, striving to enter in
at the strait gate, which alone can bring unto eternal life and happiness, and
subjugating their thoughts, will, and affections unto the government of Christ,
and so living as if they were his servents indeed whose name they hear; that
they labor either to imprison, or banish, or hide themselves from the light of
those truths which would teach them these things, to bribe or muzzle conscience
which would urge them, yea to shake off the government of reason it self, which
would put a curb upon them, and so give up themselves to licentiousness, making
provision for the flesh, to fulfill the lusts thereof with all greediness; such
who are so far degenerated and fallen from that primitive holiness which nature
was endued with at the first creation, that they have lost the relicts of Gods
Image and blotted out the characters of his law engraven upon the hearts of all
men, and have made themselves like beasts, yea more vile than the beasts that
perish; such are they that are sensual and luxurious, and seek for their
chiefest happiness in pleasing their sensual appetites; such are drunkards, and
gluttons, and adulterers, who wallow in the mire of such sins, who spend their
days in such pleasures, and gather as much of them as they can find, without
any regard to Gods Law, which does forbid them, or to those higher, sweeter
pleasures which they are capable of, and might obtain if they did seek after
them in the way which God has appointed; All these which fulfill the desires of
the flesh are children of wrath, Ephesians 3. 3. and they which please themselves,
and live deliciously here, will have torment and sorrow given them by Christ at
his appearance, Rev. 18. 7. Luke 6. 25.

3. Christ will condemn the Earthly, such who lay up for themselves treasures
on earth, and neglect the heavenly treasure, Matthew. 6. 19. 20. (...) love the
world, and things in the World, and have no true love to the Father, who is the
God of love, and the chief good of mankind, 1 John 2. 15. All covetous,
worldlings will be condemned by Jesus Christ for their heart Idolatry, Ephesians. ^.
5,6. especially unjust and unrighteous persons, oppressors and extortioners;
earth will be all the portion of such who make choice of it, no room will be
found for them in the Kingdom of heaven, 1 Cor. 6 10.

4. Christ will condemn the Devilish; all such as are children of the devil as
hear his Image, and do his work, that yield themselves to be his slaves and
servants, and endeavor the promotion of the interest of his Kingdom; all such
(...) are under the power of Devilish pride and Devilish envy, and Devilish
malice; all Devilish l^ars, and Devilish slanderers and Devilish persecutors of
Gods people: In a word, all such persons as live in a course of sin, and never
brake off the trade thereof by repentance, and obtained a pardon of sin through
faith, and yielded up themselves unto the obedience of the Gospel will (...)
condemned by Christ at his appearance.

(...) loved, examine your selves seriously hereby, and what has (...) before
said, whether you are not in the number of these persons; whether none of you
are carnal, in a state of nature; whether none of you* are sensual or earthly:
whether none of you are children of the Devil: whether none of you are
Drunkards, Adulterers, Lya^s, slanderers, unjust, unrighteous, and withal
impenitent persons, unbelievers, and children of disobedience, against whom the
wrath of God will be revealed, when (...) Lord Jesus Christ shall be revealed,
from Heaven to Judgment.

2. For the awakening of sinners. Will the Lord Jesus Christ certainly and
quickly appear to judgment? methinks ^his doctrine should awaken sleepy
sinners, and aron^e them our of their carnal security^y. Does conscience accuse
you, and secretly tell any of you, that you are in the number of those persons
whom the Lord will condemn at the last day; and sentence unto Hell; methinks it
should make you startle, and look about you; methinks it should make your hair
stand an end, and every joint to tremble; methinks it should fill you with
fear* and imprint such trouble upon your spirits, as would damp all your
earthly comforts (...) delights, to consider the danger which ye are in by
reason (...) sin, the guilt of which does still lie upon you. Every word of
this Doctrine is awakening

1. Awake sinners, Awake! Christ will appear to judgment. Christ will appear,
whom you have read of, and heard of, and have had frequent proffers of, but
could never be prevailed to accept of; Christ will appear in his glory, in whom
you could see no beauty, or desirableness* Christ will appear as a Judge, whom
you might have had for your Savior. Sinners, the Judge of the whole world will
appear, and can you sleep under the guilt of sin? He will be a most glorious,
powerful, wise, holy, righteous, strict, furious, inexorable Judge, as has
been shown. And yet are you secure and fearless? you have heard God's terrible
voice in the City, and that has not awakened you; and will not Christ's
appearance to Judgment awaken you neither? You have been asleep under the sound
of temporal judgments, and can you sleep under the thoughts of the last
judgment, when the punishment, which shall then be inflected, will be eternal?

2. Awake, sinners Awake! Christ will certainly appear to Judgment; if there
were only a peradventure of Christ's coming to Judgment, methinks it should
awaken the guilty, but (...) there is a certainty of it, how should it awaken
you? as certainly as God is true, as certainly as the Scriptures are his (...)
as certainly as you are creatures and sinners; so certainly (...) the Lord
Jesus Christ appear to judge the ungodly World for (...) at the last day
England has of late been under the stroke (...) several temporal Judgments;
and England is in danger of further and ^reater calamities; God may (...) a
more bitter (...) into our hands to drink, than yet we have tasted (...) the
^^^ger of which should awaken secure sinners, because They cannot promise to
themselves any shelter at such a time: yet there is a possibility that the Lord
may be entreated to spare* and put up his Sword, and prevent our ruin, which
we have deserved; but the day of Judgment is most certain; God, who cannot
change, has decreed it: God, who cannot lie, (...) it; the iniquities of the
World, which are great, (...) it; therefore it must be, the day will certinly
come; (...) yet can you sleep in sin? If a Thief knew after he had robbed his
neighbor, that he should certainly be taken and judged and condemned, and
punished, it would affright him; you may know that Christ will certainly come
to judgment, and that all guilty sinners shall be brought forth and condemned,
and should not this awaken you, especially fince if you fleep on, your
damnation and eternal punishment will be certain?

3. Awake sinners, Awake! Christ will Quickly appear to Judgment. The coming of
the Lord draws nigh* the Judge ^undeth at the Door; the Lord will suddenly
come down; when you least expect it, the Lord may be here; and can you sleep,
when the appearance of Christ is so sure, and so near too? can you sl^moer,
when your judgment lingr^th not, and your damnation slumbreth not? If the day
of general Judgment should be protracted for some time longer, until all the
Elect be gathered, and the things foretold in the Word, be fulfilled; yet your
time for preparation may be almost spent, you may suddenly go down into your
Graves, where there is no operation; and can you sleep in sin, when you are
liable every day to the stroke of death, which will (...) you off from all
opportunities of making your peace with God for ^ver, and deliver you up at the
last day into the hands of the Judge, under the same guilt as it found you when
it first laid ^^s arrest upon you?

4. Awake sinners, Awake! when Christ does appear, Ye also shall appear; when
Christ is descended from Heaven, ye shall be raised from the Earth; you shall
be awakened out of the sleep of death, and will not you be awakened out of the
sl^ep of (...)? If there were any hopes, that by getting into your Graves
before this day, you could hide your selves, and lie buried there for ever, you
might be the more secure; but when your death is not more certain, than your
Resurrection will be, when the appearing of Christ to Judgment is not more
certain, that your appearance on that day to be judged, you have reason to
shake off sleep and bethink your selves how you are provided; Death will (...)
terrible to you if it come with the sting of sin in its month, if it sho^t its
poisoned arrows into you; but your Resurrection will be a thousand fold more
dreadful if you awake at the last day with the guilt of sin in your
consciences; Sinners, think what terrors will invade you, when you are raised
out of your (...), when you first lift up your heads and eyes to Heaven, and
see the Lord Jesus Christ, the glorious Judge of the World, come down with
millions of mighty Angels, clothed with vengeance, like flames of Fire, and
look down with a furious countenance upon you; when in your rising you hear the
sound of the Trumpet, and such a shout given in the Air, as will make a Louder
noise, than if twenty thousand great pieces of Ordnance were shot off together,
just before you; when you have a summers given you and you are dragged with the
rest of the damned crew, which have lived in all ages of the World, to the
Tribunal Seat of Jesus Christ; O how will you quiver, and tremble, and be
filled with confusion then? and yet can you sleep securely now, as if you were
not at all concerned?

5. Awake sinners, Awake! when Christ does appear, you shall be Judged by him:
Then the Books will be opened, where all your actions are recorded; then your
(...) (now it may be forgotten and slighted) will be called to remembrance, and
your secret sins, which now you are (...) shamed of will then be manifest
before the whole World your old sins will be reviewed; your old uncleanness,
your old drunkenness, your old unrighteousness; and you will be made to hear of
all your sins, past and gone many years before, in such a manner, as shall make
your ^ares to tingle, your hearts to quake, and tremble; and when Gods justice
shall arraign you, and the Devil accuse you, and your conscience shall hear
witness against you, and the Lord Jesus Christ shall pronounce the Sentence
upon you, D^part from me ye cursed into everlasting Fire, prepared for the
Devil and his Angels* and the Saints it may be accompany him with a loud shour,
Even so Amen, or say with one voice, Go ye cursed into everlasting Fire, and
so pass from you into Heaven, and leave the Devil and his Angels to drag you
unto torments, and when you see there is no remedy, no reversing of your
condemnation, and the Devils seize upon you, and tear you, and hale you away. O
how terrible will this Judgment be unto you? O how will the terrors of the
All-mighty flow in upon you? how will your consciences gnaw, and sting, and
torment you? how will your spirits fa^l and s^nk within you, and hearts melt
like drops of water? How will you weep, and wail, and gnash your teeth? and cry
out in the fearfulness and horror of your spirits, Woe, woe, woe be unto us
that ever we were born! Woe, woe, woe be unto us that ever we have sinned!

6. Awake sinners Awake! The execution of the Sentence, which Christ will
pronounce upon you for your sins (...) the last day, will be in Hell: and do
you know what Hell is? what tongue can express the future torments, which the
damned shall endure? what heart can conceive the miseries, which God has
prepared for sinners in Hell? yet look into the Perspective-Glass of the Word,
and you may perceive something of the dreadfulness of the punishment, which
will be inflected upon you, if you be found in your sins at ^hrists second
appearance.

1. Sinners, consider he greatness of the punishment; you (...) dwell with
devouring Fire, and inhabit most horrible ^^^^ings; and think with your selves
how you will be able to endure, to have those bodies (unto whom the prick of
(...) ^in is so irksome, and a little scorch of a culinary Fire (...) so
painful cast into the great Furnace of Fire, which God will kindle with his
breath; which will turn them, it may he, into a burning Coal, that shall not
waste, neither ever be consumed; be sure will torment them with a thousand-fold
(...) accute sense of pain, than the body is capable now of ^eeling, under the
most exquisite torments; think what the (...) whelming grief, what the horrible
anxiety, what the despainful agonies, what the hideous torrour and
unexpressible anguish of your souls will be under the immediate sense of Gods
wrath and indignation, and the thoughts of that glory and happiness of Heaven
(once proffered unto you, but refused by you) which you will then perceive your
selves but out from for ever.

Awake sinners, Awake! will you sleep in sin until you are awakened in the
midst of flames? will you not leave off sinning, until you have sinned your
selves into Hell? will you needs run into these burnings? Awake! open your eyes
(...) look down, and see how deep the Pit is, (...) which you are leaping, it
is a bottomless Pit, from whence there will be no returning; consider how hot
the Fire of (...) will be unto which you are hastening, it will be an
inconceivable hot Fire, of which there will be no avoiding, if you go on in
that broad way of sin, which is leading you thereunto 2 Awake, and look up
sinners, there is a Door open, the Door of mercy is open, and the Door of
Heaven is open, and will you shut your eyes, and turn your backs upon God, and
refuse the proffers of Grace which are made to you? will you tramble Crowns
under your feet, and slight future glory and happiness, which now is possible
for you to obtain? will not this ^ear your hearts in Hell, to remember that you
have been, the cause of your own ruin, and brought misery upon your selves,
that you suffered your selves to be cheated by the Devil, and your own
deceitful lusts, of the unspeakable joys and glory of Heaven, which God did
once make tenders of unto you?

3. Sinners, consider the sureness of the punishment of Hell* it is m^st
certain that God has prepared such a punishment and it is certain that you
shall endure this punishment, if you abide under the guilt, and persevere in
the way of sin, which you are now walking in; God has threatened this
punishment, and, his justice does require it, and his truth does engage him to
execute his threa^ned wrath, and inflect this deserved punishment upon you; and
can you then have the least hopes to escape it? will God, can God prove a^^yar,
to save you from the torments of Hell? Is it not equal that you should reap
that which you have sown, that you should gather and taste the bitter fruits of
your own evil ways? if you sow to the flesh, will not torment be the fruit
hereof? if you sow sin, will not you reap Hell?

Awake sinners, Awake,! are not all your hopes of happiness in the uncertain
and empty Cisterns of the Creatures mere dreams, when such dreadful miseries
are so surely prepared for you? and what senseless dreams then are your hopes
of Heaven and Salvation; whilst you are going on i^ the way of sin to Hell, and
destruction? Is there any mercy for impenitents? Is there any pardon for
unbelievers? Do God love those which are haters of him? shall those live with
him, who have no likeness unto him? to join these things together which God
has never joined, is like the senseless fancies in the sleep of strange
Chimaeraes and Monsters, which nature never produced: Awake sinners, it is but
an idle fancy to join Heaven to the end of a sinful course; no! the foot steps
of sin will certainly take hold of Hell; and whi^hout holiness none shall see
God; and as one says, Sooner may Angels turn Devils Men Beasts and Beasts
stones and all the World just nothing, than that an unholy Person should have
an entrance into Heaven; yea, and that it is as possible that God should cease
to be God, a^ that any Men, not made after the Image of God, should be received
into the blessed V^^sion, Possession and fruition of him in Glory. Sinners, if
there be no room for you in Heaven, and your entrance there is impossible,
whilst you are in a state of nature; then your punishment in Hell is sure,
which methinks should awaken you.

3. Sinners, consider the neerness of the punishment of Hell: I mean the soul
punishment which will be the greatest part of he punishment; the perfect and
full punishment of body and soul cannot be fa^ off because the time of Christ's
coming is not f^r off; but the punishment of your souls will begin, so soon as
your lives come to an end; no sooner will your souls be separated from your
bodies, but they will appear before God, to receive their particular judgment;
and they will be banished his glorious and comfortable presence, and filled
with horror through the impressions of Gods wrath.

Awake sinners, Awake! You lie upon the brink of the Pit, you are sleeping over
the burning Lake; you are like Saylors, which drop asleep on the top of a Mast,
whom a great wind would blow into the Sea; so the wind of death, which may
suddenly beat upon you, will blow you into Hell, into the O^ean of Gods wrath;
and can you secure your selves a moment from the stroke of Death? when you are
most secure, may not death be most near? when you think you shall live many
years to eat, and drink and take your pleasure, like the rich fool in the
Gospel, may not death knock at your door that night, and break in upon you, and
fetch away your bodies to the grave, and Devils drag your souls to Hell?

Awake then, before you sleep the sleep of death, awake out of the sleep of
sin, think with your selves, this night we may be in Hell, and free, or rather
bound in Chains of Darkness and h^rrour amongst the damned; or tomorrow we may
be in torments with Cain and Judas, with the Devil and his Angels and therefore
give no^ sleep to your eyes, no^ slumber to your eve-lids, until you have
redeemed your selves out of the snare of the Devil and sin, as a Bird out of
the snare of the Fowler, or a Roe out of the hand of the hunter.

4. Sinners, consider the everlastingness of your punishment in Hell; when your
Souls a^e (...) in, they shall never come forth, until they are brought forth
unto the last Judgment at Christ's appearance; and when soul and body are
joined, and sentenced to this place of torment, and thrush into it, the Door
will be shut upon you, and you will be locked in, so that it will be impossible
for you to get forth for ever; your bodies as well as souls will be immortal
and the Fire of Hell will be everlasting, those flames will never be quenched,
and your torments will never be ended; when you have been ten thousand times
ten thousand millions of years in Hell, it will not bear the porportion of a
moment of time, to the unmeasurable space of Eternity, in which you must be
tormented for sin; your punishment will always be in the beginning of it,
never, never, never, will it come to a conclusion, nor you to any hopes of
(...) as long as God lives, and Heaven continues which will be for evermore, so
long will Hell continue, and you abide in extremity of torments, without any
possibility of release and deliverance.

Awake, sinners, Awake! think how horrible the thoughts of Eternity in Hell
will be; Extremity! and Eternity! will be the great aggravation of your misery;
methinks the danger of such torment should fill you with such fear and terror;
that nothing should be able to remove, until you had secured your selves by an
interest in him, who alone can deliver from the wrath to come; and yet can you
be secure, when you are in the greatest danger?

Awake, think whether the pleasures of si^ for a season, are to be compared
with the eternal torments of Hell; or the uncertain treasures of Earth with the
eternal store of Gods wrath, or the empty vanishing worldly honor, with the
exceeding and everlasting weight of misery, which the damned shall sink under
in H^ll? If any sleepy sinners begin to startle with such thunder (...) of
Judgment and being unwilling to part with their sins feel their hearts to rise
within them against the message and Messengers, for thrusting such harsh things
into their ears f^r ^^^^^sting their spirits, and d^st^rbing the peace which
they have ^^^herto had in their sinful way: cannot Ministers let us alone,
(...) they be called to an account for us? will they suffer for (...) and why
do they thus affright^us with Peales of Judgment? (...) loved, ^e Ministers are
set as Watchmen to sound the Trumpet, (...) warn (...) of Judgment, which if we
should neglect to do, (...) blood would be required at our hands, Ez^k 33. from
(...) first Verse to the 11. And we shall be called to an accounts for the
Souls committed to our charge, Heb. 1. 17. And (...) having notice given us by
God in his Word of the coming (...) to judge and punish the ungodly World at
the l^st day, (...) awing the terror of the Lord, how terrible the day of
(...) will be unto you if you be found amongst the ungodly and how terrible the
day will be unto us, if we be found unfaithful to your souls, we warn you, and
p^rswade you to flee from the wrath to come; and can you blame us then for
using harsh language, when we cannot omit it without danger to our selves (...)
(...) your souls? when otherwise we cannot be faithful to you (...) Master, who
has sent us to declare these things? (...) indeed (like some) flatter you, and
sooth you up in (...) of (...); we might speak smooth things unto you and
pro^^^^ (...); but what advantage would it be unto you to be (...) if you were
pleased with us, and did commend us (...) sure you would curse us for our
unfaithfulness here^^^^ (...) Sinners, it is not cruelty, but pity and mercy
to shoot (...) arrows of Gods threatenings into your consciences; it (...), but
sender love to your souls, that we endeavor to thrust the sword of the spirit
into your besomes, that if possible we might wound (...) the heart, and fetch
forth the blood thereof, as it were, which if it still live i^ you, will be
your ruin: Christ will certainly (...) quickly (...) (...), and when he does
appear, we shall appear to be (...) is (...) not good you should know it before
hand, that (...) ^^ght (...) prepared?

If any be so awakened by this Doctrine concerning Christ's coming to Judgment
that they begin to feed a sting and wou^d in their spirits, and are so
perplexed with (...) of being condemned for their sins which their consciences
do accuse them of that they know not what (...) do, yet are willing to take and
course to prevent (...) (...) And those dreadful miseries (...) they are in
danger of at that day* I shall speak unto (...) by way of Counsel and
Exhortation.

1. For the Exhortation of Sinners.

Will the Lord Jesus Christ certainly and quickly (...) to Judgment? there are
two things I would (...) unto, that they may escape the wrath of God (...) on
that day will be revealed and inflicted (...) wicked of the Earth.

1. Fl^e from Sin. 2. Flee unto Christ
If you would fl^e from wrath (...) Hell.

Or, (...) R^pent of Sin. 2. Get an interest in Christ.
And then you may be able to stand with (...) the Son of Man at his appearance;
yea, (...) sins be now, do these two things effectually, and (...) d^t^ appear
you also shall appear with him in glory.

1 Sinners repent of sin. Acts 17 30 31. God (...) all M^n every where to
repent, this is a (...) which (...) of all, Because he has appointed a day,
(...) he will judge the World in righteousness, etc. (...) Argument to enforce
the duty. It is your (...), because you have sinned, and God (...) to do it;
and it is your interest and concernment to repent, because God will judge the
World by Jesus Christ for sin, and condemn you if you be found impenitent.
Sinners, you have tasted the sweetness of sin, in the Commission of i^, O
labor ^o taste the bitterness of sin in your repentance for it; your sins have
been displeasing to the holy and jealous God; let them be displeasing to your
souls; your sins have wounded the Lord Lord Jesus Christ, let them pierce your
hearts; the spirit of God has been grieved and quenched by them, be you
grieved and troubled for them; grieve for sin, not only because of its
consequential evil, but also because of (...) intrinsecal evil; not only
because it is like to damn (...), but also because it has so much defiled you;
not only because it is likely to sink you into Hell amongst Devils, but also
because it has debased you, and made you more vile than the Beasts that perish.

Sinners mourn for sin: Be afflicted, mourn and weep: Let your laughter be
turned into mourning, and your joy into heaviness, Jam 4 9 Get your proud
hearts humbled, and your hard hearts broken for those sins whereby you have
broken Gods Law; get your hearts broken for sin, and get your hearts broken
from sin; Break off your sins by Repentance; Cast away all your transgressions
like mensturus clothes, saying, get you hence, Isai. 30. 22. Let the wicked
forsake his way, and the unrighteous man his thoughts, and turn to the Lord,
etc Isa. 55 7. Thrust these Inhabitants out of doors who have so long had
possession; suffer them not to lodge any longer within (...); remember that
they are Vipers which will (...) you, that they are enemies which will wound
and kill (...): Do not harbor sin any longer, do not entertain it (...) smiles
and a pleasing countenance, but with ^eares and ^^ownes: Get your hearts set
against sin; labor for deep rooted hatred of it, and accordingly behave your
selves toward it; get the strong holds of sin demolished (...) your hearts;
get the rooms in which your lusts have (...) defilement, washed with the ^eares
of Repentance, (...) the blood of Jesus Christ: let Christ have his Trone (...)
sin has reigned; let your thoughts and affections be brought into captivity
and obedience unto Jesus Christ: Keep the door of your hearts with all
diligence* least your old enemy enter again upon you: Flee from sin as from a
Cockatrice and if you be pursued, manfully resist, resist even unto blood,
striving against sin; never parley with sin, hearken not to any ^earms of
composition: Be not enticed unto sin by pleasing bai^s, neither be affrighted
to sin by frowns and threatenings: Fight the good fight of Faith; Turn by
repentance from sin, break off the course of sin, and walk not in the way
thereof, and turn by repentance unto the Lord; let the Biass of your hearts be
turned unto him; Deliver up your selves unto the obedience of his Law, yield
your selves unto God, etc Romans 6. This is Repentance. And that you may repent
of Sin:

1. Examine your selves: Christ will examine you at the last day, and you m^st
give an account unto him; examine your selves and call your selves to an
account, that you may repent and prevent the future misery which will be the
consequent of sin; Find out your sins that you may mourn and turn; that which
the eye sees not, the heart will no^, cannot be affected withal; Consult the
Register of your consciences, turn over the leaves and read what is recorded in
that Book: open your hearts to the beams of the light of the Word, and be ready
to receive the convictions of the Spirit; Find out your sins, your original
sin, the defilement of your natures, your actual sins, your great Conscience*
wounding sins; find ou^ your bosom-sins, which your hearts are most nearly
joined unto, and are most loath to part withal; find out your
Constitution-sins, your Calling-sins, the sins which bear the greatest sway,
and are most supported (...) the interest of the flesh, and your hearts are
ready to cloak and cover under the (...) of excuses and plausible pleas: Thin^
how you will be able to answer for them at the great Day, to the
Heart-searching Judge.

Sinners, find out your sins, otherwise your sins will (...) you out, and
Christ will find you out, and Wrath will (...) you out and then woe be unto
you.

2. Judge and condemn your selves for your sins: this (...) (...) way to escape
the judgment of God. 1 Cor. 11. 31. If you judge others, you shall be judged,
Matthew 7. 1. but if you judge your selves you shall escape; and therefore,

3. Make confession of sin; Spread the black Catalogue of your sins before the
Lord; come with ropes about your necks, and tears in your eyes, and sorrow in
your hearts unto the Throne of Grace, and fill your mo^^hes with humble
acknowledgements of your sins: rip up your hearts before the Lord (...) open
before him your soars: stand not in your own desence and justification, but
fall down Prostrate at God's feet, and confess what sinful natures you have,
what vile hearts what wicked lives you have lead; confess^^ how you have broken
his Law and disobeyed his Gospel, charge upon your selves the guilt of your
particular and most (...) sins, and do not extenuate but aggravate them with
all the circumstances you can think of; look upon your selves as cur^^d
wretches whilst under the guilt of sin, as miserable, (...) forlorn
creatures, whilst God is your enemy and his (...) abides on you; acknowledge
your sins and the (...) your sins, that you have deserved not only temporal
(...), but also eternal torments; that you have forfeited (...) outward
mercies, and are unworthly of the least grace (...) savor, much more unworthy
of eternal life. Lie very (...) before God, lick the dust; look upon your
selves as Worms, as Toads, yea as more vile and more full of ^^yson.

4. If under the view of sin and confession thereof, you find your hearts hard
and se^s^^sse like rocks, or Adamantine stones within your hearts, yet be not
discouraged; the sense of hard-nesse is some beginning of softness; but do not
rest in beginnings: take pains with them to get them (...) thoroughly* to get
them broken to pieces: Read and (...), and apply, and urge at the Throne of
Grace the (...) promise, (...). 36. 26. I will take away the stony (...) of
your flesh, and give you a heart of flesh. Be (...) of your own inability of
your selves ^^^^repent of sin, (...) persuaded that it is Gods grace; remember
it is free, (...) withal that it is promised; be^ the influence of his Spirit
upon your hearts to melt them; beg the application of the blood of Christ to
mollify them: the blood of (...) Goat only can break an Adamant stone, and it
is the blood of Christ the Scapegoat which alone can break the hard hear^^ of
sinners.

If any be discouraged with the difficulty of Repentance, that it is hard to
obtain, and a very greievous thing to endure; Let them,

1 Consider; That Repentance is necessary: it is necessary Virtute proec^^ti,
by ver^ue of Gods precept; it is a necessary Duty, Acts 17. 30 God Commands
not only (...) men, but all men: not only in some place! but every where to
repent: and it is necessary Virtute medi^ as it is a mea^^^ to avoid misery and
obtain happiness; you must sow in (...) if you would reap in joy; and you must
go forth (...) (...) bearing precious seed, if you would return again rejoy
(...) b^earing your sheaves with you, Psalm 126 5,6. That ^^^wers of tears make
way for the Sunshine of comfort here (...) the wet seed-time of Repentance, is
necessary to the harvest (...) everlasting glory and joy; and if Repentance be
difficult (...) yet since it is absolutely necessary, this should be so far
(...) discouraging you, that it should quicken you unto-more ^^^ligent
endeavors after it.

2. Consider, that Repentance is attainable; the (...) ^^^ners may be enabled
through Gods Grace to repent, as (...) as the most holy Saints at their first
turning unto God. (...) is difficult unto you, yea impossible for you to repent
of your selves, because there are no seeds of this Grace in Nature, but it is
easy with God to work you to it, and he can carr^^^^ you through the
difficulty; pray to God for this Grace, (...) endeavor to repent and in your
endeavors God may assist God is easy to be entreated, and is ready to give
this Grace unto them that desire it.

But some are discouraged from Heb. 12. 17. where (...) said, that Esa^^ was
rejected, and found no place for (...) though be sought it carefully with
tears: hence concluded (...) that though they seek repentance carefully with
tears, (...) may be rejected and find ^o place for repentance.

I answer, 1. That this place which speaks of Esau's rejection, has not a
reference (...) his rejection by God (though that may be included in it) but
his rejection by his Father Isaac* in reference to the Blessing, which his
younger brother Jacob had by a wile g^t before him. 2. That Esau there did not
seek to God for Repentance, but he sought to his Father for his blessing. 3.
That he did not seek repentance for himself, but he sought with tears to his
Father, that he would repent his giv^ng the blessing to Jacob, and give it unto
him. Such as with tears seek repentance of God, it is a sign they have some
measure of this Grace.

3. Consider, the worth and excellency of this Grace* though it be difficult,
yet it is excellent, Purchra sunt difficilia, the best things are not obtainted
without difficulty; had you this grace, you would no^ be without it for a
world, you would not change your tears and sorrow for sin, for all the
sweetness and pleasure that others find in the commission of it; if you did
but truly repent, you would not think i^ so grievous a thing to be born, but he
more you had of it, the more you would desire, and be best pleased, when you
could act this grace most strongly.

4. Consider, that the greatest difficulty is at first: Flesh may contradict
and violently oppose the beginnings of Repentance, which does so manifestly
seek its ruin and destruction; but after you are accustomed to the yoke, you
will find it more ^^^sie; after you have got mastery over your flesh, and have
attained some degrees of mortification, you will find it suitable to the new
man to live in the exercise of Repentance, and reap much sweetness from it.

5. Consider, That you must repent and mourn for sin here, or you will be
damned and burn for sin for ever; You cannot avoid grief for sin, if you have
it not in this world, you will be sure to have it in the other world; And is it
not a thousand-fold more eligible to grieve for sin here? especially
considering,

1. If you repent of sin now, your grief will not be in extremity: it will have
some allay, some alleviation, some mixture of secret comfort, at least
something will be given in to support, when you are even ready to be
overwhelmed when the heart is most broken and contri^e under the sense of sin
and apprehensions of Gods wrath, yet God will not suffer the Spirit to fail
before him. Isai. 57. 1^ ^6. the Lord will keep up ^he soul from quite sinking:
and I am confident, that such persons as are most heavy laden with grief for
sin, would not change their condition when at the lowest ebb, with the most
prosperous world^^ng: But if you repent not till hereafter, your grief will be
extreme, without the least mixture of comfort or support. In Hell you will have
nothing but weeping, and wailing, and gnashing of teeth; you will be there
uterly consumed with terrors, quite overwhelmed with sorrows, and be always
sinking in the bottomlessepit under the weight of grief, which will be
un-supportable.

2 Your Repentance of sin now will be pleasing unto God: We read, Luke 15. how
well pleased the Father was when his Prodigal son returned home, and with grief
did acknowledge that he had sinned against Heaven and against him; and was not
worthy to be called his Son; the Father meers him in the way, and ^isseth him,
and cloathe^h him with the best Ro^es* and kills the farted Calf for him, and
makes merry with him; so, though you have been prodiga's hitherto, have gone
astray from God, and wasted your time, and talents in the service of the Devil,
and your own lusts; yet if at length you come to your selves, and with
repentance, and humble confession of your si^^s, you return unto the Lord, he
will pity you, his bowels will ^^ern toward you whilst you^^^e yet upon the
way; and he will meet you, and embrace you* and cloth you with the Ro^es of
his sons righteousness* and be pleased with you, and rejoice over you; yea, and
the Angels al^^ will rejoice in your conversion; there will be joy in Heaven at
your repentance amongst the Angels and joy on earth amongst the Saints,
Ministers will be pleased and rejoice; they will pity you and pray for you;
and Saints will be pleased and be ready to help and advise you; but Gods pity
is beyond all. See how God is taken with repe^^^^g Ephraim. Jere. 32. 18. 19,
^0. I have surely heard Ephraim bemoaning him*self, etc. Surely after I was
turned, I repented; and after was instructed I smote upon my thigh, I was
ashamed, yea even confounded because I did bear the reproach of my youth; there
you have the description of Ephraim's repentance; and O the sweet words of most
^ender Love which the Lord does express himself in, toward Ephraim under his
repentings* Is Ephraim my dear son? is he my pleasant child? for since I spoke
against him, I do earnestly remember him still? therefore my bowels are
troubled for him; I will surely have mercy on him, faith the Lord. But if you
repent no^ till hereafter your grief will not only be extreme but also you will
have no eye to pity you, God will not pity you in the least, but laugh at
^our calamity, his bowels will be shut against you; your ^rief then will not
be pleasing in the least, and your cries and complaints of sin then will be
like the howling of a Dog in (...) ears: He will then instead of meeting you
to embrace (...), he will meet you to destroy you; instead of speaking ^^^dly
to you, he will speak to you in his wrath, and vexe^ you (...) his hot
displeasue; Angels and Saints will then turn from (...), and Devils will drag
you with them into torments.

3. If you repent of sin now, you may obtain the pardon of (...); I will surely
have mercy on him, says the Lord concerning ^^^enting Ephraim, Jere. 31. 20.
He that confesses his sins, that (...) with repentance, so as not only to
grieve for them, but also (...) leave and forsake them* shall find mercy, Prove
28 13. Yea, God has promised abundantly to pardon such as forsake their (...)
ways* and by repentance turn to him Isai 55. 7. and if sinners cease to do
evil and learn to do well, that though their ^^as be as scarlet, they shall be
white as snow* though they be red like Crimson, they shall be as wo^l, Isai. 1.
16, 17, 18. And not only his mercy, but also his Justice and faithfulness is
engaged ^o pardon such as acknowledge their sins with repentance and apply
themselves to him by faith: 1 John 1. 9. If we confess our sins, he is faithful
and just to forgive us our sins, (...) to cleanse as from all unrighteousness.
The Door of mercy (...) now open to all true penitents, and the golden Scepter
of Grace and Reconciliation is held forth unto them; the Lord Jesus Christ is
now interceding at the right hand of God, ready to make their peace with God;
but if you do not repent until hereafter, a pardon will be unattainable; there,
will remain no sacrifice for sin; then the day of grace will be quite spent;
and the Door of mercy will be fast shut: then Jesus Christ will have finished
his interceding work, and it will be impossible to obtain remission.

4. If you repent of sin now, you may get strength against sin; you shall be
delivered from the reigning power of sin presently and you shall be freed from
the rage and tyranny of sin by degrees and at the last you shall obtain a
perfect freedom from the being of sin, and be wholly delivered from the
bondage of corruption. But if you do not repent until hereafter, you will for
ever abide under the power of sin, you will not only be tormented in Hell* but
also be for ever sinning in Hell

5 If you repent of sin now, you will escape the punishment of sin; I do not
speak of some temporal calamities, which God may exercise his people withal in
this World; but you shall assuredly be kept from the eternal punishment^ of
Hell; which shall be ins^icted upon the ungodly World; but if you do not repent
of sin until hereafter, your punishment will be unavoidable* no cries nor
tears will then save you from the torments of Hell which you will be condemned
unto; now you are condemned for sin, whilst unbelievers, but in this World the
sentence is reversible, you may (...) from the B^r of justice, to the Throne of
Grace, and if with repentance and faith you apply your selves unto Jesus
Christ, he will deliver you from the wrath to come and free you from
condemnation; but hereafter* when the Lord Jesus Christ shall appear unto
Judgment, and summon you, and examine you, and find you guilty, and pass
sentence upon you to depart into everlasting Fire; this sentence will be
irreversible and your repentance will be too late to procure freedom from, or
the least mitigation of your punishment.

6. If you repent of sin now, your grief will be but for a time; for a season,
a short time, a few days a night, a moment. 1 Pet 1. 6. Rev 2. 10. Psalm 30 5.
Isai. 54 6, 7. Weeping may endure for a night, but joy comes in the morning;
God will not permit you (...) weep and grieve for (...) long; it is not a life
of grief which he calls you unto, but a life of faith and love; it is not
grief for it self which he requires, but in order unto your comfort, and
therefore it shall not be of long continuance; your grief for sin does make way
for spiritual comforts, for the joys of the holy Ghost, which after sorrowing
times the Lord does often give in abundantly unto his Children in this World;
in which they find incomparably more sweetness, than ever they could find
sweetness in sin, or bitterness in sorrow; they have pleasures of a higher and
more transcendent nature; be sure your grief for sin will make way for your
everlasting joys in Heaven, where all tears shall be wiped away from your
eyes, and all sorrow and sighing shall be removed from your hearts, and you
shall obtain gladness unspeakable and everlasting But if you do not repent
until hereafter, as the pleasures which you find in sin* will be but for a
season, and your ^ry^mph^ng but short, Death be sure will put a conclusion unto
all: so your grief for sin then will be long, the days of darkness and sorrow
will be many, yea your grief will be eternal.

Repent then sinners, repent; Christ will come certainly to judgment, therefore
repent truly; and Christ will come quickly to judgment, therefore repent
speedily. Protract not the time, endeavor presently without any further delay.
Considering,

1. Your particular Judgment may be suddenly, and the time of preparation your
may be spent quickly; You may be within a few months or weeks* or days, yea,
it may be within a few hours smitten by Deaths arrows and there will be no
place for repentance and preparation in the other World.

2. If you defer your repentance, it is a thousand to one that you never repent
as long as you live, If your life should continue many years; because not one
in a thousand that defer their repentance, do afterward repent; there are
millions in Hell that lived under the light of the Gospel who intended to
repent, but were prevented by death before they were aware; and it is a
thousand to one if you defer any longer, but ere long you will be received into
their number; have not you deferred your repentance before this till such a
time and such a time? and yet when such times have come again and again, have
(...) ^ot deferred i^ ^^^ll? and will not your (...) (...) still find as
plausible excuses till it be too (...)? Remember this sinners, that it is a
thousand to one but you will be damned if you any longer defer your repentance.

3 The longer you defer your repentance, the more difficult will you find the
work to be because you will be the ^^ster bound in Satan's chains, and not so
easily loosn^^; because you will be the faster asleep in sin, and not so easily
awakened; because your hearts will grow the harder by the long practice of sin,
and not so easily broken; because your sins will be more increased which you
must repent of; because your time will be the more decreased which you are to
repent in; so that if it should come to pass (which is a thousand to one) that
you should repent after procrastination or deferring repentance; yet you will
find the work to be very difficult.

4. Think what glory you may bring to God, what service you may do if you
repent and reform presently; all which time, whilst you defer repentance, is
spent in the service of the Devil and your own lusts, unto the dishonor of God.

5. Think what measures of grace and comfort you may attain here, and what
degrees of Glory you may attain hereafter, if you repent without delay, which
by deferring the work, you are like to lose.

6. If you defer Repentance, it is a question whether your last repentance will
be true; and if it should be true it is a question whether ever you shall
obtain the evidence of the truth thereof.

7. And lastly, If you defer your Repentance, God may never call you to
repentance; yea, he may give you up to a judiciary hardness^, and seal you up
unto condemnation, swearing in his wrath that you shall never enter in (...)
his Rest. Thus much for the exhortation of Sinners to repent.

2. Sinners, will the Lord Jesus Christ certainly and quickly appear to
Judgment, be persuaded then to flee to him, and get an interest in him before
his appearance* I am sure that there is none of you, but would be glad of an
interest in Christ when he comes in his glory to judge the world; the vilest
persons upon the earth, those who despise and reject Christ now, those who have
and scorn the ways of godliness, as being too mean a way for their high
spirits, would give ten thousand worlds if they had them, for the room of the
meanest Believers who have an interest in Christ at that day; But let me tell
you sinners, that this world is the only place, and this time while the day of
Grace does last, is the only time of obtaining such a privilege as this is;
if you have not an interest in Christ whilst you live, it will be impossible to
obtain it after death, or at the resurrection; If you are none of Christ's now,
he will not know you, no^ own you at the day of his glorious Appearance.

1. Get an interest in Christ as your high Priest and Advocate; Be sensible of
your sins: be assured of his death for sin and satisfaction to Gods justice; Be
persuaded of his intercession at the right hand of God, and that he is able and
willing to save you: apply your selves to him, that through him you may obtain
remission of sins, and an inheritance amongst the Saints; and if through the
mediation of Christ now, you obtain a pardon of all your sins here: how welcome
will your Redeemer be unto you, and with what joy will you lift up your heads
out of your Graves when the day of your Redemption and perfect Salvation is
come, and your Savior does appear to take vengeance up a un^pardoned sinners,
but shall own and acquit you before the whole World.

2. Get Christ to be your Master; Enter your selves amongst his Servants and
^^^ciples: submit to his Teachings: learn his Lessons; believe and obey his
Commands: follow his Example; promote his honor and interest in the world; be
ready to do, or suffer any thing for him; and when your Lord and Master comes
in his glory, you will (...) that it was not in vain to serve him, though in
ways (...) and grating to flesh and blood. O what a Reward will he give then
to his Servants! What a Crown of glory will he put upon their heads! It is a
sweet enco^ragi^^ Promise which Christ has made now, and will make good to all
his faithful servants at that day, John 12. 26. If any man serve me, let him
follow me* and where I am* there shall my servant be; if any man serve me, him
will my Father honor.

3. Get Christ to be your Husband. Sinners, We Ministers are sent to invite and
woo you to enter into this most near and sweet Relation unto Jesus Christ; we
are to tell you of the beau^ie and excellency of his Person, of his Love and
tender affection to poor sinners, of his willingness to be yours, and to make
you sharers in his Riches; O accept of him, it is the best motion that ever was
made to you, and it may be the last motion: Accept of Christ to be your
husband, lay off your filthy Garments; put on the white Robes of his
Righteousness; jo^n your hearts to him; d^vorse your selves from sin, and
dedicate your selves unto Christ alone; and if Christ be your husband, O how
joyful will his appearance be unto you, when you shall see his glorious face,
and sweet smiles, and be received into his embracements, and be carried by him
into his Fathers house, where you shall live with, and delight in his loves for
evermore.

4. Get Christ to be your Captain; List your selves under his banner; wear his
Colors; ar^^^ your selves with his Weapons; follow his conduct; fight against
his Enemies; end^re hardness as good Souldies, and do not shrink when you are
put upon the trial: and if you have an interest in this, Captain and be
victorious here over your spiritual enemies; when your Captain does ride in
Triumph at the last day, you shall be caught up into the Clouds, and Triumph
with him, and receive a Crown of Glory from him which fades not away.

Sinners, get an interest in Christ in all his Offices in all his Relations; it
is he only can save you from sin, and wrath, and eternal death It would be too
large a subject here to treat of Salvation by Christ, and the way of attaining
it; I may (God giving leave) hereafter treat purposely on some words is hereby
we may be saved, from Acts. 11. 14 He shall tell thee words, whereby thou and
thy House shall be saved* which I though ^o have added to the end of this, with
some words of advice unto young M^n from 1 John 2. part of the 14. Verse I have
written unto young Men, because ye ar^ strong and the Word of God abides in
you, and ye have ^vere come the wicked one (...) which I did indeed at the
first intend to have i^^ned together in one small Volume, with God's terrible
voice in the City; but thoughts have so multiplied in putting them into
writting, that I am even forced to separate them into three parts, which I
thought at first the room of one would hold.

CHAP. XIV.
HAving spoken to Sinners, I come now to speak, 2. To Believers, and that in
two words. 1. For the Trial of them. 2 For the Comforting of them.


1. For the Trial of Believers; the Doctrine of Christ's certain and sudden
appearance to Judgment, is a m^st dreadful Doctrine to sinners, which are in
sin; and it is a most comfortable Doctrine to believers, which are in Christ:
but because many sinners, which are still held fast in the ^^ond of iniquity,
and are under the reigning power of some ^^ns, are art to mistake, and without
good ground do persuade themselves that they are believers, who at the last day
will be found to be hypocrites; and through their mistake of their state do
ward off those strokes of Gods threatenings which are made at them, and
themselves hereby from those terrible apprehensions of Christ's appearance to
Judge and condemn them, which did they entertain, might be a means to startle
them, and awaken them to take an effectual and speedy course for the salvation
of themselves from future vengeance; and because many true believers, who are
really united unto Christ by faith, are apt also through the temptation of
Satan, and their own ignorance, and doubting misgiving-heart, to mistake
themselves, and look upon themselves to be hypocrites, and therefore fear that
when Christ does appear, that they shall be condemned by him, being so ready to
condemn themselves, and therefore gather matter for trouble from this Doctrine,
which indeed is matter of the greatest comfort; therefore it will be needful
for the undeceiving of the former, that they may not falsely apply comfort, and
the rectifying ^he mistakes of the latter, that they may not put off comfort,
to make some trial of true believers: It would be too large to present to you
all the character which we may find in the Word of God of true believers:
therefore I shall make mention but of one, which the Text holds forth, and is
the second Doctrine observed from the Words, in the beginning of our Discourse.

DOCT. 2. That there is an earnest desire in the Church, or true Believers,
after the second appearance of the Lord Jesus Christ

You may try your selves whether you are true Believers by your desires after
Christ's appearance; this is the Character which the Apostle Paul gives of
Believers, that they are such as love, and by consequence desire the appearance
of the Lord Jesus Christ: 2 Timothy 4. 8. Henceforth there is laid up for me a
Crown of Righteousness, which (...) Lord, the Righteous Judge shall give me at
that day; and not to me only, but also to all them that love his appearance:
All such, and none but such shall have a Crown of Righteousness, who love
Christ's appearing; Believers are said to look for Christ's coming, Heb. 9 28.
Unto them that look for him shall he appear the second time, without sin unto
salvation. He will appear unto all, but only to them that look for him, will he
appear unto salvation. Believers look for Christ's appearance, with an eye of
faith, of hope, and of desire.

1. Believers look for Christ's appearance with an eye of faith; they expect it
as sure as death, yea as more s^^re, because the death of some will be
prevented by it; it is not impossible that the Lord Jesus should come in (...)
days: they surely believe that the Lord will come.

2. Believers look for the appearance of Christ with an eye of hope; Tit. 2 13
Looking for that blessed hope, and the glorious appearance of the great God,
and our Savior. As they have hopes of the glory of Heaven, so they have hopes
of the coming of Christ, who will receive them into glory, who will put the
Crown upon their Heads, and bring them with Triumph unto the new Jerusalem.

3 Believers look for the appearance of Christ with an eye of love and desire;
they love and long for his appearance, they look with many a glance of love
toward the Palace above, where their Lord is, and they have many a longing
wish, that he would come forth, and come down, and receive them unto himself,
that where he is, there they may be also. The Bride says come, and the desire
of the Spouse is M^ke haste my beloved and be as a Roe noon the Mountains of
Spines: Cant 8. 14. Believers pray, Thy Kingdom come, in the Lords Prayer,
which he taught his Disciples, they desire the coming, not only of the Kingdom
of grace, but also of the Kingdom of glory; and in the Text, the Church
breathes forth, this desire, after Christ's appearance, Amen, even So come Lord
Jesus.

Now examine your selves whether you are true believers by this Character. Do
you love and desire Christ's appearance?

Object. If any object against themselves, and say, alas! we fear then we are
no true believers, because we cannot say that we love and desire Christ's
appearance, we are so far from desiring it, that we are afraid of it, and it is
matter of the greatest trouble unto us to think of it.

Ans. 1. See you to that, many go under the name of believers, which have only
the name; take heed that none of you Be found in the number of such, at the
last day.

2. Possibly some of you may condemn your selves without reason, as Gods
Children are more forward to do than hypocrites, who have the most reason; It
may be you do not desire that Christ should come immediately, but do not you
desire that Christ should come at all? a Wife may sincerely and greatly desire
the coming home of her Husband, when he is gone a long journey; and yet if her
House be out of order, and not fitted to her mind for the receiving of him, if
she be not dressed and got into such a garb, as she knows would be pleasing to
him; she may be consent that he would stay a little longer, until the be better
prepared, yea she may be afraid of his coming whilst she is unprepared; the
Harlot or Adulteress could be consent that her Husband should never ret^^n, but
the true Wife does desire the coming of her Husband, though sometimes not the
present coming: (...) true believers they do desire Christ's coming, who is gone
a long journey to Heaven, though they may not desire his present coming,
because they are not so fitted as they desire to be for the receiving of him;
they desire his coming, they would not for all the World that he should stay
away for ever in Heaven; unbelievers could be content Christ should stay away
for ever, and that they might live for ever upon Earth, but believers could not
be so content, they may fear Christ's immediate coming, because of their
unpreparation, but they desire his coming.

Quest How shall we know whether our desires after Christ's coming be sincere?

Answ. 1. If you love Christ's person, it is a sign your desires after his
coming are sincere; we desire the coming of friends to us, whom we love; Do
you love Christ in sincerity? Do you love him for himself, for his own
excellencies, this loveliness, his love, and spiritual love tokens? do you love
him upon a spiritual account?

2. If you do sincerely desire the coming of Christ into your hearts in regard
of his Spirit and grace it is a sign you have sincere desires after his coming
in glory; when grace will arrive to its perfection; Can you understandingly and
heartily (...) Thy: Kingdom come; I mean, that Christ's Kingdom of Grace should
be ^rrected in your hearts: and are sincerely desi^ous to have all things
within you brought into subjection and obedience thereunto? Do you sincerely
and earnestly desire the presence of Christ and the breathings of his Spirit
upon your hearts in his Ordinances? it is a sign that there are at the least
true radical desires in you after his second appearance, though by reason of
doubts and fears they may not be so express.

3 If you have laid up your treas^r in Heaven, and placed your happiness in
things above: if you have cast the Anchor of your hope upward into that which
is within the V^il, it i^ a sign you have true desires after Christ's
appearance* that he might give you possession of the happiness which you have
made choice of.

4. If you are careful to please the Lord and whether present or absent to be
accepted of him; and are afraid of sin, because it is grievous to him; and are
diligent in the use of means to sit and prepare your selves, and make all
things ready for the receiving of him, it is a sign you do both look for his
coming, and do desire it.

5. And (...), if you have lively hopes of his coming, and can rejoice in (...)
hopes, if you can with earnestness pray Come Lord Jesus, come quickly; this is
a sign indeed of your desires, though all true Believers have not attained to
so great a h^igh (...).

Unbelievers, they do not desire Christ's appearance, because they do not
believe in him, because they do not love him, because their hearts are set upon
the World, because they are under the guilt and power of sin, and because when
Christ does appear, he will judge them, condemn them, and punish them; But
though they do not desire Christ's coming, nor think ^f i^, nor prepare for
(...), yet Christ will come, and his coming will be dreadful unto them.

Believers, they desire Christ's coming, they are looking for (...), and
waiting for it, they are hoping for it, and preparing for it, and he will
certainly, he will quickly appear, and they shall appear with him in glory, and
this appearance ^ill be a most comfortable and joyful appearance unto them:
which leads unto the second Word which I (...) to speak.

2. For the Comforting of Believers.

Will the Lord Jesus Christ certainly and quickly appear to Judgment: here then
is a full breast of the sweetest consolation, ar^ which you may suck and be
satisfied and exceedingly refreshed; As every word in this Doctrine speaks
terror to Sinners, so every word does breath forth comfort to true Believers:
and therefore I shall and a^ your hence to help work up your hearts unto
spiritual joy.

1. Rejoice. Believers Rejoice! Christ will appear to Judgment* Christ will
appear in his Glory, the great God and your Savior will appear, He, that is
your Savior and Advocate will then be the Judge of the World; your Lord and
King will appear attended with a glorious Train of Heavenly Courtiers, decked
with glorious beams of most excellent Majesty! Your Captain will appear, the
Captain of your Salvation, with the spoils of his and your enemies: and he will
ride triumphantly in the Clouds; your dearly beloved Friend and Husband will
appear with such beauty and loveliness in his face, and with such dear love
toward you in his heart, as has not entered into your hearts to conceive: the
Lord Jesus Christ will be glorious in the eyes of the whole world on that day;
and should not this rejoice your heart to think of the glory of your Lord,
which will be then so conspicuous, and of your interest in such a Person?

2. Rejoice, Believers Rejoice! Christ will certainly appear: if there were any
grounds to doubt the ^^uth of this thing, you would have reason to grieve; but
when the thing is so certain, when God has revealed it in his Word so clearly,
when the Lord has promised it to his people so faithfully, and given his
People hopes and expectations of it, he will not disappoint them: You have
reason to rejoice, there is nothing more certain, as has been proved, that the
second appearance of the Lord Jesus Christ at the last day.

3. Rejoice Believers, Rejoice! Christ will quickly appear; the coming of the
Lord draws nigh; there is a time se^, though you cannot know it, because God
has locked (...) this secret in his own bosom; yet you may know (...) (...)
cannot now be far off; the Lord will not ^^arry much longer in Heaven before he
come down to Judgment! Look up then, and li^^t up your heads with joy, for the
day of your Redemption draws nigh, Luke ^1. 28. You will not long groan under
the bondage and burden of corruption; You will not long mourn and complain
under the persecutions of cruel Enemies; You will not long be assaulted and
buffetted with the temptations of Satan; You will no^ long live in the dark
Prison of the world, Christ will quickly be here and open the Prison-doors, and
deliver you into the glorious liberty of the Children of God.

4. Rejoice, Believers Rejoice! When Christ does appear, Ye also shall appear;
Possibly some of you may remain alive until his appearance, be sure all of you
shall be made alive; if you go down into your dust before, you shall not be hid
there for ever, you shall not be buried there in eternal oblivion; but the Lord
Jesus Christ will awaken you out of your long sleep of Death, and raise you out
of your beds of darkness; He will send his Angels to gather you from the four
Winds; Think, O think how joyful a day this day will be unto you when the Voice
is proclaimed, the Bridegroom is come, Go ye forth to meet him; when the
Trumpet does sound in the Air, and you are called out of your graves by the
Angels, and gathered into the company of all the Saints, of God which lived in
all generations from the beginning of he Creation; and in a moment in the
twinkle of an eye, such of you as are alive shall find your* bodies strangely
transformed, and all that come forth of the ground made incorruptible and
immortal; and when you shall set the Lord Jesus Christ come down with such
brightness, and beauty, and glory, and such Royal Attendants, and you are all
caught up to meet with him in the* Air; when you shall find your selves! in
the number of those blessed, happy ones, whom the Lord (...) send for, and
receive to himself, when the greatest part of the World will be left behind
crying to the Rocks to cover them, and the Mountains to fall upon them, to bide
them from the wrath of this furious Judge that is come to condemn them; O how
will your hearts then be filled, and even ravished with transporting joy which
no heart now can conceive!

5. Rejoice, Believers Rejoice! When Christ does appear ye shall be judged by
him; ye^ shall not be condemned by him, but ye shall be judged by him; your
advocate will be your judge: Who shall then lay any thing to your charge? God
will then justify you; who then shall condemn you? Christ will acquit and
absolve yo^^: You will openly be declared Righteous on that day through the
Righteousness of Jesus Christ, which here has been imputed to you; Christ will
own (...) the^ (...) Redeemed people, whom he has pur^^^sed with his own
blood; then all your works of mercy ^ill be made (...) of; all your services of
Christ (...) the World with be had in Remembrance; all your graces will be
taken notice of; and the Lord will kindly accept of the improvement of the
smallest talents, which he has (...) (...) withal. Well done good and
faithful Servants, yet have been saithfull in a few things, enter into the joy
of y^^r Lord, Matthew. 25. 21. And if you have been persec^^ (...) Righteousness
sake; if you have been imprisoned, banished reproached, and greatly afflicted
for Christ sake; if you have left Father, Mother, Wife, Children, Houses,
L^nds, yea and have laid down your lives for the testimony of Jesus, and that
you might keep a good Conscience, think what entertainment the Lord Jesus will
give to you (...) time? and O how will you Rejoice that the Lord should confer
so great honor and dignity upon (...) as to call you forth and enable you^ to
suffer for his name? and think how sweetly the sentence which Christ shall
pronoun^^ upon you, will sound in your ^^ares! Come ye blessed of my Father,
inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the World.

6. Rejoice Believers Rejoice! When Christ does appear, he will reward you, he
will give you a crown of Glory, which fades not away; He will not only Judge
and sentence you to inherit the Kingdom of Heaven, but he will receive you
into the Kingdom, he will give you possession thereof, he will carry you along
with him unto glory, he will lead you; and you bring into the new Jerusalem he
will show you the Father unto your full satisfaction, and you shall behold his
glory and share in it, he will put you into those mansions which he has
perpared for you; Then, and never till then shall you be perfectly happy, and
the fore-thoughts of this is matter of exceeding great comfort, especially if
you consider these four properties of Heavens happiness.

^. Believers consider the greatness of the happiness (...) Heaven, it will be
full, and you will be filled there with unto your utmost capacity, yea beyound
what here you are cap^ple of; consider these particulars in your happiness of
Heaven.

1. Think what Bodies you will have; they will be most beautiful and glorious
bodies, they will be most healthful, strong and immortal bodies: you will then
bear the image of the Heavenly Ada^, in regard of your bodies, as well as in
regard of your souls.

Rejoice then believers Rejoice! what though some of you have crooked and
deformed bodies now? what though some of you are blind or lame, or maimed or
have your Bodies filled with irksome pains, and weakened with long sickness?
what though you live in expectation of death, and these bodies, whatever their
mold and sha^e be, must ere long be carried to the cold stinking grave, and be
turned into putrefaction? yet Rejoice you that are believers, because your
bodies will be made so glorious in the Resurrection when all blemishes of
nature will be healed, and all sickness and vain will be removed, because they
will be raised in incorruption, and freed from any more dominion of death for
ever.

2. Think what Souls you shall have; you will be glorious without, your bodies
will shine; but you will be far more glorious within, your souls will shine
much more; then your souls shall be washed clean from all, rem^inders of sin,
so that they shall not have the least spot or stain; then you shall be
cleansed; ro^^ all fil^hiness of flesh and spirit, and arrive unto perfection
of holiness; then the seeds of grace will be grown up into the flowers of
glory, and O what a fragrant garden will your souls be? when the rude draught,
as it were of Christ here in your hearts, shall be finished and perfected by
Gods Pensil, and your spirits shall be made perfectly like unto your glorious
Lord, O how beautiful will they be in the eyes of God!

Rejoice then Believers, Rejoice! it grieveth you when you look within you, and
perceive so much remaining defilement; when you feel such strong opposition of
the flesh against the spirit, and you fi^de your selves sometimes foiled
thereby, your weaknesses (...) ^^mities trouble you; but Rejoice believers,
because in (...) will be perfectly freed from sin you will never be (...)
^^filed with it any more, but you will be made perfect (...) and perfectly
happy.

3. Think what Habitations ye shall have; you shall ^^ve Mansions in the
Fathers house, John 14. 2. A building of God, a house not made with hands,
eternal in the Heavens, 2 Cor. 5. 1. your persons will be glorious, and your
H^bitaions will be glorious.

Rejoice then, Believers, Rejoice! what though some of you live in poor and
mean co^^ages; then you shall live in the glorious Palace of the King of
Kings; what though your houses have been burned with f^^e, and some of you have
not where to lay your head, and none of you have a certain dwelling place which
you can secure to your selves? yet rejoice because there are Mansions provided
or you, out of which it will be impossible for you to be ^urned or turned out
for ever. The City which is above ^ath foundations which cannot be over-turned,
and the building of God which is not made with hands, cannot be destroyed by
hands, neither is exposed to flames of fire, which may demolish the fairest
City in the World.

4. Think what Company you shall have: you shall have the presence of the
Father, you shall dwell with the Lord Jesus Christ, and the Spirit of God will
dwell in you for ever^^ you shall have he company of holy Angels, and all the
glorified Saints; all your companions will be most lovely and glorious.

Rejoice then Believers, Rejoice! what though wicked men separate you from
their company, and think you unworthy of their fellowship? God will not think
you unworthy of his fellowship, nor separate you from his presence; what though
some of you are forced to dwe^^ i^ Meseck, and are linked ^in near relations to
some un^^ (...) persons, and are every day vexed with their ungodly (...)
^^ation? Rejoice; for in Heaven you will be freed (...) company, no wicked
person will be permitted to come (...) that place.

5. Think what Treasures you shall have; you shall have Treasures which cannot
be corrupted by moth, no^ stolen (...) thief, your riches will be durable and
unsearchable.

Rejoice then Believers, Rejoice! what though you are poo^ in the World? you
are rich in faith, and hope; what though you have no inheritance on earth? yet
you are heirs of the Kingdom of Heaven* you shall have an inheritance which is
i^^^rruptible, and undefiled; what though you endure some hardship in your
journey through the World? when you come hom^ to your Fathers house you shall
be freed from all want and have such Treasures to spend upon, which can never
be exhausted.

6. Think what Honors you shall have; the meanest of you will be exalted unto
higher dignity than the greatest Monarch that ever lived; you will be crowned
with immortal glory, you will be honored by God and the Angels; and you will
not only have honor, but you will be made most honorable.

Rejoice then Believers, and ^ake comfort, though you are scorned by some, and
accounted as the offscouring of the earth; you are reproached and vilified by
men here, but all your reproaches, especially those which you have born for the
sake of Jesus Christ, shall be wreathed into a Crown, and make you the more
glorious in Heaven; there you shall not have the least disgrace cast upon you
any more: and you shall be kept from doing any unbecoming action to blot and
sullie you in the least, but you shall shine like so many Stars, or glorious
Suns in the Kingdom of your Father.

7 Think what Peace and Rest you shall have; you shall have a most sweet peace
and tranquillity of mind, no enemy without to disturb and molest you, no Dev^^d
to tempt and assault you, no lusts within, or distempered passion to disquiet
you; then you shall have perfect peace; and then you shall rest from all
wearisome employments, and take up your repose in God for ever.

Rejoice then Believers, and let this cheer your hearts in your passage through
the tempestuous Sea of this World; ere long you will come to the haven, where
there will be no waves nor winds; sometimes now you are troubled on every side,
and have no rest in your spirits; without are fightings, within are fears; but
in Heaven you shall be freed perfectly from all disturbance and mol^station.

8. Think what Joys and Pleasures you shall have; you shall have fullness of
Joy, Psalm 16. 11. you shall drink of the rivers of pleasures, Psalm 3^ 8. O the
delights which you shall have in the immediate views of Gods face, in the sense
of Gods love, in the high actings of your love; in the fruition of the chiefest
good, and the high employments which you shall have in Heaven.

Rejoice then Believers, Rejoice in hope of these joys; now you mourn and weep
for your sin, and because of the Eclipses of the light of Gods countenance; it
troubles your hearts that you can see and enjoy so little of God, that your
love is so low and inconstant, that your highest ser^ices are but mean, and
diverted many times by little trifling businesses in the world, from converse
with God; in heaven all tears will be wiped away from your eyes, and all
sorrow, with all the grounds thereof will be removed, you will come with
singing into the new Jerusalem; you will enter and live in the vision and
fruition, in the love and joy, and spend an eternity in the praise of the Lord.

2. Believers, consider the sureness of the happiness of Heaven; as surely as
you are Believers, so surely shall you obtain this happiness; you cannot be
sure of any thing in the World, but you may be sure of the glory of Heaven, and
though there ^e not the certitudo subjecti: and many of you be not assured of
it, but are full of doubts and fears that you shall f^ll short; yet there is
certitudo objecti, the thing is sure to you.

Rejoice then Believers Rejoice! your names are written in the Book of Life,
out of which they shall never be blotted, labor to answer your doubts, and to
get your hearts wrought up to a full assurance of this happiness, by such
arguments as these, which will evidently prove, that if you be true believers,
you shall not, you cannot miss of Heaven.

1. God has chosen you to glory, he has elected you to salvation before the
world was, Act. 13 48. As many as were Ordained unto eternal life, believed.
Hence it follows, that all believers were ordained to eternal life; and 1 These.
2. 13 God has chosen you to salvation, through Sanctification of the Spirit,
and belief of the truth. All true believers are elected persons, and Gods
decree of Election cannot be frustrated, because God is unchangeable; because
God changes no^, therefore you are not consumed; because God changes no^,
therefore you shall be saved.

2 God has promised this happiness to you, 1 John 2. 24. This is the promise
which he has promised, even eternal life. And Tit. 1. 2. In hope of eternal
life, which God who cannot lie has promised. If God has promised this
happiness, and your faith does give you interest in the promise^^ and God be
faithful to fulfill to them, it being impossible for God to lie; then as
certainly as God is true, you that are believers shall obtain.

3. The Lord Jesus Christ has purchased this happiness for you, it is called
the purchased possession, Ephesians. 1. 14. as certain as the purchase, so certain
will be the possession.

4. The Lord Jesus has taken possession of Heaven for you, The forerunner is
for us entered, Heb. 6. 20. He is preparing these mansions in the fathers house
for you, John 14 2. and as certain as Christ is in Heaven, so certainly shall
those that are believers be received thither in time.

5. Christ prayed that you might have this happiness whilst he was on the
earth, Joh. 17 24. Father I will that those which thou have given me, be with
me where I am, (...) they may behold the glory which thou have given me. Which
prayer was made for you, if believers, as well as for his present Disciples, V
20. Neither pray I for these alone, but for them also which shall believe on me
through their word And for this thing Christ intercedes above, and whatever he
prays and intercedes for, he will prevail for you, and therefore you will
obtain.

6. Ye are Christ's, as ye are believers, and therefore all things are yours,
says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 3. 22, 23. amongst which, things to come are
enumerated; ye are Christ's servants, and do his work, and he will give you you^
wages* You honor him in the world, and therefore you shall be honored by him;
You follow your Master in a way of self*denial and suffering, and if you suffer
with him, y^^ shall reign with him, 2. Tim 2. 12. and be glorified together,
Rom 8. 17. and where Christ (...), there shall his s^rvants be, Joh. ^^ ^6. Ye
are Christ's members, and where the head is, there shall the members be: Ye are
Christ's Spouse, you are (...), married to him, and therefore shall live with
him, (...) the powers of earth and hell, cannot separate you from his love, and
therefore cannot keep you out of Heaven, Romans (...) 35, 36, 37, 38 39.

Ye are justified by faith, Romans 5. 1^ and therefore ab^^ (...) from the gui^^
of sin, therefore freed from the con^^ (...) Rom 8. 1.^ therefore shall not
perish, (...) thereof is removed, therefore you shall have (...) 3. 16. whom
God justifies, them he also (...) Romans 8 30.

(...) Ye are the adopted children of God. Gal 3. 26. For (...) ^re all the
(...) of God by faith in Jesus Christ. And if (...), Romans 8. 17 and if heirs,
you shall be sure (...).

Ye are called with a Holy calling, and sanctified with (...) Spirit, and
thereby in some measure fit^ed and qua^^ (...) for this happiness by the work
of grace, conformity to the (...) in holiness; grace is glory begun, and is
called eter^^ (...), and God has promised to perfect it, Phillip. 1. 6. (...)
relation to Heaven, as sin has relation to hell; (...) will certainly bring
men to Hell if it be not pardon^^^ and (...) so grace will certainly bring men
to (...), because (...) cannot be wholly eradicated.

(...) have made choice of Heaven for your portion, you (...) laid up there
your treasure, and God has set your (...) after it, and given you hopes of it;
and therefore (...) miss it, your desires shall be satisfied, and your (...)
make you ashamed, Romans 5. 5.

(...) And if besides all this, you have the witness and feal^^^ (...) of the
spirit, giving you some first fruits and fore^^^ of this happiness; though all
believers do not obtain it (...) know without question, that this is a sure
happiness, (...) its self* and unto you.


