AN ANSWER TO A LETTER Sent from Mr. Codding^on of Rode-Island, to Governor
Leveret of Boston in what conce^^^ R.W. of (...).
THe Letter it self was kindly sent to me from the Governor Leveret, as also
his Answer to it, which was truly Christian that is friendly and heavenly: So
that I had thoughts to acquiesce and rest, etc. But considering that I was the
principal Mr. Coddington gave fire upon, (both for disputing and printing) and
Governor Leveret but as (...) for furthering publishing, etc.

2. That the Governor acquainted me with it.

3. That we are commanded (not only to (...) but) (...) the work of the Lord,
as not knowing which shall prosper, (...) and (...) knowing that our labor
shall not be in vain in the Lord. These considerations moved me to put my work
aged Brain^ and fingers to this unpleasing Task: pleasing it is not in this
sense tha^ Pagans, Turks, Jews, and Papists laugh and stumble at the
Controversies of Protestants, (who protest and (...) against them all:) Partly,
as Mr. Coddington is my ancient friend at Boston, (Old and New) and any long
kind friend, and Neighbor on Rhode Island. But what then? ^o a true Child of
God All things, our goods, our good works and (...) our Friends and lives will
be but dross and (...) when once we (...) them Competitours with the true Lord
Jesus Christ.

On th^^e two Hinges turns Mr. Coddingtons Letter, first in angerly chiding the
Governor Lever^t for his dealing with the people called Quakers at Boston most
unjustly* (...) ungra^e^^lly for New-(...) and Old too knows, (I know it) ^how
great (...) Advocate the Governor Leveret (and others) living and dead (...)
to plead for Moderation toward dissenting Consciences of Jews and Gentiles, and
yet declare, that he and all Governors ought (moderately) to bannish
Incivilities, with which the people call^^ Q^^^ers (or Foxians) are defiled, as
much as most that (...) Name and worship.

(...) hinge on which Mr. Coddingtons Letter tur^^, is a bitter charge on
Governor Leveret for his furthering the publication of my poor Narrative of
transactions between the Quakers and my self.

The Governors Answer was truly Christian* to this effect, viz. that the
Narrative contained a vindication of many excellent Truths of Christ Jesus; and
therefore, the particulars concern my self, to which I humbly (before God
Angels and men) say as follows.

First, Mr. Coddington goes on in the same brutish Tract that Fox and most of
them run in, viz a simple kind of reviling* viz. Lies Lies, Slanders,
Slanders, (like poor Children and Scolds etc:) Thus most notoriously, does G.
Fox conclude most of his Answers to so many heavenly Pens in his Folio books,
viz. [And as to the rest of thy Lies and Slanders they are not worth the
mentioning] And thus deals Mr. Coddington (childishly and clamorously) against
me thus clamoring, viz. a most slanderous lying book, a bundle of lies, a book
full of lies: horrible impudence! to invent so many lies and present them to
the K. of England, (good manners would have taught him to have said at least
our Royal Sovereign, etc.) And except he had sold himself to do wickedly he had
never uttered so many abominable lies.

To these in general I Answer, what sober soul (not intoxicate with the bloody
Cu^ of the Whore of Rome who is drunk with the blood of Saints) but will
proclaim that oftentimes the whore like Potiphars wise cries out whore first!
though the accused Joseph will be found heavenly chaste, from these whorish
Lights and worship, which will be found (with their worshippers) all the world
over in Gods most holy season but Children of the Father of lies the Devil.

But to particulars, he says it is a lie, that I said that G. ^. slily (...),
when says he, he was never present, I say, who ever reads this, will see
(especially in my Narrative) that G. F. by Letters, by Relations, by Copies of
my fourteen proposals, knew all matters perfectly, and they kept my Letters
sent to the Dep. Governor Cra^ston, (in which Letters my fourteen Proposals to
G. F. were) as the Deputy openly testified until G. F. was two or three hours
under Sail, that it might be said, that G. F. never saw the (...) I sent of my
fourteen Proposals to him. This business o^ G. F. (...) p^r^fectly informed of
my offer of dispute on those fourteen ^roposals and of his deliberate
withdrawing (or running) is for apparent (as (...) made clear in my Narrative)
that he that shall deny (...) most deny that he himself has any breath or
life, or is a man (...)

2 Mr. Coddington says that the first day of our dispute at Newport was spent
in examining whether any would subscribe to my fourteen Positions, but they
were found so gross that none would sub^scribe to them.

But why does Mr. Coddington forget these two things, First, that the first day
was spent (mainly and chiefly after some preparations) in the examination of a
true and false Quaker as appears in my Narrative. 2. (and consequently) that
many spoke as my brother Robert Williams, Thomas Ward, Richard Ba^l^^, William
Hichcock, against the monopolizing of Civil and Christian Liberty, viz. that
none should speak to any point except they would subscribe to my fourteen
propositions.

Mr. Coddington says that these propositions were so gross that none would
subscribe to them.

Answ. What then? if I never offered them to any one Soul to subscribe to them?

2. If they were so sudden so strange, and high, and unexpected, that my
brother (as it is in print) thought I charged too deep etc.

But 3. What were my charges to this that Spanish Inquisition that none must
speak or object, or query, e^cept he subscribe to my proposals? does not this
justify the Popish, and Episcopal subscriptions, and proclaim that the Papists
and Foxians are all one in their snares and Engines of subscription, which my
brother Robert Williams in his Lette^ proves from some propositions of the
Bishops at Lambeth, showing more moderation then pretended Quakers at Rhode
Island.

The third Lie Mr. Coddington fastens on me is that I should acknowledge that
John Burnet spoke in his public speech or Sermon) many excellent Truths of
God, and that afterward I denied them.

This Charge has reference (or may) to twelve distinct times and (...) of m^ne
to their General Assembly were I spoke sol^mnly that John Burnet had spoke many
holy Truths of God (...) also proposed many Queries whether their Spirit was
the true (...) God by which they spa^e then and whether their Christ was (...)
Lord Jesus Christ? which shows my approbation of (...), but also my witness
against their false application of them (...) had gone on in pressing those
Queries had not the prayers of the Governors wife, and the singing of Henry
Nic^ols, and the (...) and dissolving of the meeting by John Burnet, (...)
proceedings.

(...) me off from their general meeting I resolved (by Gods help) to assault
this Camp of Anti-Christian^ to wit by off^r^ng to G. F. and all their Apostles
a solemn dispute upon fourteen proposals. In this dispute Wil^iam (...) fell
upon (contrary to the order of an equal dispute^ a large Sermon of speech to
the people, of about an hour long. John Stubs followed him* and afterward John
Burnet, who spoke best as to Repentance, in general, and turning unto God, and
yet I said, although he had delivered many heavenly general Truths: yet he had
said no more then he might have said before the Pope and the Cardinals in the
Popes Chapel at Rome, whereas if matters come to be examined what true
Repentance and Faith is* it will then be seen what the holy Truth of God is,
and what the destroying juglings and Lies of Satan are.

4 Mr. Coddingtons fourth particular Charge against me is, that I lied in
saying that the first day of our dispute at Newport was (...) Eclipse of the
Sun which I applied to the Foxians Eclipsing the Sun of Righteousness, and to
his glorious breaking forth in his primitive and Eternal Truth at last, I know
not the meaning or sense of this Lie charged on me* for he confesses there was
an Eclipse) as I affirm) only he says there was a Thunder before it (which who
denies?) Only Mr. Coddingtons Application* in opposition to mine) Let every
Soul judge in the presence of Jehovah, who has and will decide the Difference
to Eternity.

A fifth Lie charged on me is, that as I abused G. F. so I abused the Original
which John Stub^ (in effect) reproved me in, and I ac^knowledged my error.

Answ. I do not think that John Stub^ (I hear gone to the pit of (...) and I am
going) would have said so much: For the ninth of Isai* which he quoted to prove
that Christ was God, (which I no^ no true Protestant denies) I perceived was
quoted in der^gation to his true Manhood, (which was then in Agitation:) and
therefore though I granted that Christ Jesus was an Everlasting Father (as he
was God) yet ^ alleged the thoughts of many excellent, holy, an^ learned men,
that the word Everlasting Father (...) in the Hebrew [(...)] did but s^gnifie
Pater ^^culi the Father of an Age or Ages signifying the propagation of and
Succession of true Believers or followers of Jesus to the worlds end.

John Stubs only said that some said it signified Pat^r Eternitat^^ Fa^ther of
Eternity, which I denied not (as to the God^^^d of the Lord Jesus) but that it
signified not so in this place, and (...) it did not e^clude his Humanity, as
the poor Souls the (...) at.

My sixth Lie is, that I denied that Moses (...) John S^ub^ produced Heb. 12.

I say it is not rational, that I should deny Moses, or David, or Ha^akk^ks, or
Daniels trembling only I denied that the Quakers trembling now in question is
such a Quaking as theirs was, but is only an external and notoriously cheating,
Quaking, instead of true Christian trembling.

Unto these he adds a Story, that Anthony Cook came to Providence to dispute
with me but that I waved him and said, come let us gather Apples; The truth is,
it is a silly and ridiculous passage, for it pleasing God to burn and break to
pieces Mr. Scots house and Fence, (who was the great entertainer of the Quakers
against his wives Conscience, no small persecution, though one of them formerly
and a sufferer) my Lot being next, was open to all spoil by Reason of Mr.
Scots defect: the Governor Clerk in Mr. Scots name agreed with me to make up
all the Fences, and look to the Orchard, and gather the fruit, and to have the
half, I did so, and the Governor coming to Town with Mr. John Easton,
Christopher Hol^sworth, Mr. Joseph Bria^, and others coming into the Orchard
and gathering what they pleased: My self and my Indian were intent and careful
to gather Apples (what I could in have) for Governor Clerk (who requested me
etc.) going away speedily, amongst others whom I knew, a stranger^ it seems one
Arthur Cook asked me why I would write a book against innocent people called
Quakers, I remember ^ said to this purpose that every body was a Christian,
every body was Innocent in their own eyes, and it is possible I might say to my
Indian, let us gather, or make haste but that I should avoid dispute with
Arthur Cook, or all of them (in season or out of sea^on) is not to be imagined,
considering what I have done already, and what (through the help of the true
Lord Jesus) I resolve to do while I have breath to draw or a pen and hand to
handle it.

2. Mr. C^ddington says Roger Williams his hands are bound, but he persecuted
(...) his Tongue* etc.

I Answer* it is true, there is a persecution with the Tongue, the Tongue is
(...) Arrows, a Sword, a Viper, a fire from Hell, etc. but is there not als^ a
just Reproof? Rebuke them sharply, Tit. 1. Answer a ^ool accor^ing to ^is
folly, etc. Only we must be sure that our lips be opened (...) our pens
employed by the Father of Lights, and not by the (...) Light within ourselves,
which will end in Eternal (...)

3. Mr. Coddington says that he has the Word of two Majors in this Country
the one of Major Winslow now Governor of Plymouth Co^ony, who says* Mr.
Coddington after he had heard John Burnet speak at or about Marsfield, he said,
he had never heard so much of the Gospel in all his life: the second is of
Major Cra^ston Dep. Governor of Rhode Island, etc. who said after our
disputations (as Mr. Coddington says) that he was glad he heard so much, and
he was satisfied: To which I say, what is this to the Truth? if all the Majors
and Governors, Princes, Kings and Emperors of the world agree upon an Opinion,
Verdict, Sentence, or Decree, may not Pete^ a poor Fisherman, and Paul a poor
Tent-maker overturn them all? yea, a poor lad or Handmaid bringing one holy
Scripture for evidence?

But 2. I have many Arguments to persuade me that both the Governor Winslow
and Dep. Governor Cra^ston are far from approving their Impieties and
Incivilities* especially that monstrous practice of their Women's and maidens
stark nakedness, which might make each religious or sober Spirit to abhor that
Spirit which dictates and guides these Unchristian, Inhumane, Unwomanly, and
loathsome practices.

I have humbly (in the presence of the Eternal, All-seeing Eye) presented my
Apology for my self against Mr. Coddingtons charges of Lies, Lies, Slanders,
etc. I end with a few questions friendly propounded to Mr. Coddington.

1. Will he deny what his Eyes and Ears have seen and heard in this business I
Has he not seen me (I know by the power of Christ Jesus whose is all power in
Heaven and Earth a poor old Creature stand up alone against them all together
in the flourishing of their Teachers and Professions of Earthly power about
them, etc.

2. Has he not heard me abused with the Terms of th^^ Old man, Old man, till
for shame they left it?

3. Has ^e not heard me say that one Woman as well as another, and all the
Women in that Assembly might strip themselves naked at noon day to the horror
of all mankind if such a persuasion come upon them?

4. Was there not liberty for William Harris, William (...) and others to speak
freely for the Quakers, but not my (...) Mr. Hitchcock, nor Mr. Ward, etc.
might have the (...) but some were threatened with the Constable, etc?

5. Has not his Ears heard that when I produced a great many of G. Foxes
words, and desired to apply, that all of them and especially W. Edmundson stopped
my mouth with [Let G. Fox his words alone, etc.] and so bruitishly stopped all my
proofs, which can not be stopped, though Heaven and Earth perish.

6. Did not Mr. Coddingtons Ears hear me and others often complain of
Interruptions, when John Stubs professed thrice I had not interrupted them,
though some had: and that when W. Edmundson began his first Sermon, and the
rest followed, and I desired to speak after their long speeches or Sermons: yet
then I was stopped, and sometime^ so grossly by W. Edmundson that Major Cra^ston
was forced to say out of the Gallery) let the man speak, let him have liberty
to make out his matter? etc.

7. Did not Mr. Coddington sensibly (to all men's view) rejoice when I offered
to dispatch the five remaining points [remaining at N^w^ort] in five quarters
of an hour, which I had performed exactly had not the impatiences of my
opposites interrupted me, and yet I was not much above my time, though if I
had, my Opposites interposings only were the cause of it?

8. Did not Mr. Coddingtons Eyes see and Ears hear that from the beginning to
the end of three days dispute at Newport I never gave them a reviling
passionate, or reproachful word, but drew them gen^l^ ^n to de^ate the Matter,
incumbent and proper to us with (...) and patience. Did not Mr. Coddingtons
Ears hear in the close of the three days ^t Newp^rt a woman [ Eliz. Williams
now with God in Heaven] say aloud, [ The man has made good (...) undertook
against you, and the words that he has spoken shall (...) the last (...)?

More I might infer to Mr Coddingtons very sense, but I pass on another
question, What should be the Reason that [1 Ioh. 2.13.] Gods (...) should say,
^f any man love this world, or the things in this world* (...) not in him.

(...) to be so high a Saint [above the Bishops, (...), ab^ve the In^ependants,
above the Baptists (...) in men's (...) loves the World exceedingly, and the
(...) world (...) life, ever since he came to (...) has (...) Mr Coddington he
is an hard man, a (...) man (...) Rh^de Island how many ^nstances come (...)
have (...) of Mr. Codding. a worldly man, a self (...) for public but all for
himself and private.

I will not mention particulars at Portsmouth and Newport, of which I have told
him as I had opportunity, but I will only remember him of some Covetous and
Unchristian passages during the late bloody (...) amongst us, and his high
profession of a Quaker,

1. A considerable company of Providence people fled to Rhode Island, their
Houses here, their Forts, their Fences burnt up, and much if not most of their
Cattle destroyed: they obtained leave of the Government at Newport to enclose a
piece of the Common to get Corn, etc. They inclo^^^ and sent two men (thought
to be acceptable with Mr. Coddington) to pray his favor to make use of some of
his windf^ll Trees (which lay by them) for two gates* (that all might pass
throu^^* etc.) But Mr. Coddington (who had never had a foot on Rhode Island but
by one man of Providence his means) now abounding with Land and Trees, turns
these poor Providence distressed Souls off with a denial, viz except they would
gratify his worldly selfish ends and conditions, which their grieved Souls
(cosidering the most unseasonable Covetousness of them) turned away with grief,
and made some other shifts which God provided for them:

2. Again, when Providence men had broken up the Land, and planted the first
year, and hoped to reap a second Crop [which we all know to be the better] Mr.
Coddington for his own private end showed himself a Mole-rooting in the Earth,
and would not give way to it.

3. I could name many Instances of elder and later date: One I will further
particularize: A poor man came to Mr. Coddington in these late bloody
distresses, and offers to buy a Bushel of Corn for his poor Wife and Children
in great want, etc. Mr. Coddington though abounding, etc. would not let this
poor Soul have a Bushel, except he would pay him a weeks work for it, which it
is said the poor man was forced to give him. Alas* what does the Pope,
Cardinals, Jesuits, Bishops, Doctors, Presbyters, Independants, Baptists, (...)
(...) of the Christian name, and new and old-England talk of ^eligion? How many
thousands will this holy Scriptu^^ un^a^e, unmask and discover? Love not this
world, nor the things that are (...) World, if any man love this World, the
love of the father is not (...) How does Paul (by the true Spirit of God) tell
us, that (...) of such a stinking (...) that (...) not to (...) the (...).

(...) not (...) Spirit of God (...) cry out, Is (...) and (...) do (...) of
(...) Enmity with God, whosoever therefore (...) Enemy to God. Few among
thousands will (...) they are (...) Adulterers. Enemies to God, but our (...)
discover (...) at last (what e're our pretenses be) to our own Souls, and the
(...) and Consciences of all men: Oh let not Mr. (...) persecution of the
Tongue, with which his whole Letter (...) and sour'd, while he imputes it only
to R. W. and let him not forget his cutting Letter to Mr. Sellingham, and his
damning of him Body and Soul (after his Soul was I hope in (...), and his Body
at rest in his grave. I would (...) Mr. Coddington to bring forth those printed
Letters which were printed at London for him, and sent him over, and he has
them by him, or has burned them, or keep^ them for a day to come, wherein let
his persecuting and damning Tongue (and the persecuting damning Tongues and
Pens of the Quakers be set theirs and mine, the one against the other, and let
it be seen whither I rail and scold with crying out Lies, Lies, Bundles of
Lies, etc. yea, whether I damn the Bodies and Souls of all my (...), and though
I sometimes reprove sharply, (sometimes) as the holy Spirit pr^cticeth and
commands in Scripture* yet whether I tender not the persons of mine
Opposites, pity them, and pray for the destruction of their sins only, but the
salvation of their precious Souls and Bodies also. Let it be seen whether I
damn all the Saints that ever were, are, or shall be that are not of my
opinion, as G. F. and most of them that speak and write for their ^pinion do?

R. W

POSTSCRIPTS.
(...) one passage more in Mr. Coddingtons Letter, (...) not a (...) of the
book was spoken I have said it (...)* viz. that (...) of my (...) God I have
not (...) any thing* I (...)*

(...) substantial matter is (...).

(...) fastened (...) Tittle on (...) to the u^most of my memory which they
spoke not.

4. Where any Quotations (...) of G. F. and my Answers are added* I tell the
Reader of (...) also any enlargement which I intended to deliver, but could not
because of their Interruptions, and Restrictions.

I (...) not Mr. (...) Letter (to the Governor Leveret) by me, I (...):
possibly I may omit something, but I judg^ (...), objections or charges against
the Narrative^, (...) the Papists ^o) so do the Quakers, and (...), they judge
their Opposites Liars, Liars, under strong (...), prejudices, false principles,
etc. To which I say*

1. (...) that now be (...) fair and patient disputes.

2. O^ by sober writing^, Answers and Replies, etc.

2. We must have every man to venture his Soul and to Answer it (at his Eternal
peril) to the most High Father of Lights and Spirits*

3. None shall see the Truth but the Soul that loves it, and digs for it as for
treasures of gold and silver, and (...) impartial, patient, and pitiful to the
Opposers.

4. The secrets of all Controversies and of all hearts shall shortly (...): He
that believes makes (...) h^st^.

R. W.


