THE NARRATIVE OF The most terrible and dread (...) TEMPEST, HURRICANE, or
EARTHQUAKE in HOLLAND; On Wednesday the 22 of July last, With the particulars
of the Damages, how it overthrew and be down V^^t ^^^bers of St^^p^e, Mills and
Houses destroyed many men and Children, (...) away abundance of S^^ips (...)
several places, almost utterly ruined the City of Utrecht,

Where the Churches following are Demolished; The famous Dome, or Cathedral of
that (...) The Spire of St. ^an^^ses. Burr Kirk. St. Peter's Church, and St.
Nicholas Churc^^^ And other Wonderful Devastations; So that it is judged by
(...) Men, the Dutch have hereby sustained no (...) Damage, tha^^ London, by
the Dreadful (...) in Sixty Six.

Printed First at Amsterdam, by Order of the States, and Tra^^sl^^ and
published in English, for General Satisfaction, from the Dutch (...)*

To which is Added, a Letter from Kent, Whereby it appears that (...) R^mains
of this (...) into E ngland, did (...) (...) hurt the same Night in (...)
M^^sh, and there (...).

Cambridge Printed by S. G. for John Ratcliff of (...)

THE NARRATIVE of the Late DREADFUL STORM in HOLLAND.
O N Wednesday the twenty second of Ju^^ last (old style) being a day set
apart by Orde^^ of our Superiors to be observed as a Fast (...) Imploring a
blessing from Heaven, on the Forces (...) this State, under the Conduct of his
Highness th^^ Prince of Orange, the weather was all day very (...) and sultry,
and continued fair and clear till about seven of the Clock in the Evening: when
there a (...) at this City of Amsterdam, to Windward; (...) very black thick
Cloud. Which being furiously ^ought on by the Wind, suddenly filled the whole
^^emisphere with a terrible Darkness, which was in^^ntly supplied by more
dreadful Flashes of Light^^ng, that continued for some time without
Intermis^^n, and made the whole Heavens seem as if they (...) been in a Flame:
in the mean time it thundered (...) horribly, and haild excessively, several of
the (...) that fell, being (as it is credibly reported, and (...) been here
attested before the Magistrates) that extraordinary, and almost incredible
bigness ^^at they weighed above a quarter (some say almost (...)) a pound a
piece* but that which was yet more frighting and prejudicial was the extreme
fury of (...) wind, which blew with such excess of violence, ^^at the like was
never before seen or heard of in (...) parts. The noise of the Thunder,
continual (...) (...) of Lightning without the least respit, the (...) (...)
Hail, and roaring of the wind, most horrible to hear, coming thus all at once,
made the (...) people conlude the Day of Doom, or final (...) of the World was
come upon them: All that in the Streets were presently forced to take sh^^ some
Houses, partly to avoid the Hail, and (...) for that otherwise they were blown
into the (...) halls: wherein many, especially Children and persous by that
means perished, or dashed against Walls, and their breath struck out of their
(...) or if they were strong enough, or in places seen (...) avoid those
mischiefs, they were knocked on the (...) by the falls of Houses, Steeples, and
Chimneys (...) were woefully shattered down in all parts, such (...) the
violence of the storm, that the ground (...) seemed to move and tremble as if
it had be^^ (...) Earthquake (which some do still believe it in (...) have
been) and this City being generally (...) piles, such shakings threw down great
(...) Houses, and blew away others quite (...) (...) ^^^ions; whereby
multitudes of people, both Men and Women, and (...) were miserably destroyed,
or sadly maimed and hurt; and th^se other (...) happened to escape standing,
were generally uncovered, their T^^es (...) off, and their Walls of sides broke
down, whereby Goods to an (...) value were spoiled and damaged. Most part of
the Trees (...) Leagues from hence were plucked up by the Roots, and some (...)
very biggest of them) carried above half a Mile from the place they (...),
above Thirty Miles are quite blown down, and most of the other (...) City
shattered beyond repair; nor was the mischief less by water then (...) all the
Vessels that lay before the Pales being broke loose, and a do^^em over-set,
thirty Ships turned up side down in a strange manner, (...) and small Vessels
that were out in the W^^^lings were cast away (...) part of their men, of whom,
some are ^ff^^ed by their surviving (...), to have been first k^^led by the
violence of the Hailstones, which ^^^reat, and withal (...) sharp, that
several persons going to help their (...) Friend^ out, when blown into the
Ditches and ready to be (...) heads and hands almost battered to pieces, so
that they were for^^ that charitable office to provide for their own safety.
This (...) in continued not in its fury here above half an hour, and yet the
da^^^ losses sustained are scarce to be computed. (...), and other Villages
have been in the same Condition, in some scarce (...) ^^nding.

^^etch we have received an account that as this Tempest continued (...), so it
was more dreadfu^ and prejudicial, insomuch that it has almost (...) that
City; which had not yet well recovered it self from these ^^^ately susteine^^
whilst in the hand of an Enemy, the great Doom or ^^thedral of that place, a
structure renowned throughout Christ^n^^ the body of the Church was bea^ down
and buried in its own rub^^ (...) (...) s^ear the Ministers Pue, and the seven
Crown Candlesticks (...) (...), and the stately Clock-work are all beaten to
pieces but the self remains whole; the ancient and stately Spire of St. Jam^ses
is likewise thrown down, but providence ordered it so that it fell (...) (...)
the houses, which must otherwise have beaten down (...) of the Inhabitants. The
Burr (...) is beaten in on both sides and half the Roof of it. The Spire of
(...) Nicholas^ blown away, and the Tower that stood by Agents Cloister also
(...) (...) Magdalen Church and the Duke house, are demolisht, so (...) (...)
Towers of St. Peter's Church, and the body of the Church ruined.

A Schute lying full of Turf in the Gralt was beaten all to pieces, the
To^l-steek port, another Turf Ship destroyed in the same manner mine Corn-mills
on the Will, there is but there left standing, the Mill Griest-Streigh blown up
from the ground, so are the Mills without (...) stri^k port; several Passengers
were blown some into the Water, and to the Air as they were traveling thither,
and several Wagons that (...) Passengers from A^^henime we^e by violence of
the Wind overturn most of the people very much hurt, and five killed. The St.
Martins (...) is destroyed, and some poor people Killed in it, and in short,
(...) City! so eminently that there ^s (...) a House but has received and
retains considerable (...) of this Tempests violence. It is reported to arise
(...), did (...) hurt, and thence passed into North-H^lla^^ Causing great
Devastations in all its Progress.

We every moment receive fresh tyding of further damages from (...) and (...)
to be certain that very many persons have perished herein, I perfect (...) of
them as yet brought in to assert^^^ the number; Nor total of the damages
sustained be computed, for as it is Horror whilst (...) was inexpressible, so
the mischief done thereby i^ conceived (...) valuable.

POSTSCRIPT.
(...) the Translation of this Dutch Account, we have received Certain
^^ormation that on the very same Wednesday night, there happened a (...)
unusual Tempest, or Storm, in Rumney Marsh, in the County ^^t, and part,
adjacent; (...) began thereabout ten of the (...), ^o such fury that ^ff^ighted
the People, fearing a^^ their Houses have fallen on their heads; and in^^ed it
(...) very considerable (...) there, both to Houses and Cattle; and continued
for above (...), with that violence, that the (...) M^n living thereabouts,
heard the like: And some prejudice we are told of at (...) (...) our ^^sts
(...) time, which is (...) clud^d to he (...) of the remains of the ^^^ntioned
Hurricane: But the same having spent its greatest fury, (...) here somewhat
more gentle then it had been in Holland.

FINIS.

