TO FRIENDS, From a Yearly Meeting held at Philadelphia, the 4th of the 7th
Month, 1689.
BE^^^ (...) of the several Monthly and Quarterly Meetings in East and
West-Jarsey, and Pennsilvan^^, etc. In the Gospel-fellowship and Unity of the
Ancient Truth, do we at this time salute you, and in much Love, Good will and
God^ Care recommend unto you, and (...) before you the Consideration and due
Regard of these (...), but wholesome Particulars:

First, That in your respective Meetings, ye earnestly endeavor to continue
and practice those useful Instructions and that good Order established among us
in our Native Land, in reference to a Godly Life and an Honest Conversation,
that so (as far as in you lies) the Holy Truth and Profession thereof may not
suffer, or be evil spoken of, by the contrary Practices of any found among us;
and that Misdemeanors and Miscarriages herein, may receive seasonable
Admonitions, Reproof or Censure.

Secondly, That Christian Watchfulness and Wisdom be used and e^^^cised in your
Meetings toward all such who continue under a (...) among you, ^^^t ^^lk
disorderly, or are Unsavory, and of a bad Report in their Callings, Stations
or Neighborhood; We request you, upon such, and the like Occasions, that when
upon inquiry, or otherwise, you hear or understand the same, ye do, with what
convenient Expedition ye can, in tender Love, and in Brotherly and Sisterly
Regard, acquaint them thereof, and by suitable Discourses and Proceedings,
endeavor their Recovery, and that by such Means and Instruments, which are
most likely to be successful, and least to be objected against.

Thirdly, That in your next Meetings you do with sincerity and diligence, take
into your Fatherly and Motherly Consideration, the State and Condition of such
who are scattered and gone astray from among you, and more especially of those
who have not received the due Notice, and Gospel Order, which is to be
expressed and given unto them. Dear Friends, Labor in the Spirit of Meekness,
with the Bowels and Compassion of Truth, and in your measure, with the Wisdom
which is from above, to possess them of the Danger and Insecurity of their
State, and of (...) Uncertainly of the Ease and outside Satisfaction which
(...) seemingly attend, and flatter their Distance for (...) and that their
continued Separation from the Way (...), in its Requirings, and from the
Obedience of (...) Cross of Christ Jesus, is like to end with great Re^^^^^
Tribulation and Anguish of Soul and Spirit. Be^^^^ your selves, we earnestly
entreat you, with a Godly Zeal and good Understanding therein, that the Witness
of God may be (...) in them and your Proceedings may be well taken and spoken
of. And tha^ (...) redeem any Remisness or Neglige^^^ in Affairs of this
Nature, in case any has been, in your Meetings past, by your double Diligence
for the future.

Fourthly, That ye frequently and faithfully mind one another of the Virtuous
and Christian Education of your Youth and Children, that they be bred up in
Sobriety and in the for^ of Sound Words, and sound Learning, according to the
Holy Scriptures, and that they frequently read in the holy Scriptures, and
abstain from reading or hearing read all unsound, unprofitable and hurtful
Books, which are too common in the world; ye do hereby, besides the great
Advantages received therewith by your Children, Transfer your Care, as Godly
Parents, and as Exemplary Men and Women unto Posterity. And as both Worth, and
a Blessing, frequently fall upon them who are brought up and trained in the
Nurture and Way of Truth, so for your Love and Respect to the Requirings and
Commandments of the Lord, and in teaching the same to your Children, you will
receive the Reward of Peace, and the answer o^ a good (...) in your having done
your Duty in that respect here, and your Names will be continued in a worthy
Remembrance hereafter.

So Dear Friends, These few Requisite Heads remaining weighty with us at
present, We have thought good to send unto you, and to leave them with you to
be made use of as ye shall see occasion and service, by the wisdom and
direction of the good Spirit of Truth, well knowing (and we doubt not but the
sense of the same is with you) That our holy Profession and Religious
Assemblies greatly need to be strengthened, and accompanied with a Godly Life
and Gospel Discipline, that so they may still continue both desirable to
others, and savoury to such who are exercised therein. And further, that the
Way of the Lord manifested to us, for the Glory of his Name, and Salvation of
our Souls, be with Godly Earnestness and Pious Endeavors made known and
industriously recommended to our Children, and they encouraged thereunto, and
countenanced therein: so shall the Lord count us worthy of his heavenly Gifts,
and faithful Dispensers of the same, Obedient also to the Righteous Requirings
of God, and du^^y Respectful to the worthy and imitable Pattern of Godly
Parents, and both just as well as dutiful to our Posterity.

Having thus far cleared our Minds unto you, we bid you Farewell.

Its desired that this may be Read in all your Monthly and Quarterly Meetings.

Printed by William Bradford at Philadelphia (...)


