The FIRST DECLARATION of HIS HIGHNESS WILLIAM HENRY, By the Grace of GOD
PRINCE of ORANG. etc. Of the REASONS inducing Him to appear in Arms in the
Kingdom of England, for Preserving of the Protestant Religion and for Restoring
the Laws and Liberties of England, Scotland, and Ireland.
IT is both certain and evident to all men, that the Public Peace and
Happiness of any State or Kingdom cannot be preserved, where the Laws,
Liberties, and Customs established by the lawful Authority in it, are openly
transgressed and annulled: More especially where the Alteration of RELIGION is
endeavored, and that a Religion which is contrary to Law is endeavored to be
introduced: Upon which those who are most immediately concerned in it, are
indispensably bound to endeavor to preserve and maintain the established Laws,
Liberties and Customs: and above all, the Religion and Worship of God that is
established among them: and to (...) an effectual ca^e that the Inhabitants of
the (...) ^tate or Kingdom, may neither be deprived of their Religi^^ nor of
their Civil Rights. Which is so ^^ch the more necessary, because the Greatness
and Se^^rity both of Kings, Royal Families, and of all such as (...) in
Authourity as well as the Happiness of their Sub^^^^s and people, depend in a
most especial manner, upon (...) ^^act Observation and maintenance of these
their Laws Liberties and Customs.

Upon these Grounds it is, that we cannot any longer forbear to Declare, that
(to our great Regret) we (...) that those Councillors who have now the chief
Credit with the King, have overturned the Religion, Laws, and Liberties of
those Realms: and subjected them in all things relating to their Consciences,
Liberties and properties, to Arbitrary Government: and that not only by (...)
and indirect ways, but in an open and undisguised manner.

Those evil Counselors for the advancing and coloring this with some
plausibe pretexts, did invent and set on foot, the Kings Dispencing Power, by
virtue of which, they pretend that according to Law, he can suspend and
dispense* with the execution of the Laws that have been enacted by the
Authority of the King and Parliament for the Security and happiness of the
Subject, and so have rendered those Laws of no effect: Tho there is nothing more
certain, than that as no Laws can be made but by the joint Concurrence of King
and Parliament, so likewise, Laws so enacted, which secure the public peace
and safety of the Nation* and the lives and liberties of every Subject in it,
cannot be repealed or suspended but by the same Authority. For tho the King may
pardon the Punishment that a Transgressour has incurred, and to which he is
condemned, as in cases of Treason or Felony; yet it cannot be with any color
of Reason, inferred from thence, that the King can entirely suspend the
Excution of those laws relating to Treason or Felony: unless it is pretended
that he is clothed with a despotick or arbitrary Power, and that the lives,
liberties, honors and estates of his Subjects depend wholly on his good will
and pleasure, and are entirely subject to him; which must infallibly follow on
the King's having power to suspend the Execution of the Laws, and to dispense
with them.

Those evil Counselors, in order to the giving some Credit to this strange
and execrable Maxim, have so conducted the matter that they have obtained a
Sentence from the Judges, declaring that this dispensing Power, is a Right
belonging to the Crown; as if it were in the power of the twelve Judges to
offer up the Laws, Rights and liberties of the whole Nation to the King, to be
disposed of by him arbitrarily and at his pleasure, and expressly contrary to
Laws enacted for the security of the subjects. In order to the Obtaining this
Judgment, those evil Counselors did before hand examine secretly the Opinion
of the Judges, and procured such of them as could not in conscience concur in
so pernicious a Sentence, to be turned out, and others to be substituted in
their rooms, till by the Changes which were made in the Courts of Judicature,
they at last obtained that Judgment. And they have raised some to those Trusts,
who make open Profession of the popish Religion, tho those are by law rendered
incapable of all such Employments.

It is also manifest and notorious, that as his Majesty was upon his coming to
the Crown, received and acknowledged by all the Subjects of England, Scotland
and Ireland, as their King, without the least Opposition, tho he made then open
Profession of the popish Religion; so he did then promise and solemnly swear at
his Coronation, that he would maintain his Subjects in the free enjoyment of
their laws and liberties, and in particular, that he would maintain the Church
of England as it was established by Law. It is likewise certain, that there
have been at diverse and sundry times, several laws enacted for the
preservation of those Rights and liberties, and of the protestant Religion: and
among other Securities, it has been enacted, that all persons whatsoever, that
are advanced to any Ecclesiastical Dignity, or to bear Office in either
University, as likewise all other, that shall be put in any Employment, Civil
or Military, should declare that they were not Papists but were of the
Protestant Religion, (and that by their taking of the Oaths of Allegiance and
Supremacy and the Test) yet these evil Counselors have in effect annulled and
abolished all those Laws, both with relation to Ecclesiastical and Civil
Employments. In order to Ecclesiastical Dignities and Offices, they have not
only without any color of Law, but against most express Laws to the contrary,
set up a Commission, of a certain number of persons, to whom they have
committed the Cognizance and Direction of all Ecclesiastical matters: in the
which Commission there has been and still is, one of his Majesty's Ministers of
state, who makes now public Profession of the popish Religion and who, at the
time of his first professing it, declared that for a great while before, he had
believed that to be the only true Religion. By all this, the deplorable state
to which the Protestant Religion is reduced, is apparent, since the Affairs of
the Church of England, are now put into the hands of Persons who have accepted
of a Commission that is manifestly illegal, and who have executed it contrary
to all Law; and that now one of their chief Members has abjured the Protestant
Religion and declared himself a Papist, by which he is become incapable of
holding an^ public Employment. The said Commissioners have hitherto given such
proof of their Submission to the directions given them, that there is no reason
to doubt, but they will still continue to promote all such designs as will be
most agreeable to them. And those evil Counselors take care, to raise none to
Ecclesiastical Dignities, but persons that have no Zeal for the Protestant
Religion, and that now hide their Unconcernedness for it under the specious
pretense of Moderation. The said Commissioners have suspended the Bishop of
London, only because he refused to obey an order, that was sent him to suspend
a Worthy Divine, without so much as Citing him before him, to make his own
Defense, or observing the common Forms of Process. They have turned out a
President, chosen by the Fellows of Magdelen College, and afterward all the
Fellows of that College, without so much as Citing them before any Court that
could take legal Cognizance of that Affair, or obtaining any Sentence against
them by a Competent Judge: and the only Reason that was given for turning them
out, was their Refusing to choose for their President, a person that was
recommended to them by the Instigation of those evil Counselors: tho the Right
of a Free-Election belonged undoubtedly to them. But they were turned out of
their Free-holds contrary to Law, and to that express provision in Magna
Charta, that no man shall lose life or goods, but by the Laws of the Land. And
now these evil Counselors have put the said College wholly into the hands of
Papists, tho as is above said, they are incapable of all such Employments both
by the law of the Land and the Statutes of the College. These Commissioners
have also cited before them all the Chancellors and Archdeacons of England,
requiring them to certify to them, the names of all such Clergy men as have
read the Kings Declaration for Liberty of Conscience, and of such as have not
read it: without considering that the Reading of it was not enjoined the Clergy
by the Bishops, who are their Ordinaries. The Illegality and Incompetency of
the said Court of the Ecclesiastical Commissioners was so notoriously known,
and it did so evidently appear, that it tended to the Subversion of the
Protestant Religion, that the Most Reverend Father in GOD, William Archbishop
of Canterbury, Primate and Metropolitan of all England, seeing that it was
raised for no other End, but to Oppress such Persons as were of eminent Virtue
Learning and Piety, refused to fit or concur in it. And tho there are many
express Laws against all Churches or Chapels for the exercise of popish
Religion, and also against all Monasteries and Convents, and more particularly
against the Order of the Jesuits, yet those evil Counselors have procured
Orders for the Building of several Churches and Chapel for the Exercise of that
Religion: they have also procured diverse Monasteries to be erected; and in
contempt of the Law, they have not only set up several Colleges of Jesuits, in
diverse places of the Corrupting of Youth, but have raised up one of the Order
to be a Privy Councellor and a Minister of State. By all which they do
evidently show that they are restrained by no rules of Law whatsoever; but that
they have subjected the Honors and Estates of the Subjects, and the
Established Religion to a despotick Power and to arbitrary Government: In all
which, they are served and seconded by those Ecclesiastical Commissioners.

They have also followed the same Methods with relation to civil Affairs: for
they have procured Orders to examine all Lord Lieutenants, deputy Lieutenants,
Sherriffs, Justices of the peace, and all others that were in any public
Employment, if they would concur with the King in the Repeal of the ^ests and
Penal Laws; and all such, whose Consciences did not suffer them, to comply with
their designs, were turned out, and others were put in their places, who they
believed would be more compliant to them, in their designs of defeating the
Intent and Execution of those laws, which had been made with so much care and
caution, for the Security of the Protestant Religion. And in many of these
places they have put professed Papists, tho the Law has disabled them, and
warranted the Subjects not to have any regard to their Orders.

They have also invaded the Privileges, and seized the Charters of most of
those Towns that have a right to be represented by their Burgesses in
Parliament; and have procured Surrender to be made of them, by which the
Magistrates in them have delivered up all their Rights and Privileges to be
disposed of, at the pleasure of those Evil Counselors, who have thereupon
placed new Magistrates in those Towns such as they can most entirely confide
in: and in many of them they have put popish Magistrates, notwithstanding the
incapacities under which the law has put them.

And whereas no Nation whatsoever can subsist without the Administration of
good and impartial Justice, upon which men's Lives, liberties, honors, and
estates do depend; those evil Counselors have subjected these to an arbitrary
and despotick power. In the most important affairs, they have studied to
discover before hand, the Opinions of the Judges; and have turned out such, as
they found would not conform themselves to their Intentions: and have put
others in their places, of whom they were more assured, without having any
regard to their abilities. And they have not stuck to raise even professed
Papists to Courts of Judicature notwithstanding their incapacity by law, and
that no regard is due to an Sentences flowing from them. They have carried this
so far, as to deprive such Judges, who in the common Administration of
Justice, showed that they were governed by their consciences, and not by the
directions which others gave them: by which it is apparent that they design to
render themselves the absolute Masters of the lives, honors and estates of the
subjects, of what rank or Dignity soever they may be; and that without having
any regard to the equity of the cause, or to the Consciences of the Judges,
whom they will have to submit in all things to their own will and pleasure:
hoping by such ways to intimidate those who are yet in employment, as also such
others, as they shall think fit, to put in the rooms of those whom they have
turned out; and to make them see what they must look for, if they should at any
time, act in the least contrary to their good liking: and that no failings of
that kind are pardoned in any persons whatsoever. A great deal of blood has
been shed in many places of the Kingdom by Judges guided by those evil
Counselors, against all the Rules and Forms of Law, without so much as
suffering the persons that were accused, to plead in their own Defense. They
have also, by Putting the Administration of Justice in the hands of Papists,
brought all the matters of civil Justice into great uncertainties, with how
much exactness and Justice soever that these Sentences may have been given. For
since the Laws of the Land do not only exclude Papists from all places of
Judicature, but have put them under an incapacity, none are bound to
acknowledge or to obey their Judgments, and all Sentences given by them, are
null and void of themselves: so that all persons who have been cast in Trials
before such popish Judges, may justly look on their pretended Sentences as
having no more force, than the Sentences of any private and unauthorised person
whatsoever. So deplorable is the case of the subjects who are obliged to answer
to such Judges, that must in all things stick to the Rules which are set them
by those evil Counselors, who as they raised them up to those Employments, so
can turn them out of them at pleasure; and who can never be esteemed lawful
Judges; so that all their Sentences are, in the Construction of the Law, of no
force and efficacy. They have likewise disposed of all Military Employments in
the same manner: for tho the Laws have not only excluded Papists from all such
Employments, but have in particular provided that they should be disarmed; yet
they in contempt of these Laws, have not only armed the Papists, but have
likewise raised them up to the greatest Military Trusts both by Sea and Land;
and that strangers as well as Natives, and Irish as well as English; that so by
those means, having rendered themselves Masters both of the affairs of the
Church, of the Government of the Nation, and of the Course of Justice, and
subjected them all to a despoick and arbitrary power, they might be in a
Capacity to maintain and execute their wicked Designs by the Assistance of the
Army, and thereby to enslave the nation.

The dismal effects of this Subversion of the established Religion, laws and
liberties in England appear more evidently to us by what we see done in
Ireland; where the whole Government is put into the hands of Papists, and where
are the protestant Inhabitants are under the daily fears of what may be justly
apprehended from the arbitrary power which is set up there, which has made
great numbers of them, leave that Kingdom, and abandon their estates in it,
remembering well that cruel and bloody Massacre, which fell out in that Island,
in the year 1641.

Those evil Counselors have also prevailed with the King to declare in
Scotland, that he is clothed with absolute Power, and that all the Subjects are
bound to obey him without Reserve: upon which he has assumed an arbitrary power
both over the Religion and Laws of that Kingdom, from all which, it is
apparent, what is to be looked for in England, as soon as matters are duly
prepared for it.

Those great and insufferable Oppressions and the open Contempt of all Law,
together with the Apprehensions of the sad Consequences that must certainly
follow upon it, have put the Subjects under great and just fears, and have made
them look after such lawful Remedies, as are allowed of in all Nations, yet all
has been without effect. And those evil Counselors have endeavored to make
all men apprehend, the loss of their Lives, Liberties, Honors, and Estates, if
they should go about to preserve themselves from this oppression, by Petitions,
Representations, or other means authourised by Law. Thus did they proceed with
the Archbishop of Canterbury and the other Bishops who having offered a most
humble Petition to the King, in terms full of Respect, and not exceeding the
number limited by Law, in which they set forth in short the reasons for which
they could not obey that Order, which by the Instigation of those evil
Counselors was sent them, requireing them to appoint their Clergy to read in
their Churches, the Declaration for Liberty of Conscience, were sent to prison,
and afterward brought to a Trial, as if they had been guilty of some enormous
crime. They were not only obliged to defend themselves in that pursuit, but to
appear before professed Papists, who had not taken the Test, and by Consequence
were men whose Interest lead them to condemn them: and the Judges that gave
their Opinion in their Favors were thereupon turned out.

And yet it cannot be pretended that any Kings, how great soever there power
has been, and how arbitrary and despotick soever they have bin in the exercise
of it, have ever reckoned it a Crime for their Subjects to come in all
Submission and Respect, and in a due number, not exceedding the limits of the
Law,) and represent to them the Reasons that made it impossible for them to
obey their Orders. Those evil Counselors have also treated a Peer of the Realm
as a Criminal, only because he said that the Subjects were not bound to obey
the Orders of a popish Justice of Peace: tho it is evident that (they being by
law rendered incapable of all such Trusts) no regard is due to their Orders.
This being the security which the people have by the Law, for their lives,
liberties, honors, and estates, that they are not to be subjected to the
arbitrary proceedings of Papists, that are contrary to Law put into any
employments Civil or Military.

Both We our Self, and Our dearest and most entirely beloved Consort the
Princess, have endeavored to signify in terms full of respect, to the King,
the just and deep Regret which all these proceeding have given us; and in
Compliance with his Majesty's desires signified to us, We declared both by word
of mouth to His Envoy, and in writing, what Our thoughts were touching the
Repealing of the Tests and penal Laws, which we did in such a manner, that we
hoped we had proposed an Expedient, by which the peace of those Kingdoms and a
happy Agreement among the Subjects of all persuasions might have been settled:
but those evil Counselors, have put such ill Constructions on these our good
intentions, that they have endeavored to alienate the King more and more from
us, as if we had designed to disturb the Quiet and Happiness of the Kingdom.

The last and great Remedy for all those evils, is, the Calling of a
Parliament, for the securing of the Nation, against the evil practices of those
wicked Counselors: but this could not be yet compassed, nor can it be easily
brought about. For those men apprehending, that a lawful Parliament being once
assembled, they would be brought to an account for all their open violations of
Law, and for their Plotts and Conspiracies against the protestant Religion, and
the Lives and Liberties of the Subjects, they have endeavored under the
specious Pretense of Liberty of Conscience, first to sow divisions among
Protestants, between those of the Church of England and the Dissenters: the
design being laid to engage Protestants, that are all equally concerned to
preserve themselves from popish Oppressions into mutual quarrellings; that so
by these, some advantages might be given them to bring about their Designs, and
that both in the Election of the Members of Parliament, and afterward in the
Parliament it self. For they see well that if all protestants could enter into
a mutual good understanding one with another, and concur together in the
preserving of their Religion, it would not be possible for them to compass
their wicked ends, They have also required all persons in the several Counties
of England, that either were in any employment, or were in any considerable
Esteem to declare before hand, that they would concur in the Repeal of the
Tests and penal Laws; and that they would give their voices in the Elections to
Parliament, only for such as would concur in it: Such as would not thus
pre-engage themselves were turned out of all Employments, and others who entered
into those engagements were put in their places, many of them being Papists:
and contrary to the Charters and Privileges of those Buroughs that have a
Right to send Burgesses to Parliament, they have Ordered such Regulations to be
made, as they thought fit and necessary for assuring themselves of all the
Members that are to be chosen by those Corporations: and by this means they
hope to avoid that punishment which they have deserved: tho it is apparent,
that all Acts made by popish Magistrates are null and void of themselves; so
that no Parliament can be lawful, for which the Elections and Returns are made
by Popish Sheriffs and Ma^ors of Towns: and Therefore as long as the Authority
and Magistracy is in such hands, it is not possible to have any lawful
Parliament. And tho according to the Constitution of the English Government and
Immemorial Custom, all Elections of Parliament Men ought to be made with an
entire Liberty, without any sort of Force, or the requiring the Electors to
choose such persons as shall be named to them: and the persons thus freely
elected, ought to give their Opinions freely upon all matters that are brought
before them, having the good of the Nation ever before their eyes, and
following in all things the dictates of their Conscience; yet now the people of
England cannot expect a Remedy from a free Parliament, legally called and
Chosen. But they may perhaps see one called, in which all Elections will be
carried by fraud or force, and which will be composed of such persons, of whom
those evil Counselors hold themselves well assured, in which all things will
be carried on according to their direction and Interest, without any regard to
the Good or Happiness of the Nation. Which may appear evidently from this, that
the same persons tried the Members of the last Parliament, to gain them to
consent to the Repeal of the Test and penal Laws, and procured that Parliament
to be dissolved, when they found that they could not, neither by Promises nor
Threatenings, prevail with the Members to comply with their wicked designs.

But to crown all, there are great and violent presumptions, inducing us to
believe that those evil Counselors in order to the carrying on of their ill
designs, and to the gaining to themselves the more time for the effecting of
them, for the encouraging of their Accomplices, and for the discouraging of all
good Subjects, have published that the Queen has brought forth a Son: tho
there have appeared both during the Queen's pretended Bigness, and in the
manner in which the Birth was managed, so many just and visible grounds of
suspicion, that not only we our selves, but all the good Subjects of those
Kingdoms, do vehemently suspect that the pretended Prince of Wales was not born
by the Queen. And it is notoriously known to all the world, that many both
doubted of the Queen's Bigness, and of the Birth of the Child, and yet there
was not any one thing done to satisfy them, or to put an end to their Doubts.
And since our dearest and most entirely-beloved Consort the Princess and
likewise We our selves have so great interest in this Matter, and such a Right,
as all the world knows, to the Succession to the Crown: Since also the English
did in the year 1672. when the States General of the United Provinces were
involved in a most unjust War, use their utmost endeavors to put an end to
that War, and that in Opposition to those who were then in the Government, and
by their so doing, they run the hazard of losing both the favor of the Court
and their Employments; And since the English Nation has ever testified a most
particular affection and esteem both to our dearest Consort the Princess and to
Our Selves, We cannot excuse Our Selves from espousing their Interests, in a
matter of such high consequence, and from contributing all that lies in us for
the maintaining both of the Protestant Religion, and of the Laws and Liberties
of those Kingdoms, and for the securing to them the continual enjoyment of all
their just Rights. To the doing of which, we are most earnestly solicited by a
great many Lords both Spiritual and Temporal, and by many Gentlemen and other
Subjects of all Ranks.

THEREFORE it is, that we have thought fit to go over to England, and to carry
over with us a Force sufficient, by the Blessing of God, to defend us from the
violence of those evil Counselors. And WE being desireous that Our intentions
in this may be rightly understood; have for this End prepared this Declaration,
in which as We have hitherto given a true account of the reasons inducing us to
it; So we now think fit to Declare that this Our Expedition, is intended for no
other Design but to have a Free and Lawful Parliament assembled as soon as is
possible: And that in Order to this, all the late Charters by which the
Elections of Burgesses are limited contrary to the ancient Custom, shall be
considered as null and of no force, and likewise all Magistrates who have been
injustly turned out, shall forthwith resume their former Employments, as well
as all the Buroughs of England shall return again to their ancient
Prescriptions and Charters: And more particularly that the ancient Charter of
the great and famous City of Lodnon, shall again be in force: and that the
Writts for the Members of Parliament shall be addressed to the proper Officers,
according to Law and Custom. That also none be suffered to choose or be chosen
Members of Parliament, but such as are qualified by Law: and that the Members
of Parliament being thus lawfully chosen, they shall meet and sit in full
Freedom, that so the two Houses may concur in the preparing of such laws as
they, upon full and free debate, shall judge necessary and convenient, both for
the Confirming and Executing the Law concerning the Test, and such other Laws
as are necessary for the Security and maintenance of the Protestant Religion;
as likewise for making such Laws as may establish a good agreement between the
Church of England, and all Protestant Dissenters, as also for the covering and
securing of all such who will live peaceably under the Government, as becomes
good subjects, from all persecution upon the account of their Religion, even
Papists themselves not excepted; and for the doing of all other things which the
2 Houses of Parliament shall find necessary for the Peace Honor and Safety of
the Nation, so that that there may be no more danger of the Nations falling at
any time hereafter under arbitrary Government. To this Parliament we will also
refer the enquiry into the Birth of the pretended Prince of Wales, and all
things relating to it, and to the Right of Succession.

And We, for Our part will concur in every thing, that may procure the peace
and Happiness of the Nation, which a free and lawful Parliament shall
determine; since We have nothing before Our eyes in this Our Undertaking, but
the Preservation of the Protestant Religion, the Covering of all men from
persecution for their Consciences, and the securing to the whole Nation the
free enjoyment of all their Laws, Rights and Liberties under a just and legal
Government.

This is the design that We have proposed to Our sevls in appearing upon this
occasion in Arms: in the Conduct of which, we will keep the Forces under Our
Command, under all the Strictness of Martial Discipline, and take a special
care, that the people of the Countries through which We must march, shall not
suffer by their means; and as soon as the state of the Nation will admit of it,
We promise that We will send back all those foreign Forces, that We have
brought along with Us.

We do therefore hope that all people will judge rightly of us, and approve of
these our Proceedings: But we chiefly rely on the Blessing of God, for the
success of this our Undertaking, in which we place our whole and only
Confidence.

We do in the last place Invite and Require all persons whatsoever, all the
Peers of the Realm, both Spiritual and Temporal, all Lords Lieutenants, Deputy
Lieutenants, and all Gentlemen, Citisens and other Commons, of all Ranks, to
come and assist Us in order to the executing of this our design, against all
such as shall endeavor to oppose us; that so we may prevent all those Miseries
which must needs follow upon the Nation's being kep't under Arbitrary
Government and Slavery: and that all the Violences and Disorders, which have
overturned the whole Constitution of the English Government, may be fully
redressed in a Free and Legal PARLIAMENT.

And We do likewise resolve, that as soon as the Nations are brought to a State
of Quiet, We will take care that a Parliament shall be called in Scotland, for
the Restoring the ancient Constitution of that Kingdom, and for bringing the
Matters of Religion to such a Settlement, that the people may live easy and
happy, and for putting an end to all the unjust Violences that have been in a
Course of so many years committed there.

We will also study to bring the Kingdom of Ireland to such a state, that the
Settlement there may be religiously observed: and that the Protestant and
British Interest there may be secured. And we will endeavor by all possible
means to procure such an establishment in all the Three Kingdoms that they may
all live in a happy Union and Correspondence together; and that the Protestant
Religion, and the Peace, Honor, and Happiness of those Nations may be
established upon lasting Foundations. Given under our Hand and Seal, at our
Court in the Hague, the tenth day of October, in the Year of our Lord, 1688.

WILLIAM HENRY, PRINCE OF ORANGE. By his Highnesses special Command. C.
HUYGENS.


His Highness's Additional Declaration
AFter we had prepared and Printed this our Declaration, we have understood,
that the subverters of the Religion and Law of those Kingdoms, hearing of our
preparations to assist the people against them, have begun, to retract some of
the Arbitrary and Despotick powers that they had assumed, and to vacate some of
their Injust Judgments and Decrees. The sense of their Guilt, and the distrust
of their force, have induced them to offer to the City of London some seeming
relief from their Great Oppressions: hoping thereby to quiet the People, and to
divert them from demanding a Re-establishment of their Religion and Laws under
the shelter of our Arms; They do also give out, that we do intend to conquer
and enslave the Nation, and therefore it is that we have thought fit to add a
few words to our Declaration.

We are confident that no persons can have such hard thoughts of us, as to
imagine that we have any other Design in this Undertaking, than to procure a
settlement of the Religion and of the Liberties and Properties of the Subjects
upon so sure a Foundation, that there may be no danger of the Nations relapsing
into the like miseries at any time hereafter. And as the forces that we have
brought along with us, are utterly disproportioned to that wicked Design of
conquering the Nation, if we were capable of Intending it, so the great Numbers
of the Principal Nobility and Gentry, that are Men of Eminent Quality and
Estates, and persons of known Integrity and Zeal both for the Religion and
Government of England, many of them being also distinguished by their constant
fidelity to the Crown, who do both accompany us in this Expedition, and have
earnestly solicited us to it, will cover us from all such Malicious
Insinuations: For it is not to be imagined, that either those who have Invited
us, or those that are already come to assist us, can join in a wicked attempt
of Conquest, to make void their own lawful Titles to their Honors, Estates and
Interests, We are also confident that all men see how little weight there is to
be laid, on all Promises and Engagements that can be now made: since there has
been so little regard had in time past, to the most solemn Promises. And as
that imperfect redress that is now offered, is a plain Confession of those
Violations of the Government, that we have set forth, so the Defectiveness of
it is no less Apparent: for they lay down nothing which they may not take up at
Pleasure: and they reserve entire and not so much as mentioned, their claims
and pretenses to an Arbitrary and Despotick Power; which has been the root of
all their Oppression, and of the total subversion of the Government. And its
plain, that there can be no redress nor Remedy offered but in Parliament: by a
Declaration of the Rights of the Subjects that have been Invaded: and not by
any Pretended Acts of Grace, to which the extremity of their affairs has driven
them. Therefore it is that we have thought fit to declare, that we will refer
all to a free Assembly of the Nation, in a lawful Parliament.

Given under our Hand and Seal, at our Court, in the Hague, 24 October. in the
year of our Lord 1688. William Henry, Prince of Orange. By his Highness's
special Command. C. HUYGENS.


Boston, Printed for B. Harrris at the London Coffee-house.


