BY THE COUNCIL and REPRESENTATIVES Of the COLONY of the Massachusetts Bay;
Convened At Boston.
MR. Eliakim Hutchinson, Mr. Peter Sergeant, Mr. Samson Sheaf, Mr. John Air
and Mr. Thomas Brattle (all or any three of them) are Desired and Appointed a
Committee to grant Debenters for Wages to the Soldiers that have been lately
Employed in their Majesty's Service against the common Indian Enemy; which
Committee are to sit in Boston at such times as they shall appoint, giving
public Notice thereof.

The said Committee to receive the Commissaries Accounts, that so what and of
whom any of the Soldiers have taken up any thing may be notified. Every
Soldier to bring a Certificate from his Commander for the time he has Served,
and a Certificate from the Captain out of whose Company he was Impressed, that
he Served with his own Arms, or has returned the Arms he was furnished with;
or else the full value thereof to be defalked out of his Wages, unless good
cause be shown to the contrary.

It is likewise Ordered, That if any Town or particular Person have supplied
any Soldier toward his Wages, they are with all speed to give in the Account
thereof to the several Commissaries, who Served in their respective Head
Quarters, that so it may be inserted in the said Commissaries Accounts, and
returned to the Committee as abovesaid: All which being considered, the said
Committee are to pass each Soldiers Debenture to the Treasurer for payment of
what may be due.

December. 10 th. 1689. By Order of the Council, Isaac Addinton, Secr.
The Committee have appointed to Meet at the Townhouse in Boston upon
Wednesdayes and Fridayes, from nine of the Clock in the Morning to twelve, and
from two to four in the Afternoon for this Service.




