sealBY HIS EXCELLENCY A PROCLAMATION COMMANDING the Setting at Liberty His
MAJESTY's Subjects lately taken and detained by Indians; and all Indians
actually concerned in the Murder of any to Surrender themselves.
WHEREAS Several of His MAJESTY's Subjects inhabiting in the Province of Main
and County of Cornwall within the Eastern parts of His MAJESTY's Territory and
Dominion of NEW ENGLAND, have been by some wicked and evil-disposed Indians
lately Murdered, and others (by them) forcibly Taken and Detained: I do
therefore, by Advice of the COUNCIL, hereby Require and Command All and Every
Indian or Indians whatsoever, who have taken, or do now Keep and Detain any of
His MAJESTY's said Subjects, that forthwith upon Notice hereof, they and Every
of them do Set at Liberty and Discharge all such persons so taken kept and
detained; and Deliver or cause them to be Delivered at their usual Habitations
or Places of abode; (from whence they were so taken) or to some Persons in
Authority there. And that All such Indians who have lately been actually
Concerned in the MURDER of any of His MAJESTY's Subjects, as aforesaid, do on
or before the Eleventh day of November next ensuing the Date hereof, Surrender
and Deliver up themselves to some of His MAJESTY's COUNCIL, Justices of the
Peace, or other Officers within His MAJESTY's said Territory and Dominion, to
Answer for their said Crimes and Offenses, on Default whereof to be Pursued and
Proceeded against with the utmost Severity.

And I do further, with the Advice aforesaid, DECLARE and Publish, that All and
Every Indian or Indians belonging to or being within any part of this His
MAJESTY's said Territory and Dominion, (except such as have been actually
Concerned in the late MURDER of any of His MAJESTY's Subjects, as aforesaid)
shall (according to former Orders) be Received and Protected, with their Women
and Children, near any of our Towns or Places, without any Restraint whatsoever
if they desire the same: Of which All persons are to take Notice and conform
themselves accordingly.

Given at the Council Chamger in Boston the Twentieth day of October, in the
Fourth Year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord JAMES the Second King of
ENGLAND, Scotland, France and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc. and in the
Year of our LORD GOD 1688.

E. ANDROS. By His EXCELLENCY' s Command. JOHN WEST d'. Secr'.


GOD SAVE THE KING:
Printed at Boston in New England by Richard Pierce.


