AT A SESSIONS of the General Court held at BOSTON the 3d. of November 1675.
THis Court being in some measure sensible of the hand of the Lord being
stretched forth against us in the way of his Judgments, by Sickness and War
shortning our numbers, wasting the Substance of this Wilderness People, and
that justly, for that we have neither answered former mercyes, nor hearkened to
lesser strokes, that the causes of his displeasure are too visible yet with us,
not only by moral Transgressions, found among us, but that we have been found
wanting in walking up to Gospel enjoyments, Professions, and the rules thereof
given by our Lord Jesus, being wanting in love to him, and one unto an other,
not carrying it to others as we would they should do to us: and for that we
know it is not in us to repent and reform our selves, or to provoke others
thereto, or be examples to them therein as we should, and well knowing that it
is the gift of our blessed Lord Jesus to give repentance and remission of Sins,
who is exalted for that end to be a Prince and a Savior, and will be sought
unto for the same; and that if it be the blessed will of God, we may be so
favored by him, we do hereby stir up our selves, and all the People of this
Colony to cry mightily to God for this great blessing, and that we may be joint
therein,

This Court does appoint and set apart the second day of December next to be
kept a day of solemn Humiliation and Prayer throughout the several Churches,
Congregations and Towns in this Colony: and all persons in their respective
places, Magistrates, Ministers, and people, young and old are required to
attend the same, forbearing all servile labor thereon, and are earnestly
desired that we may all labor heartily to be hearty herein before the Lord,
and implore his grace and favor, that he would be pleased yet to appear for
his poor People by those that are already employed, or may be sent forth
against the Enemy, that they may be enabled to fight the Lords Battles, and
find his gracious presence with them, making his Arm glorious and victorious
over his and our Enemies.

By the COURT, Edward Rawson Secr'.


