WHereas the Laws Published by the Honored General Court, Lib. 1. Page 76.
Sect. 3. Do Require all Towns from time to time to dispose of Single Persons
and inmates within their Towns to Service, or otherwise. And in Page 16. Tit.
Children and Youth, It is Required of the Select men, That they see that all
Children and Youth under family Government, be taught to Read perfectly the
English Tongue, have knowledge of the Capital Laws, and be taught some
Orthodox Catechism, and that they be brought up to some honest employment
profitable to themselves and the Common Wealth, and in case of neglect on the
part of the family Governors, after Admonition given them, the said Select men
are Required with the help of two Magistrates, or next Court of that Shire, to
take such Children or Apprentices from them, and place them forth with such as
will look more strictly to them.

The neglect whereof, as by sad experience from Court to Court abundantly
appears, does occasion much Sin and prophanes to increase among us; to the
dishonor of God, and the ensnareing of many Children and servants, by the
dissolute lives and practices of such as do live from under family Government,
and is a great discouragement to those family Governors who conscientiously
endeavor to bring up their youth in all Christian nurture as the Laws of God
and this Common Wealth does require.

THese are therefore in his Majesty's Name to Require you to acquaint the
Select men of your Town, that the Court does expect and will Require that the
said Laws be accordingly attended, the prevolency of the former neglect
notwithstanding. And you are also required to take a list of the names of all
those young persons within the bounds of your Town, who do live from under
family Government, viz. do not serve their Parents, or Masters, as Children,
Apprentices, hired Servants, or journey men, ought to do, and usually did in
our Native Country; being subject to their Commands and Discipline: and the
same you are to Return to the next Court


