A WEDDING Ring for the Finger; ^e Salve of Divin^^^ ^he Sore of Humanity.

Directions to tho^^ (...) Wives, how to (...) and (...)

Genesis 2.18. And the Lord God said, It is (...) good that the man should
^^lone; I will make him (...) meet for him.


HUmane Misery is for Divine Mercy* as a black foil to a sparkling Diamond; or
as a (...) Good to the Sun heart. Psalm. 8.4. Lord, what (...) thou art mindful
(...) Man is,

^n his Creation, Angelical.

^n his Corruption, Diabolical

^n his Renovation, Theological.

^n his translation Majestical.

An Angel in Eden.

A Devil in the World.

A Saint in the Church.

A King in Heaven.

There were four silver Channels, in which the Crystal Streams of God
affection ran to Man i^ his Creation.

1. In his Preparation. 2. In his Assimilation. 3. In his Coronation. 4. In his
Association*
1. In his Preparation: Other Creatures receive^ the Charter of their Beings by
a s^m^^^e Fiat, but there was a Con^^^tation, at his forming; not for the
difficulty, but ^o^ the dignity of the Work. The Painter is most studiou^ about
that which he (...) to make his Masterpiece: The four Elements were taken out
of their Elements to make up the perfection of man's complexion: the Fire was
purified, the ^ar was clarified, the Water was purged, the Earth was refined;
when Man was molded, Heaven and Earth was married; a Bo^y from the one, was
espoused to a Soul from the other.

2 In his Assimilation. Other Creatures were made like themselves, but Man was
made like God, as the Wax has the impression of the Seal set upon it. It^
admirable to behold so fa^^ a picture in such cou^^ canvas, and so bright (...)
character in such brow^ paper.

3 In his Coronation. He that made man and all the rest, made man over all the
rest. Quantillum Dominum posuit, Deus tantum dominium, He was a little Lord of
a great Lordship: this King was crowned in his Cradle.

4 In his Association. Society is the solace of Humanity. The World would be a
Desert without a Consort.

Most of men's Parts are made in Pairs: now he that was double in his
perfection, must not be single in his condition; And the Lord God said, etc

These words are like the Iron Gate that opened to Peter of its own accord
dividing themselves into three parts.

1. An Introduction, And the Lord God said.

2 An Assertion* It is not good that the Man should be alone.

3 A Determination, I will make an Help meet for him.

In the first, there is a Majesty proposed.

In the second, there is a Malady presented.

In the third, there is a Remedy provided

Once more let me put these Grapes into the Press.

1. The Soveraignness of the Expression, And the Lord God said.

2 The Solitariness of the condition, It is not good, etc.

3 The Suitableness of the provision, I will make, etc.

In the first, there is the worth of Veracity.

In the second, there is the want of Society.

In the third, there is the Work of Divinity.

Of these in their Order

And first of the First.

First, the Soveraignness of the expression, And the Lord God said, Luk 1 70 As
he spoke by the mouth of his Prophets: In other Scriptures he used their
mouths, but in this he makes use of his own; they were the Organs, and he the
Breath; they the early streams, and he the Fountain: How he spoke, it is hard to
be spoken, whether eternally or internally or externally: Quomodo non est quod
quaeramus, sed potius quid dixerit intelligamus, we are not to enquire to the
manner of speaking, but to the matter that is spoken; which leads me like a
directing Star from the Suburbs to the City, from the Porch to the Palace, from
the Founder of the Mine to the Treasure that is in ^t, it is not good, etc.

In which you have two things: 1 The Subject. 2 The Predicate.


The Subject. Man alone.

The Predicate, It is not good, etc.

First, the Subject, Man alone; take that in two Branches.

1 As it is limited to one man.

2. As it is lengthened to all men.

First As it is limited to one man.

and so it is taken particularly, man for the first man When all other
Creatures had their Ma^es, Adam wanted his; Tho he was the Emperor of the
earth and the Admiral of the Seas, yet in Paradise without a Companion; though
he was truly happy, yet he was not fully happy; though he had enough for his
B^ard, yet he had not enough for his Bed* though he had many Creatures to serve
him, yet he wanted Creature to solace him when he was compounded in Creation,
he must be completed by Conjunction; when he had no sin to hurt him, then he
must have a Wife to help him; It is not good that man should be alone.

Secondly, As it is lengthened to all men; and so us taken universally, Heb 13
4. Marriage is honorable unto all; not only (...) but (...), its not only
warrantable, but honorable. The whole Trinity has conspired together to set a
crown of Glory upon the head of Ma^rimony.

1. God the Father: Mar^iage was a Tree planted within the Walls of Paradise:
this Flower first grew ^n Gods Garden.

2 The Son: Marriage is a Crystal Glass, wherein Christ and the Saints do see
each others faces.

3. The Holy Ghost, by his overshadowing of the blessed Virgin. Well might the
World when it saw her pregnancy, suspect her virginity, but her Matrimonial
condition was a grave to that suspicion; without this, her innocence had not
prevented her infamy; she needed a shield to defend that Chastity a broad which
was kept inviolable at home

Too many have not worth enough to preserve their virginity, have yet will
eenough to cover their unchastity; turning the Medicine of Frailty into the
Mantle of Filthiness Certainly she is mad that ^^ts of her Leg to get her ^
Crutch, or that venoms her face to wear a Mask.

Saint Paul makes it one of the characters of those that should cashier the
faith, 1 Timothy 4.3. not to forbear Marriage, which may be lawful, but to forbid
it which is sinful.

One of the Popes of Rome sprinkles this unholy drop upon it, car^is
pollutionem and immunditiem. Its strange that that should be a pollution which
was instituted before corruption; or that impurity which was ordained in the
state of Innocence; or that they should make that to be a sin, which they make
to be a Sacrament.

But a Bastard may be laid at the door of chastity and a leaden Crown se^ upon
a golden head.

Bellarmine, that mighty Atlas of the Papal power, blows his stinking breath
upon it, saying, Better were it for a Priest to defile himself with many
Harlots, than to be married to one Wife. These children of the Purple Whore
prefer their Monasteries before our Marriages; a Concubine before a Companion:
They use too many for their lusts, to choose any for their love; their ^ables
are so largely spread, that (...) cannot feed upon one

As for their exalting of a Virgin-state, its like him that commended fasting
when he had filled his belly

Who knows not that virginity is a Pearl of sparkling luster? but cannot the one
be set up, without the other be thrown down? will no oblation pacify the
former, but the demolishing of the latter? tho we find many enemies to the
choice of Marriag^ (...) yet its rare to find any Enemies to the use of
Marriage they would pick the Lock that want the Key, and pluck the fruit that
do not plant the tree.

The Hebrews have a saying, He is not a man that has not a Woman.

Tho they climb too high a bough^ yet its to be feared that such flesh is full
of imperfection that is not tending to propagation: tho men alone may be good,
yet it is not good that the man should be alone; Which leads me from the
Subject to the Predicate, it is not good, etc.

Non bonum is not in this place as malum, but bonum est honestum utile jocundum.

Now it is not good that man should be in a single condition, upon a threefold
consideration.

1 In respect of Sin, which would not else be prevented. Marriage is like
water, to quench the sparks of Lusts fire, 1 Cor 7.2. Nevertheless to avoid
Fornication, let every man have his own wife etc. Man needed no such Physic
when he was in perfect health. Temptations may break Natures best fence, and
lay its Paradise wast; but a single life is a prison of ^^ruly desires, which
is daily attempted to be broken open. Some indeed force themselves to a single
life, merely to avoid the charges of a married state; they had rather say in
the grease of their own sensuality, then extinguish those flames with an
allowed Remedy: it is better to marry than to burn; to be lawfully coupled,
than to be lustfully scorched. Its best feeding these flames with ordinate fuel

2 It Is not good in respect of mankind, which then would not be propagated.
The Roman Historian relating the ravishing of the Sabine women excused it thus:
Res erat unius aetatis populus virorum, without them mankind would fall from
the earth and perish. Marriages do turn mutability into the image of eternity;
it springs up new buds, when the old are withered. Its a greater honor for a
man to be the father of one son, than to be the master of many Servants.
Without a wife children cannot be had lawfully; without a good wife children
cannot be had comfortably. Man and Woman as the stock and the scien, being
grafted in marriage, are trees bearing fruit to the world.

St. Augustine says, this pair is, primum par and fundamentum omnium, etc

They are the first link of humane society to which all the rest are joined.
Mankind had long ago decayed and been like a Taper fallen into the Socket, if
those breaches which are made by Mortality were not repaired by Matrimony.

3 It Is not good in reregard of the Church, which could not then have been
expatiated. Where there is no generation, there can be no regeneration: Nature
makes us Creatures before grace makes us Christians.

If the loins of men had been less fruitful, the death of Christ would have
been less successful.

It was a witty question that one put to him that said, Marriages fills the
earth, but virginity fills the heavens. How can the heavens be full, if the
earth be empty?

Had Adam lived in Innocence without Matrimony, there would have been no
servants for God in the Church Militant, nor no Saint with God in the Church
Triumphant. But I will not sink this Vessel by the overburdening of it, nor
press this truth to death, by laying too great a load upon its shoulders.

There is one knot which I must unty before I make a farther progress, 1 Cor
7.1. It is good for a man not to touch a woman.

Does all the Scriptures proceed out of the same mouth, and do they not all
speak the same truth? the God of unity will not indite discord, and the God of
verity cannot ass^^t falsehood. If good and evil be contraries, how con^trary
then are these Scriptures? either Moses mis^takes God, or Paul mistakes Moses
about the point of Marriage.

To which I shall giv^ a double answer.

1. There is a public and a private good. I^ respect of one man it may be good
not to touch a woman, but in respect of all. So it is not good that the man
should be alone.

2. Moses speaks of the state of man created, Paul of the state of man
corrupted: now that which by institution was a mercy, may by corruption become
a misery; as pure water is tainted by running through a miry channel; or as the
Sunbeams receives a tincture by shining through a colored glass. There Is no
print of evil in the World but sin was the stamp that made it. They which seek
nothing but weal in its commission will find nothing but w^ in the conclusion.
Which leads one from the solitariness of the condition, man alone to the
suitableness of the provision, I will make her an help meet for him.

In which you have two parts.

1 The Agent, I will make 2 The Object, a Help.
First, The Agent, I will make.

We cannot build a house without tools, but the Trinity is at liberty.

Dic verbum tantum.

To Gods omniscience there is nothing invisible, and to Gods omnipotence nothing
impossible.

We work by hands without, but he works without hands. He that made man meet
for help, makes a meet help for man.

Marriages are consented above, but consummated below Prove. 18.22. Tho man
wants supply, yet man cannot supply his wants, Jam. 1.17. Every good and
perfect gift comes from above, etc. A Wife tho she be not a perfect gift* yet
she is a good gift.

These beams are darted from the Sun of righteousness.

Have thou a soft heart it is of Gods breaking: has^ thou a sweet Wife? she is
of Gods making.

Let me draw up this expression with a double application.

1. When thou layest out for such a good on earth, look up to the God of
heaven. Let him make thy choice for thee. Look above you before you look about
you. Nothing makes up the happiness of a married condition like the holiness of
a mortified disposition. Account not those the most worthy, that are the most
wealthy. Art thou matched to the Lord match in the Lord. How happy are such
Marriages where Christ is at the Wedding; Let none but th^se who have found
favor in Gods eyes, find favor in yours.

2 Give God the Tribute of your gratulation for your good Companions. Take heed
of paying your Rent to a wrong Landlord When you taste of the stream, reflect
on the Sting that feeds it. Now thou have four eyes for thy speculation, four
hands for thy operation, four feet for thy imbulation, and four shoulders for
thy sustentation. What the Sin against the Holy Ghost is in point of divinity,
that is unthankfulness in point of Morality, and offense unpardonable. Pity it
is but that Moon should be ever in an Eclipse that will not acknowledge her
beams to be borrowed from the Sun. He that praises not the giver, prizes not
the gift; and so I pass from the Agent to the Object, a Help.

She must be so much, and no less, and so much, and no more. Our Ribs were not
ordained to be our Rulers. They are not made of the head to claim Superiority,
but out of the side to be content with equality. They desert the Author of
nature, that invert the order of nature. The Woman was made for the man's
comfort, but the man was not made for the woman's command. Those shoulders
aspire too high, that content not themselves with a room below their head. It Is
between a man and his wife in the house, as it is between the Sun and the Moon
in the heavens, when the greater light goes down, the lesser light gets up;
when the one ends in setting, the other begins in shining. The wife may be a
Sovereign in her Husbands absence, but she must be subject in her husbands
presence. As Pharaoh said to Joseph, so should the Husband say to his wife,
Genesis 41.40. Thou shall be ^ver my house, and according to thy word shall all my
people be ruled, only in the Throne will I be greater than thou. The ^^^dy of
that household can never make any good motion whose bows are out of plac^* The
woman must be a help to the man in these four things*

1 To his Piety^ 2 To his Society. 3 To his Progeny. 4 To his Prosperity.
To his Piety, by the ferventness of her Excitation.

To his Society, by the fragrantness of her conversation*

To his Progeny, by the fruitfulness of her education*

To his Prosperity, by the ^ithfulness of her preservation.

1 To his Piety, by the ferventness of her Excitation, 1 Pet. 3 7.

Husband and Wife should be as the two milch ^^ne which were coupled together
to carry the Ark of God; or as the two Cherubims that looked one upon another,
and both upon the Mercy Seat; or as the two Tables of stone on each of which
were engraven the Laws of God* ^n some Families married persons are like
Jeremiah^ two Baskets of Figs, one very good, the other very evil; or like fire
and water, whilst the one is flaming in Devotion, the other is friezing in
corruption. There i^ a twofold hindrance of holiness; first, of the right side;
secondly* on the left; on the right side when the wife would run in Gods way,
the husband will not let her go: when the fore-horse in a Team will not draw,
he wrongs all the rest; when the General of an Army forbids a March, all the
Soldiers stand still. Some times on the left; how did Solomon's Idolatrous
^i^es draw away his heart from heaven? A sinning Wife was Satan's first ladder,
by which he sealed the walls of Paradise, and took away the Fort-Royal of Adams
heart from him. Thus she that should have been the help of his Flesh, was the
hurt of his Faith: His natures under propper, becomes his graces under^miner;
and she that should be a crown on the head, is a cross on the shoulder^. The
wife is often to the husband as the Ivy is to the Oak, which draws away his sap
from him.

2 A help to his Society by the fragrantness of her conversation.

Man is an affectionate creature, now the woman's behavior should be such
toward the man, as to requite his affection by increasing his delectation.
That the new born-love may not be blasted, as soon as it is blossomed; that it
may not be ruined before it be rooted. A Spouse should carry her self so to her
husband as not to disturb his love by her contention, nor to destroy his love
by her alienation. Husband and wife should be like two candles burning
together, which makes the house more lightsome, or like two fragrant flowers
bound up in one Nosegay, that augments it is sweetness; or like two well tuned
instruments, which sounding together, makes the more melodious music. Husband
and wife, what are they but as two springs meeting, and so joining their
streams that they make but one current* It Is an unpleasing spectacle to view
any Contention in this Conjunct^on.

3 To his Progeny by the fruitfulness of her education, that so her children in
the flesh may be Gods children in the Spirit, 1 Samuel 1.11 H^n^^ she vows if the
Lord will give her a Son by ^earing him, she will return that Son to the Lord
by serving him. A Spouse should be more careful of her childrens breeding, than
she should be fearful of her childrens bearing. Take heed least these flowers
grow in the Devils Garden. Though you bring them out in corruption, yet do not
bring them up to damnation. Those are not Mothers, but Monsters, whilst th^^
should be teaching these children in the way to heaven with their lips, are
leading them the way to hell with their lives.

Good education is the best livery you can give them living, and it is the best
Legacy you can leave them dying. You let out your cares to make them great, O
lift up your prayers to make them good; That before you dye from them, you may
see Christ live in them.

Whilst these Twigges are green and tender, they should be bowed toward God.
Children and Servants are in a Family, as Passengers are in a Boat* husband and
wife they are as a pair of Oars, to row them to their desired Haven. Let these
small pieces of Timber be hewed, and squared for the Caelestial building. By
putting a Scepter of Grace into their hands, you will set a Crown of glory upon
their heads.

4 A help to his Prosperity by her faithful preservation, being not a Wanderer
abroad, but a Worker at home

One of the Ancients speaks excellently; She must not be a Field Wife like
Dinah, no^ a Street Wife like Thamar, nor a Window Wife like J^zabel.

Phideas when he drew a woman, painted her sitting under a Snail-shell, that
she might imitate that little Creature that goes no further than it can carry
its house upon its head.

How many women are here that are not laboring Bees, but idle Drones; that
take up a room in the Hive, but bring no Honey to it; that are Moths to their
husbands Estates; s^ending when they should be sparing? As the man's part is to
pr^vide industr^usly, so the woman's is to preserve discreetly; the one must not
be carelessly wanting, the other must not becauslesly wasting: the man must be
seeking with diligence, the woman must be saving with providence. The Cock and
the Hen both scrape together in the dust ^eap to pick up something for their
little chickens

To wind up this on a short bottom^

1 If the woman be a help to the man, then let not the man cast dirt on the
Woman.

Secundus being a^ked his opinion of a Woman, speaks thus, Viri naufragium,
domus tempestas, quietis impedimentum, etc. But surely he was a Monster, and
not a man, fitte^ for a Tomb to bury him, than a womb to bear him.

Some have styled them to be, Like Clouds in the Sky.
Like Motes in the Sun.
Like Snuffs in the Candle
Like Weeds in the Garden.


It is not good to play the Butcher with that naked Sex that has no arms but
for embraces. A Preacher should not be silent for those who are silenced from
preaching; because they are the weaker Vessels, shall they be broken all to
pieces? Thou that say women are evil, it may be thy expression flows from
thy experience; but I shall never take that Mariner for my Pil^t, that has no
better knowledge than the splitting of his own Ship W^ thou condemn the f^ame
of all for the faults of one? as if it were true Logic, because some are evil,
therefore none are good. He has ill eyes that disdains all object^* To blast
thy helper, is to blame thy Maker. In a word, we took our rise from their
b^owls, and may tak^ our rest in their bosoms.

2 Is the woman to be help to the man? Then let the man be a help to the wo^.
What makes these Debtors be such ill Pay-Masters* but because they look at what
is owing to them, (...) not at what is owing by (...). If thou would have
(...) wives reverence, let her have thy respect. To force (...) fear from this
relation, is that which neither b^^its the husbands authority to enjoin, nor
the wives duty to perform. A wife must not be sharply driven, but sweetly
drawn. Compassion may b^^^ her, but compassion will break her. Husband and Wife
should act toward each other with consent, not by cons^*

There are four things wherein the Husband is (...) a meet help to the wife.

1 In his protecting of her from injuries. Its well observed by one, that the
Rib of which woman was made, was taken from under the man's arm: as the use of
the arm is to keep off blows from the body, so the office of the husband is to
ward off blows from the wife: The wife is the Husbands Treasu^^, and the
hu^band should be the wives Armory. In dark^ness he should be her Sun (...)
direction; in danger he should be her shield for protection.

2 In his providing for her necessities. The Husband must communicate
maintenance to the Wife, as the head conveys influence to the members; thou
must not be a Drone and she a Drudge. A man in a married estate is like a
chamberlain in an Inn, there is knocking for him in every room. Many persons in
this condition, wast that estate in Luxury, which should supply their wives
necessity. Nec amor viget mariti, nec fides Christiani, they have neither the
faith of a Christian, nor the love of a husband. (...) a sad spectacle to see a
virgin sold with her own money unto slavery, when Services are better than
Marriages; the one receive wages, whilst the other buys their Fetters.

3 In his covering of her infirmities. Who would trample upon a Jewel because
it is fallen in the dirt? or throw away a heap of wheat, for a little chaff? or
despise a golden wedg because it retains some dross? these Roses have their
prickles. Now Husbands should spread a mantle of charity over their wives
infirmities: they by ill Birds that desire their own nests: Its a great dea^
better you should fast, than feast your selves upon their failings. Some
husband, are never well, longer than they are holding their singers in their
wives sor^^ such are like Crows, that fasten only upon carrion. Do not put
(...) ^^ndle because of the snuff* if the gold be good allow (...) grains.
Husband is and wi^^^ should provoke one another to love, and they should love
one another notwithstanding of provocation. Take heed of poys^ning those
Springs, from whence the streams of your pleasure flows.

4. By his delighting in her Society: a wife taken Sanctuary, not only in her
husbands house, but in (...) heart. The Tree of (...) should grow up in the
Family as the tree of life grew up in the Garden. They that marry where they
affect not, will affect where they marry not. Two joined together without love,
are ^ut but two tied together, to make one another mi^erable. And so I pass to
the last stage of the Text* ^ help meet.

A help, there is her fullness; a meet help, there is her firness.

The Angels were too much above him, the creatures were too much below him; he
could not step up to the former, nor could he stoop down to the latter: The one
was out of his reach, the other was out of his race: but the woman is a
parallel line drawn equal with him meet she must be in three things.

1 In the Harmony of her disposition. Hu^band and wife should be like the image
in a looking-glass that answers in all properties to the face that stands
before it; or like an Echo that returns the voice it receives. Many
marriages are like putting new wine into old bottles An old man is not a meet
help for a young woman. He that sets a gray head upon green shoulders, has one
foot in the Grave and another in the cradle. Yet how many times do you see the
spring of youth, wedded to the winter of old age? A young person is not a meet
help for an old woman; raw flesh is but an ill plaster for rotten bones. He
that in his nonage, marries another in her dote-age, his lust has one wife in
possession but his love another in reversion.

2. In the Heraldry of her condition. Some of our Europian Nations, are so
strict in their junctions, that it is against their Laws, for the Commonalty to
couple with the Gentry.

It was well said by one: If the wife be too much above her husband, she either
ruins him by her vast expenses, or revi^es him with her base reproaches: If
she be too much below her husband, either her former condition makes her too
generous, or her present mutation, makes her too imperious.

Marriages are styled matches, yet amongst those many that are married, how few
are there that are matched? Husbands and wives are like locks and keys, that
rather break than open, except the wards he answerable

3 In the holiness of her Religion. If adultery may separate a marriage
contracted, idolatry may hinder a marriage not perfected. Cattle of di^ers
kinds were not to engender, 2 Cor. 6.14. Be not unequally yoked, etc. It Is
dangerous taking her for a wife, who will not take God for a husband. It is not
meet that one flesh should be of two spirits. Is there never a Tree thou likest
in the Garden, but that which bears forbidden fruit? there are but two channels
in which the remaining streams shall run.

1 To those men that want wives, how to choose them.

2 To those women that have husbands, how to use them.

1 To those men that want wives, how to choose them.

Marriage is the tying of such a knot, that nothing but death can unloose.
Common reason suggests so much, that we should be long a doing that which can
but once be done. Where one design has been gravelled in the Sands of Delay,
thousands have been split upon the Rock of Precipitance. Rash adventures yields
little gain. Opportunities are not like tides, that when one is past, another
returns; but yet take heed of flying without your wings; you may breed such
Agues in your bones, that may shake you to your graves.

1 Let me preserve you from a bad choice.

2 Present you with a good one.

First, to preserve you from a bad choice. Take that in three things.

1 Choose not for Beauty. 2 Choose not for Dowry. 3 Choose not for Dignity.
He that looks for beauty, buys a picture.

He that loves for Dowry, makes a purchase.

He that leaps for Dignity, matches with a multitude at once.

The first of these is too blind to be directed.

The second, too base to be accepted.

The third, too bold to be respected.

1 Choose not by your eyes.

2 Choose not by your hands

3 Choose not by your ears.

First, choose not by your eyes, looking at the beauty of the person. No^ but
that this is lovely in a woman, but that this is not all for which a woman
should be beloved. He that had the choice of many r^ces, stamps this Character
upon them all; ^avour is dece^s^^, and (...) vain. The Sun is mo^e bright in a
clear Sky, than when the Horizon is clouded. But if a woman's flesh has more of
beauty, than her spirit has of Christianity; it is like poison in sweet meats,
most dangerous, Genesis 6.2. The sons of God saw the daughters of men that they
were fair, etc. One would have thought, that they should rather have looked for
grace in the heart, than for the beauty in the face* Take heed of inning at the
fairest signs. The Swan has black flesh under her white feathers.

Secondly, Choose not by your hands, for the bounty of the portion.

When Cato's daughter was asked, why she did not marry, she thus replied; she
could not find the man that loved her person above her portion Men love curious
pictures but they would have them set in golden frames. Some are so degenerate,
as to think any to be good enough, who have but goods enough. Take heed for
sometimes the bag and baggage go together. The person should be a figure, and
the portion a Cipher, which added to her, advances the sum, but alone
signifies nothing When Themistocles was to marry his daughter, two Suitors
courted her together, the one rich and a fool, the other wise, b^^ poor; and
being deman^ded which of the two he had rather his daughter should have,
answered, mallem virum sine pecunia, etc. I had rather she should have a man
without money, than money without a man.

Thirdly, choose not by your ears, for the dignity of her parentage A good old
stock may nourish a fruitless branch. There are many children who are not the
blessings, but the blemishes of their parents. They are nobly descended, but
ignobly minded. Such was Aur^lius Antonius, of whom it was said, that he
injured his Country in nothing, but in being the father of such a child. There
are many low in their decents that are high in their deserts. Such was the
Collers Son, who grew to be a famous Captain: when a great person upbraided the
meanness of his original, my nobility (says he) begins with me, but thy
nobility ends with thee. Piety is a greater honor than parantage. She is the
best Gentlewoman that is heir of her own deserts, and not the degenerated
offspring of another virtue.

Secondly, to present you with a good choice in three things.

1 Choose such an one as will be subject to your dominion. Take heed of yoking
your selves with untaimed H^^fers.

2 Choose such an one as may sympathize with you in your affliction. Marriage
is just like a Sea Voyage, he that enters into this Ship, must look to meet
with storms and tempests, 1 Cor. 7.28. They that marry shall have trouble in
the flesh. Flesh and trouble are married together, whether we marry or no* now
a bitter cup is drunk by one mouth. A heavy burden is easily carried by the
assistance of others shoulders. Husband and wife should not be proud flesh;
neither dead flesh. You are fellow Members, therefore should have a fellow
feeling. While one stands safe on the shore, the other should pity him that is
tossed on the S^^. Sympathy in suffering, is like a dry house in a wet day.

3 Choose such an one as may be serviceable to your salvation. A man may think
he has a Saint, when he has a Devil, but take heed of a Harlot that is false
to thy bed, and of a hypocrite that is false to thy God

Secondly, To those women that have husbands, how to use them, in two things

1 Carry your selves toward them with obedien^^. Let their power command you,
that their praise may command you. Th^ugh you may have your husbands hearts,
yet you must not have their hea^^s. As you will his love, so you should love
his will. Till the husband leave commanding, the wife must never leave obeying.

As his injunctions must be lawful, so her subjecti^^^ (...)

2 With faithfulness* ^n cre^^^ God made not one woman (...) many men* (...)
many woman (...) man every (...) should (...) her husband as Ev^^ (...) Ada^ a
whole world of wo^men; (...) every husband should be to his wife, as Adam was
(...) Evah, a whole world of men When a (...) is divided into many cha^^els,
the main ^^^rem (...).

To conclude: Good servants ^re a great blessing: good (...) ^en a greater
blessing (...) ^^od wi^e as the greatest (...) (...) that (...) one, let him
(...) her that has (...) one, let him take pleasure in (...) that (...). And
the Lord (...) it is not good etc.

FINIS

