The Turkish Fast, Out of the Monthly Mercury, for December, 1697.
THe 29 of the last Month, N. S. the new Aga of the Janissaries made his Public
Entry into Adrianople; but he had not above Ten or Twelve Captains of the
Janissaries to attend him, all the rest who were at the Battle of Zenta being
killed, or since dead of their Wounds. The next day the Grand Signior arrived
at the same City with his new prime Visir; but he rode directly to his Seraglio
without entering into the City, not desiring they should make him any public
Reception, or that the Sultanness his Mother should meet him, as she intended,
two Miles out of the City. The ill Success of the last Campaign has cast a deep
Consternation into all the Provinces of his Empire which have heard the ill
Tidings, insomuch that in some Places the People begin to murmur against the
Grand Signior and his Government. For which Reason the Sultan has caused a
General Fast, and Public Prayers to be said throughout all his Dominions
Alamode de Turqueske, which are to be accompanied with Processions to Mecca, in
hopes to appease the Anger of Heaven. To which purpose he has set forth the
following Ordinance, wherein are many things to be observed relating to
Mohammedan Bigotry.

THe Grand Signor of the Turks acknowledging that the Hand of God lies heavy
upon his Dominions and his Subjects, for that they have so often fought and
been vanquished as well by Sea as by Land by their Enemies the Christians, who
have also in a little time regained from 'em a large Extent of their Country,
attributes these frequent Misfortunes to the too great Confidence he has had in
his Strength and his Alliances against the Emperor of the Christians For which
Reason he Ordains and Commands, by these Presents, for the attoning the Wrath
of God, and his great Prophet Mahomet, That every Friday of the New Moon, as
also upon the 5th. 6th. and 7th. of the Month, that all Persons fast all the
Day, without eating or drinking, till the Stars appear in the Sky. That the
Multi and his Clergy upon those Days be clothed with Sackcloth, girt with
Cords, with long Beards; and that they go in that posture, first through the
Streets, and then to the Churches, with their Eyes fixed upon the Earth,
lamenting and crying, Ja Aagib, Allah, Allah, that is to say, O Merciful God, O
God. That they also take the Coffin of the Grand Prophet out of his Sepulcher
in Mecca That after they have placed it in a Chair, they also take Twenty five
more Coffins full of the Bones of those who were formerly slain fighting in
Defense of the Musulman Religion; which done, they shall perfume 'em with
Incense, to the end that by that means the great Prophet may be moved to employ
his Intercessions to appease the Wrath of the Great God. That atter all this
has been done upon the abovementioned Days, and that they shall have placed
the Prophet's Coffin in the open Field, all Pilgrims and Inhabitants, as also
all the Foreigners of all the Caravans, may walk seven times about the Coffin
weeping and bewailing themselves, and that the last Day of the Fast they make a
solemn Procession, Twenty Miles an end, in the following manner.

1. Six thousand Turks shall lead the way clothed in Sackloth, girt with
Cords, barefoot, and without Turbans, carrying a Box full of dead Men's Bones,
with broken Scimitars, small rusty Firearms, etc.

2. Three thousand other Musselmen all bloody, covered with Ashes, shall follow
them, bewailing themselves, and tearing their Clothes.

3. Six thousand Persons naked from the Wast upward, shall follow them,
whipping their Backs and Breasts with Thorns till they fetch blood, which shall
drop upon the Ground, nor shall they be suffered to rub or wipe themselves.

4. After them shall appear Three thousand Spahi's bareheaded, with long
Beards, carrying the Prophet's Coffin, who shall be surrounded with Three
hundred Basha's with naked Swords, and if any one shall offer to take off his
Eyes from looking steadfastly upon the Coffin, the Basha's shall presently kill
him,
and cast his body to the Dogs. 5 At the end of every Mile they shall put to
the Sword a Christian Slave, and a Jew; and they shell let 'em die in their own
Blood. 6. Thirty Basha's, Governors of Provinces, shall follow them without
Purple, and with Turbans of plain black Cloth, died before hand in the Blood of
a Jew and an Ass: and every one of these Basha's shall have one Hand bound
behind him, and instead of a Sword shall wear a long Camel's Tail trailing upon
the Ground. 7. Three thousand Janissaries shall follow them without Arms, but
with Battoons, which they shall trail after 'em, and they shall cry out, Allah
bize ramah eile, Lord be Merciful unto us.

8. Next to them shall come a Chest full of Money, which shall be scattered
upon the Road. But the Poor shall be forbid, upon pain of being empal'd, to
touch the Money before the end of the Procession, 9. Lastly, The Concourse of
People shall close the Procession. In the midst of the Crowd there shall walk a
Hundred Santons, or otherwise Turkish Hermites, who shall cut their Arms,
Breasts, and Faces, with Knives, till the Blood drop upon the Ground, and at
the end of every Mile they shall lift up their Hands to Heaven, and cry,
Vengeance against the Christians, and say, Allah Jek^a, Ja Allah erraman, It Is
enough, Lord, most Merciful God.

Advice from FRANCE. From Poitou they Write, that the Sieur de Maupeon d'
Ablege, Intendant of Justice, has given Sentence, without Appeal, upon several
New Converts of that Country, that were assembled together for the Exercise of
their Religion, two of which he caused to be hanged, one at Poitiers, and the
other at St. Maixant, and he has also condemned several to the Galleys, others
to Banishment, and others to terrible Forfeitures.

BOSTON, in N. E. Reprinted by B. Green, and J. Allen. May, 13. School.


