His Excellency, The Earl of BELLOMONT'S SPEECH TO THE General Assembly of His
Majesty's Province, Convened at New Hampshire in New England, on Monday, August
7. 1699.
Gentlemen,
I Have Called you together at this time to give you an Opportunity of Serving
the Common Interest of your Country, by Redressing the Grievances this Province
lies under, and of making such Laws, as may by the Blessing of God, Establish
you in safety and happiness for the time to come.

I am very sensible of the great Sufferings you sustained all this last War, by
this Province's being a Frontier toward the Eastern Indians, a cruel and
perfidious Enemy in their own nature, but taught and encouraged to be more so
by the Jesuits, and other Popish Missionaries from France, who were not more
industrious during the War, to instigate their Indian Disciples, and Proselytes
(as they are pleased to call 'em) to Kill your people treacherously, than they
have been since the Peace, to debauch those Indians from their former
Subjection to the Crown of England: Insomuch as at present they seem to have
departed from their Allegiance to the Crown, and Revolted to the French. I have
taken such measures as quickly to find out whether those Indians will return to
their Obedience to the Crown or no: if they do not, and that they Commit any
Hostilities upon you; I doubt not but to find an easy way of subduing them.

Upon the Report of His Majesty's Engineer, whom I sent to view the Fort on the
Great Island, and the Harbor of this Town, I find the Situation is naturally
well disposed, but the Fort so very weak and untenable, that it requires the
Building a new substantial one, to secure you in time of War. You will do well
to take this matter into Consideration as soon as may be. This Province is well
Seated for Trade, and your Harbor here on Piscataqua River so (...) good that
a Fort to secure it would invite people to come and settle among you, and as
you grow in number, so will your Trade advance and flourish: and you will be
useful to England, which you ought to covet above all things, not only as it is
your duty, but as it will also be for your Glory and Interest. Such a KING as
GOD has blessed us with at present, and such a Nation as that of England ought
to excite in us a noble ambition to be religiously faithful to the First, and
zealously subservient to the Interest of the Latter.

I Recommend to you Gentlemen of the House of Representatives, the providing
for the necessary Support of the Government, you being best able to judge what
the Charge will be, and it belonging to you of right to provide the means to
defray that Charge.

Gentlemen,

You will do well to think of every thing that may conduce to your own
happiness and advantage (...) you may depend (...) you, for I have all the
disposition imaginable to do the KING and this Country the best Service I am
Capable of.

Ordered by the House of Representatives, that His Excellency's Speech be
Printed. Samuel Penhallow, Speaker.

BOSTON, Printed by Bartholomew Green, and John Allen, Printers to His
Excellency the GOVERNOR and COUNCIL. 1699.


