(...) By HENRY STUBBES, Minister of the Gospel.

Acts 23.1. I have lived in all Good Conscience before God until this day.

Boston, Reprinted by B. Green and J. Allen for Nicholas Buttolph, and are to
be Sold at his Shop at the corner (...) Guttridg's Coffee-House 1699

To the Readers CONSCIENCE.
COnscience; how their wilt ta^ it I know not: however I h^ adventured to write
a ^lines unto thee, because I (...) thou art well acquainted (...) Reader, and
canstd do much with (...) thou will; and if thou be good Conscience thou will.
Naturally good I kn^w (...) art. I would hope that thou (...) ^^^ritually good,
purged from dead (...) the Blood of Christ, Heb (...) made good* by the power
of (...) (...) proper^y. Even those (John. (...)) that tempted Christ, that
(...) something t^ accuse ^im of* (...) convicted of their Consciences; then
^sciences (...) plainly w^ them, (...) them the trut^, that they were (...) sin.

Conscience, t^^u a^t the Cand^e (...) searching the inward pa^ts, (...)
th^ughts, desires, and in^ (...) heart, Prove. 20 2^. according (...) the
Apostle, 1 Cor. 2.11* Wh^ (...) knows the things of a man* s^ spirit of a man
within him? (...) P^^^^^h that he was wicked, (...) Joseph's Brethren, that
(...) Genesis 41* 21* and Judas (...) ^est to thee; and seeing thou always ^gest
in the bosom of my Reader, thou ^st not want an opportunity to do what shall
request of thee My Request is this, (...) thou would deal honestly with my
^der, and tell him the truth of his estate ^t it is.

^f he be a child of wrath, and in the (...) of bitterness and bond of
iniquity, (...) him so, and say to him as Peter to Si^^n Magus. Acts. 8 23. I
perceive thou (...) in the gall of bitterness and bond of iniquity, a child of
wrath, and the wrath of God will come upon thee if thou conti^^^ ^ph. 5.6.

If my Reader do live after the flesh ^d sure thou can tell whether be (...)
that (...)

If he remember not the Sabbath day to keep it holy, give him no rest, till
thou have gotten him to read and ponder upon what is written. Jer. 17.27.

If he be an idle, slothful, unprofitable servant in the Lords work, show him,
Mat. 25 30.

If he be an unfruitful tree in the Lord vineyard, prevail with him (for thou
can do it.) to read again and again the words of Christ, Luke. 13.7, 8, 9*
show him also, Matthew. 7.17. and Heb. 6.7, 8. Say to him, Why do thou not take
the Bible and read it?

Conscienec, if my Reader believe not it (...) Christ, if he do not
obedientially res^ (...) him alone for salvation, tell him the (...) ^er see
the Lord; and let him not ^et till he has taken the Bible and (...) it in Heb.
12 14.

^he be unregenerate, tell him he ^t (if he continue so) see the ^dom of God
Put the Bible into (...) hand, and bid him read, John 3.3, 5. ^onscience, if my
Reader be a neg^ of that great Salvation proffered i^ (...) Gospel, and continue
so, tell him (...) he canR^onot escape Damnation, and (...) him, Heb. 2.3.

If he turn away from him that speaks from Heaven to him, tell him that (...)
cannot escape the wrath of God; (...) show him Heb ^2.15. and Act ^3 and ask
him whether he be not (...) o^ destruction?

And if he shall still refuse to hearken, ^d still pull away the shoulder, and
(...) his ears* and make his heart like (...) Adamant stone, tell him that
great ^th will come upon him, Zech. ^.11, (...)

Conscience, if my Reader be one of ^t black catalogue 1 Cor. 6.9, 10. or ^do^
of the works of the flesh, Gal 5.^, 20, 21. tell him, that he shall not ^erit
the Kingdom of God, And i^ he ask thee what warrant thou have to say so, refer
him to the forecited Scriptures.

Conscience, if my Reader should be fear^ful, unbelieving, abominab^e; if he
should be a Murderer, a Whoremonger, a Sorcerean Idolater, a Liar; tell him
that if (...) continue such, he must have his part in (...) lake that burns
wi^h fire and brimstone^ and make him read R^v 21 8

Conscience, if my R^ader be a prou^ person, tell him from God, that God (...)
able to abase him, Dan 4.37. and w^ be above him, Exodus 18.^. and bring him
down, Psalm 18.27 and low, Prove. ^9.23. even to destruction, Prove. 16.18. and
15.25. Get him also to read Isaiah. 2.11. to 18 and Isaiah, 16. to the end

If my Reader be a covetous person, good Conscience, let him know from the Weed
of God,

1. That he i^ a trouble^ of his own house Prove. 15 27

2. That he is i^ Gods account an Idolater, Col. 3.5 Ephesians 5.^3

3. That h^ is hated and abborred of God, Psalm 10.3.

^. That he is sorely threatened Isa 5. (...) Isa. 10.1, 2. Job. 20.15, 19, 20,
^d 27.16, 17, 18. 1 Cor. 16 10 And ^t him to read 1 Timothy 6.9, 19.

And Conscience, if my Reader be a voluptuous person, an adulterous unclean
person, I must entreat th^e to send him to the Bible, and to see that he read
and consider these following Scriptures of the Old and New Testament; Prove.
2.18, 19. Prove 5.3, 4, 5, 6 to 14 Prove. 6.26, 32, 33 Prove 7.2^. to the end of
the chap. Prove. 22 14. Prove. 23.27. Prove 29 3. Eccles^ 7.26. 1 Cor 5.9. 1 Cor
6.9.10. Ephesians. 5, 5, 6. Heb 13.4^* Rev 21.8. and 22, 15.

Good Conscienc^ be at him again and again, and never leave him till thou have
gotten him to go into his Closet, and ^ere to spend one quarter or half an hour
in pondering on those Scriptures.

Conscience, do thy office; thou art Gods Deputy, fail not to be faithful.

Possib^y thou may say, That thou have done it again and again, but they
will not hear, they are deaf to me as well (...) to you. But Conscience, if
thou be a ^ood Conscience, speak louder, speak not with so low a voice, lift up
thy voice ^^ke a trumpet, for thou art ordained a Preacher to show my Readers
their tra^^gressions and sins.

Be not silent whether they will h^* or whether they will forbear, yet sp^ unto
them. I know my Readers, man of them, will endeavor to silence a^ stop thy
mouth; they do not love to (...) told of their faults, or what their o^ (...)
is: but Conscience be not thou rebeli^ but do that which is thine Office to
(...) I know thou have much to charge my Readers with*

Some of them (thou know) (...) neither read the Scriptures, nor pray their
Families, nor Catechize them (...) are committed to the charge

Others pray not in their Closets, no^ do they commune with their own heart^
about their spiritual estates, they exa^mine not themselves, whether they be^
the Faith, or whether Christ be in them they compare not themselves with the
Word of God, to know how it is with ^m.

Some spend their time and strength, (...) ^states in R^o^ing and Drunkenness*
(...) ^^mbering and Wantonness, in S^ri^e and Envying

Some trifle away their precious ti^

Taverns, Alehouses, Play Houses, ^offee-houses.

Some embrace this present world with ^mas.

Some are lovers of Pleasure more than lovers of God.

Some acknowledge God in their words, and in their works deny him.

Some have left their first love.

Some are lukewarm, neither hot nor cold.

Some say Lord, Lord, but will not do the things that he says unto them

Some believe not with their Hearts what with their Mouths they say they do
believe.

Some confess sin with their lips bu^ ^o neither mourn for it, nor hate it, nor
^urn from it with their Hearts.

Some pray for that they would not ^ave.

Some hear the Word, but will not ^o it.

Some love in word and tongue, but not in deed and truth

Some fashion themselves according to ^his world, yet would not be thought ^o
be of the world.

Some Dedicate and Devote the^^ Children to God, to the service of that one God
who is Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; and when they have so done, they alienate
them from his service to the service of the World, Flesh, and D^vil, breeding
them up in Idleness, Pride, (...) Wantonness Never, or never to (...) purpose,
minding them of their b^p^^^^mal C^ and Engagement, to (...) wholly and only
the Lords.

Some n^glect rel^^ive Duty, (as the Conscience know very w^)

Are not some (...) ^nds bitter (...) their Vi^, and (...) disob^d^ to their H^?

^o ^ot some P^ provoke (...) ^n to w^ath (...) ^dren dishonor (...)

Do no^ (...) Mast^ (...) is just and (...) are not (...) S^rvant (...) to
(...) Masters? D^st thou ^o kn^w all this (...) be true, Co^sci^^c^? (...)
do, and doub^l^ss (...) ^st of^^n (...) and ^^inge them for i^ But g^
Conscience make them (...), make the^ smart, let them not go on in pe^ disturb
them, haunt them con^inu^l^y to (...) their own, and take a fit time (...) ^n
for it.

SERMON I.
JOB XXVI 7. (...) Righteousness I h^ld^ fast, and will* not ^et (...) go^ my
Hea^ shall not reproach me so l^ng as I live.


MY Righteousness I hold fast. His Friends would have ^obb^^ him of it, would
have persuaded him out of it, would have ^^gued and d^sput^^ him ^ut of it, but
you shall not do it says Job* I stand (...) in the ^nce of it, I hold i^ fast*
I ^ill ^ot let i^ go: Say what you will, (...) what you can, I will maintain my
(...) i^^, I am not an Hypocri^e as you would have me think I am, I am not
(...) man as you would speak (...) as you would have me ^k^ my (...) be* no my
Righteousness (...) will hold (...), I will not let it go^ pull while you will,
I will hold it fast* Take we up the like Resolution: there are some that
pretend to be friends, pretend friendship and kindness, but act the part of
Job's friends here. Oh how many are there that would spoil us of our
Righteousness! the World, the F^esh, and the Devil, pull to take it ^way; Hold
we our R^solution not to let it go. Should I let it go, (says Job) m^ Heart
would reproach me, would upbraid me; my Conscience would accuse me o^ wrong
done to my self, which is worse than doing wrong to others It is b^d to wrong
others, much worse to wrong ^^r selves: therefore he is resolved, M^ ^rt shall
not reproach me, no not (...) ^g as I live. In which words you have Job's holy
resolution, My Heart shall not reproach me. My Heart, that is my Conscience,
for so Heart is to be understood. 1 John. 3.20.21. If our heart condemn us, God
is greater than our heart And if our heart condemn us not, and^ that is, our
Conscience. So that by Heart you must hear understand Conscience. Conscience!
Is there any such thing in the World? Sure one would think that Conscience had
been (...) long ago, and that there was no Cons^ience now alive in the World
But Si^s) it will have a Resurrection assure our selves, for it is of an
Immortal nature; and though it may seem to die, it will have a real
Resurrection. Sleep is the image of Death, and Con^cience may for awhile be
asleep, but (...) sure as ever thou did awake when thou wast asleep,
Conscience will awake (...) long: and when it shall awake, it ^^ll make y^u
look about. My Consci^^ce shall not reproach me, shall not ^braid, shall not
accuse me of any wrong done to my self, nor of any omission of what is my Duty,
nor of ^y commission of what is Transgression, shall not accus^ me, either for
omit^^^g what God has commanded, (and ^d has commanded (...) to preserve
(...) own Integrity, and to seek my own ^ce and q^iet;) o^ accuse me for
^^mmitting what God has forbidden, ^d has forbidden me the wronging (...) my
self, and Consci^nce shall not ^^cuse me for doing what God has ^bidden, so
long as I live, Hitherto (...) Conscience accused him not. O ^xcellent Job! A
man more righteous then his Neighbor. Indeed he was one that had the
Commendation of God ^^mself; no wonder he does stand up in his own
justification, being a person that had Gods so great Commendation. Job. 1 1.
There was a man in the Land of Uz, whose name was Job, and that man was perfect
and upright, one that feared God and eschewed evil. And (...) further
Commendation the Lord gave him, ver. 8 Have thou not considered my Servant Job,
that there is none like hi^ in the earth? etc No wonder that he stands upon his
own Justification Hi^therto I have so lived that my Consci^^^^ cannot accuse
me, and he was ^ved so to live. I will have a care (whatever I suffer) to have
Conscience on my side: I will have Conscience to be my Friend, I will not do
any thing that shall occasion Conscience to be my Foe; For I were better to
have all the World, yea if there were ten thousand Wor^ds, it were better for
me to have them all to be my mortal enemies, than to have Conscience to be my
enemy.

Now it will be needful to consider what Conscience is that is so great a
Friend or Foe: it will be the best Friend ^r the worst enemy, according as your
^^rriage toward God and Man shall ^e, I shall show, 1. What Conscience is. 2.
About what it is employed. 3. How it is employed.


And then when I have so done, I ^^ll tell you and prove it, that it ^^^uld be
your greatest care so to live, ^^t Conscience, may not reproach ^ou whilst you
live; and then give you reasons of it, and then Apply it.

I. General. What Conscience is.

Briefly. Conscience is a man's Judgment of himself, i. e. Of his Estate and
^ctions: Or thus, if you will; Conscience (...) a Power of the Soul; for the
Soul is* ^dowed with Noble Powers and Faculties, ^nderstanding, Conscience,
Memory, Will ^d Affections: and Conscience is not the ^ast of them. I say,
Conscience is a Power (...) the Soul taking notice and bearing ^ness of all a
man's Thoughts, Words ^d Actions; and as it finds them, ^her to agree or not
agree with the Rule, (...) accuses or excuses, absolves or condemns, ^mforts or
torments. This is Consci^^ce. Do you think there is any such Inhabitant in you?
It may be some have taken no notice of any such ^^^habitant in the House of
their S^ul, whether there be any such Power of the Soul or no^ I say it again,
Cons^i^^^^ is a Power of the Soul, taking no (...) and bearing witness, (it
takes (...) that it may bear witness) of all a^m Thoughts, Words, and Actions;
a^ it finds his Thoughts, Words, or A^^^^ons, to be either agreeing or not agr^
with the Rule, so it does excuse o^ ^^^cuse, absolve or condemn, comfort ^ment.
This is Conscience.

1. It is a Power of the S^^l; (...) ^lied Heart, 1 John. 3 ^^. F^^ if o^^ ^art
condemn us, etc and (...) 7 22 For oftentimes also (...) etc. It is called
likewise the Spirit a man, Prove 18 14 (...) Spirit of m^n will su^ (...)
wounded Spirit w^ (...)

^. Conscience i^ ^ Power of the S^ taking notice; it is a most (...) server*
Conscience is very quick (...) it is continually pr^^ng, through w^ not observe
and (...) notice of it* so it is. What is said of God, (...) 23* 2 3, 4 (...)
of his Deputy (...) (...) that? It is Conscience. Conscience (...) no mean
thing, it is Gods Deputy* ^d what is said of God in that place (...) true of
Conscience: Thou compassest my path and my lying down, and thou art ^uainted
with all ^y ways, for there is (...) a word in my mouth, but lo, O Lord, (...)
know it altogether: Thou have be* (...) me behind and before. So that a ^an
cannot stir but God sees, and Conscience sees; and knows and ^eth notice of
it; and one would wonder how Conscience will revive what was done seven years,
and three times seven-years ago. Conscience will whisper in your ear, this was*
in your ^art, and this was in your tongue, and ^is was in your hands, this was
thought (...) you, that was spoken by you, and ^at was done by you; that which
we ^d utterly forgotten, how fresh many ^ears after does Conscience bring it to
^ind? Conscience took notice of it, and did well observe it Thus Conscience is
a Power of the Soul taking ^ice.

3. And bearing witness, it takes ^otic^, that it may bear witness, if it
^ould not take notice it could not bear witness. Can a man bear witness (...)
that which he never knew, which he ^^^ver saw, nor heard? Romans 2 14 (...)
Apostle speaking of the Gentil^s, (...) Having not the Law, they do by (...)
the things contained in the Law^ (...) having not the Law, are a Law (...)
themselves, which (...) the w^^k of (...) Lord written in their hearts, their
Co^^science also ^earing witness. ^t is old prover^ial speech, (...) thousand
Witnes^es* (...) a thousand or ten thousand Witnes^ that one Witness is enough
to cast If Conscience be a Witness, there ^o need o^ any (...) Witnes^ (...)
said of Ch^ What need (...) further witnes^* we have (...) own mou^^? So will
the Lord (...) the Sin^ What need any (...) Witness, (...) You read of the
Testimony of C^^^science, sometimes it is for, and someti^ against.

1. I^ is s^metim^s for us* as (...) 1.1^. (...) says (...) Apostle^ (...)
Conscien^^* that in all simplicity and (...) sinceri^^ not with (...) by the
gra^ (...) ^one, though done by his instigation and ^emptation* see Zech. 3* 1.
Poor Crea^^res are tempted to destroy themselves; ^ll, God delivers them, and
now they ^e ashamed. O what a shame is this (...) sai^^ the Devil) that thou
have ^tempted to destroy thy self? how can ^ou look any body in the face
without ^ame? no and destroy thy self. This was the case of a poor creature
that I ^^ve twice spoken with; once she at^^mpted to drown herself; I spoke
with ^r and gave her the best counsel I ^ould* she answered me, I am ashamed,
(...) ashamed, I cannot go about any ^^ing. Not many days after she went (...)
to a Wood to cut her own Throat, (...) God delivered her: But this poo^ (...)
is still under discontent, the Devil does remember her* I beseech ^ou con^i^er
how many Witnesses there ^e of all that you do; you think to sin (...) the
dark, and to do it so that no eye ^all see you; you think to draw the Curtains
and then none can see you, but ^ou deceive your selves, it is Noon Day ^ith God
still, and so it is with Angels, and with the Devil too; there is nothing ^id
from them. 4. Men know, they (...) be for you, and that Conscience may have no
cause to upbraid you, and torment you another day. L^^ (...) care be your care;
let not Conscience reproach you so long as you live. I beseech you earnestly,
let it be your great care to have A Conscience (...) of offense toward God and
(...) Man; toward your selves and (...) the^^. And if you so do, you (...)
have no cause to repent your (...) ^^re to hear this Lesson.

(...) ^avid's Conscience was asleep for a ^t while, but afterward Nathan
^meth to him from the Lord, and ^useth Conscience, and then Conscience (...)
most violently upon him; as appears ^y Psalm 51. where he complains of ^ken
bones, and prays that he ^ones which were broken might rejoice. (...)
Joseph's Brethren, they heard no^g of Conscience a great while, but ^st
Conscience twinges them, at last ^onscience put out his envenomed sting; ^o
such sting as the sting of Con^^ience) at last Conscience takes them (...) ^he
throat, Genesis 42.21* And they (...) one to another, we are verily guilty
^^ncerning [the blood of] our Brother, (...). though men do with the Harlot for
(...) great while wipe their mouth^, and say, that evil have we done? As
Joseph's ^rethren, they sold their Brother Joseph. Conscience said never a word
to them, ^t them alone a great while: they ^^me and told their Father a lie,
and Conscience said never a word to them, ^hen they told their Father that
Jo^^ph was slain: they saw their Father ^ourning as if h^ were going down into
^he Grave, Conscience says* nothing all (...) are our Observers. Some have
their eyes in their heads, and see that which should make their eyes weep and
tr^^k^e down with tears, and if they have any Zeal for God, the sight of their
E^es will affect their Hearts. And besides this, Conscience also knows, and
therefore called Conscience (as (...) think) because it knows with oth^^^ I^
knows with God, with Angels, w^ Devils, and knows it to be all true whi^^ God
lays to our charge, and what (...) Devil lays to our charge; so that Conscience
is a Knowledge together with others* Romans 1.9. My Conscience hearing (...)
witness. My Conscience co-witnessing. (...) Conscience witnessing together with
^od^ God knows it, and does wi^^ness it, ^d my Conscience knows i^ and does
^^^ness it; and my Conscien^^ together with me knows it.

1. There is a double Act of the Understanding; there is a Direct Act whereby
we know a thing, and there is a R^^^^ct Act whereby we know that we know it.
And this is the Action of Conscience. Isa. 5^.12. For our transgressions are
multip^ied before thee, and our sins th^^ testify against us; for our
transgressions ^re with us, and at for our iniquities we know them, we know
that we have sinned. So ^at Conscience is a recoiling or a re^^ction of the
Soul upon it self; accord^^g to that of Paul. 1 Cor. 4.4.

II. General I come in the next place (...) show about what Conscience is
employed. It is employed about the whole ^n and all his actions. It has a
Commission thus to employ it self about the understanding, how that does Act,
about the memory to observe how that does act, about the w^^l how that does
act, and the Affections how they do act, it is employed to observe whether the
man be sanctified or not, and it is employed about his Actions whether they be
good (...) bad, about our actions toward God o^ Man* toward our selves or
others ^d it (...) implo^ed about every thing (...) either a Sin or a Duty.
Conscience (...) employed to observe how you eat and ^rink, it is employed to
observe how (...) dress and habit your selves, how you ^y and f^ll, and deal
and trade in the ^orld; it is employed to obs^rve how you read the Sc^ipture,
pray in your ^m^^y, in your C^ose^, and in the ^ongregation, how you sanctify
the Sabbath, receive Sacraments, how you spend your time, how long you ly a Bed
in a morning, how late you set up at night, and about what; to observe how you
carry your selves alone, and how you carry selves in Company, to observe what
you do in the Streets, or in the Field, in this place or in the other place, in
this Company or in the other Company; it goes along with you, and it will
never leave you. God help me to mind this. I hope you will make the same prayer
for your selves, that I make for my self.

III. General. How Conscience is im^d. From the Description of Con^e which I
have given you, you may understand that Conscience ha^^ several Offices, the
Office of a Nota^^ or Register, the Office of a Witness (...) Accuser, the
Office of a Judge or a Co^^^mner, the Office of a Comforter o^ a Tormenter;
Conscience is imploye^ in such Offices as these are, and Consci^ence will first
or last be faithful in the executing of them, and it will do its Office to
purpose.

1. It is employed as a Notary or Register to write down all we do; to write
down as with the point of a Diamond, (...) Book it down and Seal it up, that ^y
come to light again.

It is employed as an Accuser, (...) we do amiss, when we wa^p from ^^cuse.

It is employed as a Judge, to (...) s^ntence of life or death. Oh, Sirs, (...)
many poor souls are condemned (...) own hearts? Their, own ^nces tell them,
Thou art in ^d C^^^ture, thou art an undone.

It may be Conscience as yet does (...) in Judgment, it is not S^ssions o^ ^s
(...) with you, it may be it is ^ed and put ^t to a longer time* ^e your se^ves
the time will (...), the time is at hand

C^ns^i^nce is also employed as a ^r, as an Acqui^ter and Absolve^ (...) we do
w^ll 2 Cor. 1.12. This is our (...) ^i^^im^ny of (...) Conscience, (...) it in
simp^icity and god^ sincerity, etc. (...) have ^ad our ^onver^^^i^n in the
world. What g^eater rejoicing than this? when C^nscience shall acq^it me in the
pre^^nce of God, when Conscience shall be able to say as He^, Rem^mber O Lord,
how I have walked before thee in truth and with a perfect heart, and have done
that which is good in thy sight. Oh what a comfort will it be when Conscience
shall reflect upon its believing in Christ, upon its confession of sin,
repentance and tears, sighs and groans for sin. This is my rejoicing, the
testimony of my Conscience; that I have been alone in a corner in my Clo^ with
tear^ (...) mine eyes, and sorrow in my heart, th^^ I have rolled my self on
Christ and out all my care upon Christ.

5. Then as a Tormenter Consci^nc^ is employed. When Conscience sha^^ ^coil,
and thus reflect upon a m^ When thou should have been in (...) Closet thou
wast here or there in (...) Street or in the Field, in the Co^ House or
Taverns: when thou shou^ have been with God alone, thou (...) been elsewhere.
Thou could l^^d (...) and rise up without having God be (...) thine eyes:
thou could eat and drin^ without fear and without rule, (...) buy and sell,
and habit thy self wi^h (...) ^ear. There is as much danger in habiting and
dressing our selves, as (...) eating and drinking* O what if th^^ ^dress should
be a snare, what if thi^ should occasion the commiting of Adul^ery; He that
looks upon a Woman to lust after her (says Christ) has committed ^dultery
with her already in his bearer. ^aith one, There is a fine clear (...), and so
says a second, and a third; but* ^o you know what temptation may ^e in a naked
skin: the Lord help (...) ^o take heed of it. I would commend ^ou a little
Book, it is but three pence^ ^rice, it is called, The Hairy Con^ ^ry fit for an
Hairy Age. This is ^ndeed an Hairy Age; God deliver us ^om false Hearts, for we
can see almost nothing but false Heads every where. Assure your selves,
C^n^cience will ^ave a Bo^t with men for this another ^ay.

Conscience will not let this go ^an observed: Conscience does write down this,
and will hereafter find a ^ime to read it to you: It may be ^he Wife will say I
must please my Husband, and the Husband will say I must please my Wife. But
have (...) care I beseech you to please Con^science, that it may not be against
you another day. See that Conscience (...) the while: a Famine comes upon the
Land, Conscience yet says nothing to them: at last they come down into Egypt,
there they meet with hard usage, and are in danger of Imprisonment. Now
Conscience begins to rouse up it self like a Lion, to tear and devour, then
they cry out, Verily we are gui^ty concerning the blood of our Brother. You see
Conscience had an awakening time, though it had been asl^ep; the Morni^g came
for its awakening. So Judas's Conscience was asleep for a great while: and one
would wonder that it should ever be so fast asleep as it was, M^^. 26.15. You
may read there some p^s^es of it. He goes to the Chief ^iests and makes a
Bargain: What will you give me, and I will deliver (...) to you? and they
covenanted with him f^r thirty pieces of Si^ver: there he mak^th a bargain for
a little Silver to sell his Lord and Master, and to betray innocent blood:
Conscience says never a word to him. Further; he sought for opportunity to
betray Christ, yet Conscience says nothing to him v 21. when he was come into
the presence of his Master, he came with the Disciples to the Passover, yet
Conscience said nothing to him all the while: when he was at the Passover and
eating, Christ tells his Disciples that one of them should betray him, yet
Judas's Conscience says never a word to him, but lets him alone all this
while. Nay further, when the Disciples at these words were exceeding sorrowful,
and began to say every one of them, Lord is it I? yet Judas's Conscience faith
nothing to him. And Christ said, He that dippeth his hand with me in the dish,
the same shall betray me: yet his Conscience was asleep all this while.
Further, ver. 24 Christ pronounces a Woe to that man by whom he should be
betrayed; yet the denunciation of that Woe did not awak^n Judas's Conscience; Woe
to him; it had been good for that man he had never been born It is matter of
admira^ion and amazement, that his Conscienc^ should be so fast asleep; the
D^vil entered into him; and rock^d Conscience asl^^p till he might be sure to do
him mischief enough; ver. 25. Then Judas which betrayed him, put the question
and said, Master, is it I? Methinks his Conscience should have flown in his
face (...) a Mastiff. Nay further says Christ* That have said, thou art the
man: and yet for all this Judas's Conscience wa^ not awake. This is indeed
matter of admiration, that a man's Conscience should be so have asleep But how
many Instances of such sleepy Consciences do this very age afford? (...) does
Judas's Conscience sleep always? No, Then Judas which (...) him, when he saw
that Jesus was c^ned, he brought again the Thirty (...) of Silver to the Chief
Priests, and (...) have sinned in that I have betrayed ^cent blood But
miserable (...) ^ere those Christ-B^yers, they b^ him to be crucified; they did
rep^ him when he said, I have sinned; (...) it that to us? see th^^ to that. A^
cast down the thirty pieces of Si^ (...) the Temple, and went and hanged (...)
se^f And now his Conscience w^ awake that it would not suffer him to live. I
assure you, howsoever C^^^science will be asleep for a great w^* yet the time
will come that Consci^^^e will do its office; and therefore it do^ greatly
concern us to take great (...) that Conscience may have no occasion to reproach
us. O happy Judas if thou had never made a bargain to sell thy Master, and
had never sought opportunity to betray him! O happy, if thou had never
accompanied the Band of Soldiers, that came to apprehend him! But he came
along with the Band of Soldiers, and gave them the Sign, The Man whom I shall
kiss is the Man, hold him fast: Yet Conscience did not reproach him. But let
men do what they can to stop the mouth of Conscience, it will speak at last,
and they will be biting words. Carnal Reasonings cannot stop ^t, carnal
Pleasures cannot bribe it, nor any variety of diversions silence it. Cain you
know he was quiet a while. Gen 4.13. But after a while Cain's Conscience did
reproach him, would not let him a^one. Bel^hazzar, he is merry a while with his
Courtiers and Companions in drinking Wine in Bowls, but after he falls a
trembling and his knees smote ^ne against the other, and he grew p^^e when he
saw the hand writing on the wall. Conscience will see an hand writing not on
the Wall, but in this book. I have spoken with some poor Souls, that could say,
this Word is against me, and that Word is against me* there are words enough in
this Book against you. Conscience will one day awake and reproach and will not
be bribed, will not have its mouth stopped. This is one great reason why we
should be careful to live, that Conscience ^^y not reproach us while we live,
for the reproaches of Conscience are unavoidable.

Reason II.
Another reason why we should take all possible care that Conscience may have
no occasion to reproach us, is because the reproaches of Conscience are
^ntollerable, there will be no bearing of ^m. A wounded Spirit who can (...)
^one are able to bear it. Many instances might be given; you may (...) Job
7.13, 14, 15. When I say (...) shall comfort me, my ^^uch shall ^as^ my
complaint; then thou scarest me with dreams, and terrifiest me with visions,
(...) that my soul chooses strangling, and death rather than life. Oh Si^, what
a c^se will the terrors and accusations of Conscience bring the poor creature
(...) Job 10.1. My soul is weary of my (...) I will leave my Complaint upon my
self, etc. Psalm 32.3* 4. When I kept silence my bones waxed old through my
roaring a^ the day, etc All this was occasioned through the reproaches of
Conscience: I might add, Prove 12 25. Heaviness in the heart of a man makes a
man to ^^oop. I have known those that have been bowed together by reason of the
agonies of Conscience. I knew one, at whose Eyes and Ears Blood has gushed
forth by reason of the Agonies of Conscience. Prove. 17 22. A merry heart does
good like a medicine, but a broken spirit dries the bones You know Judas did
choose ^he^ to die than endure it. Bil^ey and (...) (after they had abjured)
felt ^^^n pangs such a fles^ in their Consciences, till they had openly
professed their sorrow for it, as they would not have felt again for all the
world. Daniel chose rather to be cast into the Lions Den, then to carry a Lion
in his bosom, viz an enraged Conscience. Richard the Third was a terror to
himself after he had murdered his two innocent Nephews. Charles the Ninth o^
France, after that bloody Massacre by which his Conscience was enraged, could
not endure to be awakened in the night, without Music or some other diversion.
Thus much for the Reasons of the Point: I proceed to the

APPLICATION.
USE. I. Of Reproof. The first Use shall be for Reproof of those that take no
such care to avoid the Reproaches of Conscience, but do that which will be cast
by Conscience as a Reproach upon them another day. How do some for many years
together heap up Fuel (...) keep a Fire burning within them? No sooner is some
Fuel spent, but the^e is more Fuel heapt on again; fresh sins ^e committed, and
after a while these ^s come to remembrance, and set (...) Fire a burning. It
may be a man (...) weather it out a little, but then (...) sins come to light,
and that sets the F^re a burning again, and so there is no (...) Conscience
has not forgotten any thing done many years ago, but rememb^^ it as i^ (...)
had been done but yesterd^^* You ^^at cannot endure to be rep^ed, that cannot
endure to hear others reproached, that cannot bear t^^ ^^^proaches of Men, when
as it ^a^ (...) they reproach wrongfully; how will (...)

SERMON. III.
JOB XXVII.6 My Righteousness I hold fast, and will not let it go: my Heart
shall not reproach me so long as I live.


HAving already showed you what Conscience is, and about what it is employed,
and how it is employed, and given you several reasons why we should make it our
great care so to live, that Conscience may not reproach us while we live, and
having made some Use of the Doctrine, ^ now come to resolve two questions or
cases.

1. The first is, how may we so live, ^ a^k and act, and carry our selves, hat
Conscience may have no caus^ to repro^ch ^s another day?

2. ^e have so lived, ^o wa^^ed (...) ^cted, (...) so carried our selves, (...)
Conscience has had just cause to reproach us, and does reproach (...) what is
to be done, that the repro^^^^s of Conscience may be wiped off, that Conscience
may be quiet, and cease to accuse and condemn, cease to vex and torment? These
are the two ca^^ I am to answer.

Case 1. How may we so live, walk, act and carry our selves, that Conscience
may have no cause to reproach us? You s^e that J^b did so live and carry
him^^^f, that though his fri^nds did reproach him, his Conscience did not
re^roach him, though his friends did ^^^ge him, yet his Conscience did
discharge hi^, though his friends did ^^^^d^mn him, yet his Conscience (...)
qui^ him. He did so live, that he (...) able to maintain his Integrity and
^^^rightn^ss, and doubtless it is not (...) thing imp^ssible, but we do not se^
(...) w^ do (...) about it in earnes^* If w^ (...) indeed, and not alm^st
Christ (...) w^ might ^o live as ^^^science m^g^^ (...) j^st cause to ^^proach
us (...), R^lations may reproach us. (...) may reproach (...) hands, and
Husbands reproach (...) Children may reproach Parents, and Servants reproach
their Masters, and one Neig^bour reproach another; but it is possible so to
live, that Conscience all this while may be at peace, and not reproach us.
Possibly you may be ready to think and say within your selves, Would we could
tell how we might so live, pray let us have some directions how we may so live
that Conscience may not reproach us. But before I give counsel should not I
know of you whether you will follow it? And in case you will not follow i^, why
should I give it? Ask your selves therefore, if the Minister shall give us no
other counsel then what God himself gives us, should not I follow it? Si^s if I
give you any other counsel than what God in his holy Word does give you, I
would entreat you not to follow it; nay, if you set it at naught I shall not be
offended. Consider what Jethro said to Moses, Exodus 18 23. If thou shall do this
thing and God command thee so; so say I. Therefore consider whether God say as
I say, whether God command you so; I so, pray take heed how you do set at
naught the Counsel of God. Now the first Direction which I shall give you is
t^^^.

Direction I.
Set God always before you. And this will be a means so to live, that
Conscience may not reproach you Assure your selves there is no time wherein
Gods Back is turned, no time wherein Gods Eye is not upon you: if you can find
a time when God is ab^^nt, you may take your liberty and do what you list. You
know of what force ^he Masters Presence is among the servan^ of what force the
Paren^s presence is among the Children to restrain them; of that force the
presence of a Minist^^, or (...) grave, serious and holy Christian, is to
restrain People from what otherwise they would take liberty to do: Sure Gods
Presence should be of greater force to restrain us, if we did but live in the
Apprehension thereof. O if we could but set God always before us, what manner
of persons should we be in all holy Conversation, all holy c^g^^tation, and in
all holy communication too! David did set God always before him, and why should
not we do so too* Psalm. 16.8. I have set the Lord (...) before me. O then it
was that David was a man after Gods own heart; then it was that David was such
a Praying man, and such a Praising man, and such ^n holy and heavenly man, when
he did ^et the Lord always before him. You know how persons will carry
themselves ^^ the sight of Men, if they have any thing to do in the sight of
others, how (...) will do it; O that we could do (...) we do as in the sight of
God. This was the charge that was given to Abra^am by God himself, Genesis 17.1.
Walk (...) me and be thou perfect; that is, ^^ght* There is no such way to be
^pright, as to live in the Apprehension of the Presence of God, and to have
(...) always run in our thoughts, God ^ea^eth, God sees, and God knows. O that
^^s were written upon your Desks and Shop-Boards, God sees; O that this were
written upon your Tables, God sees; O that this were written upon your
Looking-Glasses, God sees; O that this were written upon all your Attire and
Dresses, God sees; and O that this were written upon your Naked Breasts and
Shoulders, (...) sees, and upon your Faces and Fore^heads too. I do assure you
(Si^s) that God does see you; O that you would live in the continual
Apprehension of it. God sees thee, God knows what all your thoughts are, what
all your designs are, what all your sayings and doings are. Be ever thinking,
Go^ knows, God hears, God sees. In all thy way^ acknowledge him, and he shall
direct the paths, Prove. 3.6. This will make you careful to keep Gods Precepts,
if in all your ways you look upon God as your Observer and Overseer. This was
that which made David careful to observe Gods Precepts, Psalm. 119.168. I have
kept thy Precepts and thy Testimonies. O blessed David, how did thou do this
He tells you in the next words, For all my way, are before thee* I could
heartily wish that you would often and seriously read and consider these three
or four Scriptures; Job 34.21, 22. For his eye^ are upon the ways of man, and
he sees (...) his goings. There is no darkness o^ shadow of death, where the
Workers o^ iniquity may hide themselves. There is no hiding from God, ^he sees
all our going^* we cannot set one foot before (...) but God sees it. Alas,
alas, (...) do (...) go out of doors, God sees it, if he goes into the Field
(...) sees it, if he goes to other Houses God sees it, if he goes to his own
house God sees it too. Prove. 15.3. The eyes of the Lord are in every place,
beholding the evil and the good Prove. 5.2. The ways of a man are before the
eyes of the Lord, and ^^ ^ondereth all his goings. I desire you once a week to
read over the former part of the 139 Psalm. If I should desire you to read it
once a day, it would not be lost labor. You will see there is no going out of
the sight and presence of God. Verily (Sirs) to set God always before us, and
to live in the Sight and Apprehension of the Presence of God, this would have
such an influence upon our thoughts, word^ and works, that it would make them
pleasing to God; and if so, Conscience would never reproach us for them; for
Conscience will not reproach us, for doing that which is pleasing to God. Thus
much for the first Direction.

Direction. II.
Set up Gods will revealed in his Wor^ as the Rule of all your thoughts, words*
(...) actions; as the rule of all your (...) your general calling, and of all
(...) in your particular calling; as a rule of all your natural, civil, and
religious actions; set up the Will of God revealed in his Word, as the rule of
your all. Let it be the rule of your carriage toward God, of your carriage
toward men, toward your selves, and toward others. This is Scripture direction,
(...) Counsel which the Holy Ghost give^^* ^^^refore I beseech you seriously
consid^^ (...) it and follow it, Psalm. 119.6. Then shall not I be ashamed, when
I have ^espect unto all thy Commandments* (...) in the 9th. verse a Question is
(...) Wherewithal shall a ^oting man (...) his way? (the answer follows)
(...) taking-heed thereto according to thy W^ ^oing all according to Rule. Wh^^
has ^ child a copy for, but to w^ after (...)? and what has the Mas^^ a Lin^
and a ^^ummer for, but to b^^ld by i^ (...) Let the Word of God be (...) ^amp
and thy Light, Psalm. 11^. (...) Thy Word is a lamp unto my feet, (...) light
unto my Path. Order your th^s according to the Word of God, (...) David prayed,
Psalm. 119.133. and then you will not stumble; nor give Con^^^ence any occasion
of reproaching you (...) are careful when you walk in ^^e (...) never the less
profitable or pleasureable, contentful or satisfactory to us for making Gods
glory the end of all; but a thousand to one, it would make every thing by so
much the more profitable, pleasurable and satisfactory to us, by how much more
we make the glory of God the end thereof. O Sirs, how sweetly will that meat go
down that is eaten with an eye to the glory of God? How comfortable will th^se
dealings and tradings in the World be* that are done with an eye to the glory
of God?

Direction IV.
If you would so live, that Conscience may have no occasion to reproach you*
(...) up an Inquisition Court in your own (...). You have heard talk of an
In^^^sition in Spain, and in other Popish Countries; Oh that you would set up ^^
Inquisition Court in your own Souls* We have Courts of Inquiry among us; O keep
a weekly, nay a daily, Court^ Inquiry in your own hearts Commune with your own
hearts every day, acco^ding to the example of David, Psalm* 4 4. Examine your
selves often, be (...) ^^^dom in the work of self-examination^ ^ Cor. 13.5.
Examine your selves, prove your own selves, whether you be in the faith: know
ye not that Christ is in you, except ye be Reprobates or unapproved? whether
you he reprobate Silver, that is, not current. Examine your selves, prove your
own selves. Psalm, 119.59. I thought (...) my ways (says David) and tu^^ed
(...) feet unto thy testimonies. Oh think (...) your ways, say often to thine
own soul, What am I? what do I? how live I? whether go I? what will be my
condition through all Eternity? will such questions do you any harm? I appeal
to your selves that are able to judge. O that I could get you to reckon often
with your selves, and to keep a ^^^^y Sessions in your own Souls, and sit as
Judges in a Court of Inquity upon all your thoughts, words and actions, saying
to them, come hither my thoughts, come hither my words, come hither my works,
come let me examine you, come ^et me compare you with the rule, would not this
prevent the accusations of Conscience, if you did but reckon (...) your selves
once every day, if it were but one quarter of an hour in (...) day? Se^ Jer.
8.6.

Direction V.
Set open your ears to the voice of Conscience, when it is enlightened and
directed by the Word of God. When Conscience has information from the Word of
God, set open your ears to its ^oic^* hearken to the voice of Conscience; ^^
Abraham once by Gods command hearkened to the voice of Sarah, Genesis 21.12. And
God said unto Abraham, Let it not be grievous in thy sight because of the Lad,
and because of the Bond woman: In all Sarah has said unto thee, hearken unto
her voice. Why so say I to you: in all that Conscience, informed by the Word,
shall say unto you, hearken unto its voice. Be subject for Conscience sake, i^
the command, Romans 1^ ^. This Subjection for Conscience sake to those that are
in Authority God has commanded; Conscience will clamor, upbraid and reproach,
i^ Gods Commands be not obeyed. Hearken to the voice of Conscience, hearken to
the directing voice, and the reproving voice of Conscience. Psalm. 16.7. My
^ein^ instruct me, etc. that is, my inmost thoughts and secret ^otions do
instruct me. Hearken to its directing voice, when it ^aith, This (...) way;
walk in it, Isa. 30.21. When thou hear a voice behind thee, saying, This is
the way, walk in it; hearken (...) to its reproving voice, to its correcting
voice. Thus David expostulates, Psalm. 42. and 43. Why art thou cast down, O my
Soul? and why art thou dis^ within me? Trust still in God. Why (...) thou thus
diffident? why art thou (...) distrustful? Thus David reproves himself, and
chides himself. Psalm. 77.10* and I said, this is my infirmity. But I will
remember the years of the right hand (...) most high. And I said, this is my
^^mity, this is my frailty; I am to (...) Thus he checks himself, and hear^^^
^o the voice of Conscience.

Direction VI.
Set your selves against all sin (...) great and small. Fight against all (...)
oppose all sin; allow not your selve^ (...) the practice of any known sin,
(...) the omission of any known Duty. (...) was very careful herein, Act. 8 23.
(...) Paul earnestly beholding the Council (...) Men and Brethren, I have lived
in (...) Conscience before God unto this day (...) how came he to live in all
good Conscience? It was before God. If we (...) well remember the first
Direction, we should the better live in all good Conscience. And herein (says
the Apostle) do I exercise my self, to have always a Conscience void of offense
toward God and toward Me^, Act. 24 16. Pray for us, (says the Apostle) for we
trust we have a good Conscience, in all things willing to live honestly. Mark,
in all things* So Psa^ 119.1^^. I have refrained my feet from every (...) way,
etc. Verse 128* I esteem all the Precepts concerning all things to be right,
and I hate every false way. Pray observe (...) are three Universals: If you
would (...) have Conscience reproach you, set (...) selves against Sin, against
the com^^^ion of all Sin, and against the omiss^ (...) all Duties both g^^^^
and small* (...) you be not (...) in the least, you (...) not be trusted in the
greatest. Luke ^ 12 Make Conscience of evil Thoughts* ^dle and unsavo^^y Words
and see^^ (...) Oaths: and according to the Rule, ^ain from all appearance of
evil (...) ^^semblance of evil. 1 (...) 5.22. Take h^^d of Deceit, and of (...)
thing that ^^th ^he show and semblance of evil Take h^^d of Wanton Dresses*
take h^^d of en^^aring ^^tire* I am confident that many poor creatures have
been caught as it were in a Snare and Tr^p by the Habit and dresses of the
Professors of our Age. Alas, what Inventions have we to draw eyes, both behind
and before, to this part of the Body? and to the other part of the Body? The
Lord be merciful to us, is this the way to escape the reproaches of Conscience?
O Friends, take heed of deceit in your dealings* take heed of Lying for
advantage; take heed of the Husk and Kernel of the Grape: though we drink no^
the Wine, may we (...) eat the Grape? if not the Grap^, may (...) not eat the
Husk of the Grap^? A^ if not the Husk, yet may we not ca^ Kernel of the Grape?
No, Num^. 6 ^. This is the Law of the Nazarite, (...) days of his Separation he
shall eat (...) that is made of the Vine-Tree, (...) Kernels even to the Husk.
He must (...) drink Wine, that was the Law of the Nazarite, That he might not
be ens^a^^d, not under a temptation to drink Wine, he must not meddle with any
thing coming of the Vine, not the very Husk or the Kernel, lest he be ensnared.
Our first Mother Eve was drawn to Eating (...) Seeing: O take heed of
Temptations and Snares, and be not a Snare or Temptation unto others; but make
Conscience of (...) sin, whether great or small. Nay further it there be any
question or doubt about any thing, whether it be a sin or no, what shall we do
then? Some say it is a sin, and some say it is not a sin; and possibly some
good men may say it is not a sin, and some good men may say it is a sin; what
shall we do in such a doubtful matter? I shall quickly resolve you; Take the
su^st side. In such a (...) when the matter (...) ^oubtful, the (...) way (...)
is not to (...) or m^dd^ (...) with it.

W^^ there not ^^at ^^ough for them (...) in the Prim^^ive Tim^^ besides that
wh^^ did giv^ ^f^^nce? Some doub^ whether it (...) of this or that meat* (...)
we (...) i^? Paul (...) in such a (...) eat f^esh (...) the (...), rather than
offend ^ weak breth^^* (...) is not law^ul, says one; I will do it for all
that, says another. They are not of ^auls Spirit. And as for (...) Habits, are
there not enough besides those which ar^ questionable, and which both Ancient
and Modern Divines have all condemned as sinful? Possibly some will assume a
greater Liberty, and we are now generally grown to a grea^^er Latitude; but
tell me, is there not enough of other sorts, but we must use such habits and
dresses as are doubtful, questionable, and offensive? God help us to consider
of it. In all matters doubtful and questionable, still take the surest side. If
you do that which is questionable, and doubtful, you may sin, and possibly it
may be found to be a sin at the Day of Judgment: and if so, what will you do
then? It was the speech of Mr. B^lton concerning long hair: You say the wearing
of long Hair is not a sin, but what if it be found at the Day of Judgment to be
a sin? You will then ^ish, O that I had left it off, or never used (...) Men
are not infallible, Ministers are not ^allible, no not the best of them; you
are not to ground on them as if they could not be mistaken: therefore in all
doubtful cases choose the surest side. There is Meat enough to eat besides that
which is doubtful; and there is Apparel enough to wear besides that which is
offensive and questionable. If you would so live that Conscience may have no
cause to reproach you, my Counsel to you is, Take always in doubtful matters
the surest side, which is not to meddle or make with it at all: for if you do
it, you may sin, and ^^nd case. What if we have neglected these rules and
directions which have been laid before us. If you have neglected to walk
according to rule, and have given Conscience just cause to reproach you* and if
Conscience does reproach you, and if you a^k me, How may we get the reproaches
of Conscience wiped off, and get Conscience quiet again? I answer in two words,
Repent and Believe.

1. Repent of that before the Lord which Conscience reproacheth you for, ^^^urn
for it, be ashamed of it, judge and ^^nd^mn your selves for what is past,
re^^re against it for the time to come this (...) good course. If we confess
our sins, he ^^ faithful and just to forgive us our sins, and ^se us from all
unrighteousness, 1 Cor. ^^.31. For if we would judge our selves, we (...) not
be judged* and if we acknowledge our transgressions, and accept of the
punishment of our iniquity. Read Lev. 26.40, 41* 42. There is not a better way
to wipe off the reproaches of Conscience, than by the tears of repent^nce.
Follow (...) example of that Woman that came ^^^ind our Lord and Savior, and
washed his feet with her tears, and wiped them with the hairs of her head A
service perhaps that you would be loath to put your hair to; but Sirs, if you
would have Consc^ence to be quiet, then seriously set upon the work of
repentance.

2* Believe. By Faith set Christ's blood on work, to wipe off the aspersions and
reproaches of Conscience, to purify and pacify Conscience, get Conscience
^^led with the blood of Christ, Heb 9 14. You read of one, Mat. 15*28. that set
the Pity and Power of Christ on work to make her Daughter whole. Jesus (...)
^ed and said unto her, O Woman, (...) thy Faith! Be it to thee even is th^^
(...) Christ seemed not to regard her a wh^^ but she followed him, and set his
(...) Power on work. Faith will set the blood of Christ on work, to wipe off
the reproaches of Conscience. The Ce^ Faith set Christ on work to heal his
S^rvant, Lord, (says he) my (...) home sick of the Pal^^^, griev^^s^ (...) And
Jesus says unto him, I wi^ (...) heal him. The C^ on answe^^d (...) Lord, I am
not worthy that the (...) come under my Roof, but speak the (...) ^^ly, and my
Servant shall be healed. An^ Je^^^ said unto the Centurion, Go thy way, (...)
thou have believed so be it done unto t^ee. And his servant was healed in the
self same hour, Mat. ^*13. The Lepers Faith did ^et Christ on work, Mat. 8.2,
3. And the^ came a Leper and worshipped him, saying, Lord, if thou will thou
can make me clean. And Jesus put forth his hand and touched him, saying, I
will, be thou clean: and immediately his Leprosy was cleansed. The Father of
the Child that had a deaf and a dumb Spirit, his Faith set Christ on work, Mark
9 23, 24, 25. Jesus says unto him, if thou can believe, all things are
possible to him that believes. And straightway the Father of the Child cried
out with tears, Lord, I believe, help thou my unbelief. The Faith of the Woman
diseased with an Issue of blood set Christ on work, Mat 9 21. For she said
within her self, if I may but touch the Hem of his Garment, I shall be whole.
And it follows, the Woman was made whole from that hour. The Faith of the poor
Leper set Christ on work, Luk 17.19. And Jesus says unto him, Thy faith has
made thee whole.

And likewise the Woman's faith ( Luke ^.48) set Christ on work for the pardon
of her sins; he said unto her, Thy sins are forgiven thee. And v. 50. Christ
tells her, Thy faith has saved thee, go in peace.

And likewis^ the Faith of blind Bartim^us, Mark 10.51, 52. sets Christ's Power
and Pity on work, and o^^^ined He^ (...) And the Faith of the two blind men in
Mat 9 27, 28, 29, 30. Christ touched their eyes and said, According to your
Faith, so be it unto you And their eyes were opened. O if you could but
(according to these Examples) set Faith on work for the healing of your souls,
Conscience would be quiet Thus bespeak and expostulate with thine own
Conscience, and say* it is true (Conscience) I have sinned, and deserved to be
reproached and condemned, but I fly to the Blood of Christ for cleansing, and I
apply that by Faith Nay (says Conscience) if thou fly to that City of Refuge,
I can then no longer pursue after thee; thou ar^ sale enough from me. If thou
make the Blood of Christ thy Refuge, thou art then secured from all the
Storms and Terrors, and Reproaches of Conscience. If you would not have
Conscience upbraid you, accuse and condemn you, set about the work of
Repentance and Faith, and then whatsoever cause you have given Conscience to
reproac^ you, it will reproach you no more, it w^ be quiet and ^ peace with ^o^
always provided that you set about this work of Faith (...) Repentance
seriously (...) good (...) ^onsider what has been said* and the Lord (...) in
all things.

FINIS.

