THE SPEECH OF His Excellency Coll. Benjamin Fletcher, Captain General and
Governor in Chief of His Majesty's Province of New York, in America, etc. To
the Assembly, the 7th day of April, 1600.
Mr. Speaker, and you Gentlemen Representatives.
THe great Favors and Kindnesses we have received from Our most gracious King
calls for the (...) extent of Our Obedience and Gratitude.

His Majesty, by late Supplies of Men, Artillery and other (...) of War, with
the Royal Commands for Assistance from the Neighboring Governments (if a due
Compliance be made) has enabled us to withstand and oppose all our Enemies, and
(...) in a happy Security. Nothing but our Sins can render His Majesty's Care
ineffectual. The blessings of Almighty God will go along with our Endeavors,
if we first assert our Duty to him, and (...) the Deference to our Prince.
Obedience to Government is a part of Religion.

^

It must be Considered, that all Utensils of War are but Tools, and of no use
without hands to employ them.

The King has sent us Men to work with these Tools for our Ease and Safety, but
Men wear out, they dye, they desert, are often sick and weak; Armies and
Battalions must be kept up by constant (...) else they crumble to nothing.

The Forces (...) much (...) since their arrival, and will be more so, unless
some proper Encouragement be thought of for them, as in the like case practiced
in the Leeward Islands. The (...) of Laborers runs so high in this Country,
that most Necessitous Man rather choose to earn their Bread by the Spade than
the Sword.

We shall want both Men and Money to render his Majesty's gracious Assistance
answerable to his Royal Intentions.

It ought ever to be acknowledged, with an humble (...) on our parts, that
notwithstanding his Majesty's present Pressures, the great and bloody War he is
engaged in, the daily hazards he exposes his Sacred Person to, yet he remembers
this little handful of his People.

Let us not forget what we owe to such a King, (...) Royal Bounty; let us not
forget our selves, but wisely (...) our own safety, by strengthening our
Fronteers, which I chiefly (...) to you, as the best return we can make, the
most acceptable Service we can do to our King, and to our Country.

His Majesty that by his Royal (...) recommended to us the Building a Chapel
in this Fort, a former Assembly took some notice of it. I hope you will not be
wanting on your parts, to forward and finish.

I have (...) will give you Satisfaction. (...) the Government in (...), and
consider that such Gentlemen as have advanced Money upon the Credit of it, may
not suffer for their Zeal for the Public Weal, being the Money thus lent has
been when Alarms or other Exigents have called for an immediate Care, wherein
our common Safety seemed concerned, and at such Seasons when we could not
timely meet in Assembly. I will not doubt of your Care in a matter of such
Moment; you will all concur to keep up the Credit of the Governments, which in
some measure is the safety of it.

The Money granted last Sessions is in great part left to my Dispose (it is not
yet paid) I desire, for my own case and your Satisfaction, That a Committee of
your House may confer with a Committee of the Council on this matter, that the
Money be applied to the Public Good: I would have it obvious to you and all
Men, that it is not converted to any by or private end, nor do I desire one
penny of it should be paid (...), nor to be any further concerned than to Sign
Warrants for the payment of it to such Uses as you shall advise.

Gentlemen, I wish you a good Agreement and Understanding amongst your selves,
that His Majesty's Favors be not lost upon us, but that the Safety, Honor and
Prosperity of this Province may be timely considered, as by his Majesty in the
repeated Succors he has been graciously pleased to send us, so on our parts by
an humble Acknowledgment for them, and a proper Application of them.

FINIS

