His Excellency, The Earl of BELLOMONTS SPEECH TO THE Honorable the COUNCIL and
House of Representatives, Convened in General Assembly, at Boston, in His
Majesty's Province of the Massachusetts Bay in New England, on Friday the 2 d.
of June 1699.
Gentlemen,
I Cannot but think the extraordinary kind Reception I have had among you, is a
sure presage of a perfect good Agreement, and Correspondence between you and
me; to which no Care of mine or Study shall be wanting. And that I may acquit
my self toward you as I ought, I shall as well as my Weakness will permit me,
Copy after the Example of Our Great Master the King, who through the whole
Course of His Administration, has shew^d a tenderness of His people not to be
equaled, and a singular moderation even toward His most Inveterate Enemies;
the first an effect of His Goodness, the latter of His Magnanimity and
Clemency: which admirable qualities have gained Him the just Veneration of all
mankind; and ought to possess our hearts that are here with the same Loyalty,
Affection and Duty toward His Sacred Person, that our Fellow Subjects in
England have manifested ever since His Majesty's most Happy Accession to the
Throne.

I cannot more truly Imitate the King in a Fatherly Care and Tenderness of you,
than by looking into the public Administration of Justice, to see that it be
done quickly and impartially. And for moderation, which I take to be in a
peculiar manner the Kings Attribute; I come among you with a Settled Resolution
not to disturb any of you in the Exercise of your Consciences, or in the free
Enjoyment of your Liberties and Estates.

In a word, I will do you all the good I possibly can in my Station; and that
in Duty to God, to the King, and to my own Conscience and Honor.

I Understand the Courts of Justice are fallen, I therefore Recommend your
Reviving them by Act of Assembly, such an one I mean, as you can be sure will
meet with His Majesty's Approbation when it is (...) before Him.

I should be glad you would think of ways to Engage the Neighbor Indians in a
Trade with you, which I am apt to believe may be managed with that advantage to
them, by a good regulation and underselling the French, that their friendship
and fidelity may be secured to the Crown, and then they will be no longer
Thorns in your sides.

The Country I am told is destitute of Stores of War, which is so necessary a
provision, that I cannot think I need do more than put you in mind of it.

The Fortifications on the Island at the mouth of your Harbor, ought in my
mind to be looked into, I intend to visit them in a few days with His Majesty's
Engineer, and will afterward report to you, whether the present Works be
sufficient, or new ones requisite.

I would very gladly promote a Charter of Incorporation for your College at
Cambridge, and will heartily join with you in addressing His Majesty for His
Royal Grant of such Privileges and Franchises as His Majesty in His Goodness
shall Think fit. It Is a great advantage you have above the other Provinces,
that your Youth are not put to Travel far for Learning, but have the Muses at
their doors. Besides that College will always be a Nursery to afford you a
Supply of Able Ministers for the Cure of Souls. Therefore 'twere pity the
Kings Royal Charter should not be solicited out of hand.

Mr. Speaker, and you Gentlemen Representatives;

AS it is your undoubted right, that the Granting or Continuing a Revenue
should have its first rise with you: I therefore apply to you, that Care may be
taken for the necessary support of the Government, in such a manner as will
best suit with the ease and circumstances of the People. The Revenue of Excise
I understand will Expire the Twenty Ninth of this Month, and you will do well
to consider, whether it will not be proper to revive it. Mr. Treasurer has
showed me an Abstract of the public Accounts, by which I perceive the
Government is out of Debt, which is a happy Circumstance for you, and as such,
is very pleasing to me, for I shall always delight in your happiness.

Some (...) I am Commanded from England to offer you for your passing; which
are of a public nature, and will be for your Service; and such other Laws as
you stand in need of, for promoting your Trade, and the general Interest of the
Province, I will Join with you in; provided they be made to square with the
Laws of England.

I should be wanting to you and my self too, if I did not put you in mind of
the indispensable duty and respect we owe the King, for being the Glorious
Instrument of our Deliverance from the odious Fetters and Chains of Popery and
Tyranny which had almost overwhelmed our Consciences, and Subverted all our
Civil Rights. There is something that is God-like in what the King has done for
us. The work of Redemption and Preservation comes next to that of Creation. I
would not be misunderstood so as to be thought to Rob God of the Glory of that
Stupendous Act of His Providence, in bringing to pass the late happy and
wonderful Revolution in England. His Blessed Work it was without doubt, and He
was pleased to make King William mediately the Author and Instrument of it.
Ever since the Year 1602. England has had a Succession of Kings that have been
Aliens; in this respect I mean, That they have not fought our Battles, nor been
in our Interests, but have been in an unnatural manner plotting and contriving
to undermine and subvert our Religion, Laws and Liberties, till God was pleased
by His Almighty Power, and Infinite Mercy and Goodness to give us a true
English King in the Person of His Present Majesty, who has upon all occasions
hazzarded His Royal Person in the Front of our Battles, and where there was
most danger. He has restored to our Nation the almost lost Character of Bravery
and Valor; and what is most valuable of all, His Majesty is entirely in the
Interests of His people It Is therefore our Duty and Interest to Pray to God in
a most fervent manner, That He would Bless our Great KING WILLIAM, with a long
and prosperous Reign over us, to which I am persuaded, you that are here
present, and all Good Men will heartily say. Amen.

By Order of the House of Representatives, I do Appoint Bartholomew Green and
John Allen, to Print His Excellency's Speech.

James Converse, Speaker.


