The Address Of the Honorable the Lieutenant Governor Stoughton, In the Name
of Himself and of His Majesty's COUNCIL of the Province of the
Massachusetts Bay, unto His Excellency the Earl of BELLOMONT, immediately after
His Lordship's having made His Speech unto the General Assembly of said
Province, at His first meeting of them, on the Second day of June, 1699.
My Lord,
THIS Day Shines most happily upon us, wherein we see and enjoy Your Excellency
Seated in the Chair of Government over this His Majesty's Province, and Entered
upon the Exercise thereof, to the great content of all.

I may well say this day, inasmuch as this Your Excellency's Presence is that
which makes it to be more Day with us than lately it has been, since it cannot
more properly or fitly be looked upon than as the Rising of that greater Light
of a more conspicuous Orb, and proportionable Influences, which nature has
appointed to distinguish and rule the day,

We may truly say, That our long Expectation of Your Excellency has been an
Expectation with Desire; and we now begin to find that true which the Wise man
tells us, That when the Desire comes, it is a Tree of Life; Long may it Root
and Flourish, that we may long sit under the Shadow, and Enjoy the Fruit
thereof.

Had not Your Excellencys particular Instructions, and His Majesty's more
Especial Service in another Province belonging to Your Lordships Government,
necessarily prevented, we had much sooner Enjoyed this days happiness: For sure
we are, Your Lordship has put no needless Delays upon us, having more than
redeemed all the time that has been spent elsewhere, in doing those great and
necessary things there brought to pass; and in the mean time not omitting to
give unto us early and repeated Assurances of Your Lordships favorable
inclinations and forwardness to be coming to us, and of Your having Entertained
us very far into Your good Opinion and Good Will, for which we do most humbly
return our most Sincere Acknowledgments.

And since our Turn is so happily come at last, we will not begrudge, but
Congratulate unto our Neighbors, that they have been so long the first in
reaping the signal Fruits of your Lordships Government amongst them Administered
with so much care and indefatigableness; so much Wisdom and Justice, and such a
fixed resolution and zeal expressed against things evil, and to be
discountenanced. And this we do the more freely, because that from this
experience of theirs, it comes to pass, that we now receive Your Excellency
more nearly known and understood, unto the greater, not only Confirmation, but
also Enlargement of all our Expectations for our selves.

My Lord,

All men must needs take notice, but none can with the like Sense and
Concernment as our selves, how highly His Majesty has honored and dignified
this Province in placing over us Your Excellency, a person of so high and great
Quality, noble in degree, and much more noble otherwise; who have stood so much
in public view for Merits and Services greater than ordinary, and who have in
most Honorable Employment stood so near, and been so acceptable to His
Majesty, and His Late Royal Consort our late Sovereign Lady. Your Lordships
Honor shall be ours, and the Luster of Your Name and Character shall be
reflected upon us, so as to advance and increase our reputation from this day
forward in the world. And since (...) the great distance that we His Majesty's
Subjects here do stand in from His Sacred Person: Your Lordship is placed as
the Great Medium of Intercourse and Communication: We most thankfully and
joyfully account our selves possessed this day of a greater advantage than ever
heretofore, by reason of Your Excellencys Interposition, and the Improvement of
Your Interest for us both in making our most humble Addresses and Applications
to the Crown of England, and in the obtaining thence all those Favors,
Supports and Cherishings of Supreme Authority, which we do, and so often shall
stand in need of, without the least doubt of Success; Having KING WILLIAM the
Third, the Glorious Deliverer and Restorer of Three Kingdoms, the Bulwark of
the true Protestant Religion, and all English Liberties: Most Princely, most
Just, most rightfully appointed, Heavens Care, the Father of all His People,
and the best of Kings, to Reign over us.

My Lord.

The good people of this Province (as has already been more publicly
signified) cannot, nor indeed ought they to forget that great difference of
Interest and Design, upon which their Fathers and Predecessors, truly Great and
Good Men in this respect, did with so much cost and hazard, transport
themselves and settle this wilderness: Most other Plantations declared for
nothing more than Trade and Gains; but those good men publicly Owned that of
Religion. That they and theirs might more freely Enjoy the Worship and
Ordinances thereof; That their Children might be Educated more free from the
growing Vices and Debaucheries of other places, that they might be brought up
in a Land where the Examples of Piety, Sobriety, Diligence, Strict Observation
of Gods Holy Sabbaths; and all other Virtues and Good Behavior might be more
abundantly in their View. The Settlement of these things under the Government
and Royal Charter then obtained, was the First Settlement which they chiefly
labored in. The Enjoyment of these was the first and principal Enjoyment which
they took contentment in. And from those times, SIR, until now, the same
Interest and Design has (Thanks be to God) continued in some good measure the
great Standard and Rule whereby this people have made an Estimate of all their
Concernments. By this they have judged of Things and Persons, of themselves and
others, and of the Times and Providence that have passed over us. Whilst they
have kept up to this great Design, they have reckoned themselves to be going
forward, but otherwise to be going backward: When Divine Providence have
Smiled on them as to these things, they have ever thought themselves to enjoy
much of the Favor of Heaven; but otherwise to be under its Frowns. When it was
in their power, they have ever Chosen such to be Over them in chiefest place as
were Lovers, and would be Promoters of this Great Interest and Design, and the
great things mentioned under the same. And all this I take the boldness thus
plainly to mention to Your Lordship, that I may also as plainly say, that one
great and principal cause of the joy and thankfulness of this day, is, that God
and the King have made so favorable a Choice for us, that in the Person of
Your Excellency we do at this time receive a Captain General and Governor in
Chief, who has given so many and great proofs of His great Esteem of Sincere
Love to, and Care for all these Things; and by whose Example and Authority, as
a Patron and Favourer, they may be promoted and secured to us; and all that
which is contrary and destructive of them, Discouraged and Suppressed.

As to the State of the Province, Your Lordship will soon fully acquaint Your
Self therewith, and therein I am not so confident that you will not find many
things, and some material ones, out of order, as I am, that by Your Excellencys
Authority, Happy Conduct, and Universal Influence, a favorable, proper and
speedy Remedy will be given to them all: Each Order and Degree amongst us,
cooperating with Your Excellency thereunto, as in Duty we are bound: Nor do we
doubt, but that in judging of our Affairs, and of the Management of the last
Years, Your Lordship will make favorable Allowances for the Emergencies,
Difficulties and Distractions of the late War, that continued so long, and did
so sorely press upon us; from all which we rejoice, that Your Excellency, in
Your Time, shall be so happily delivered; and that we shall so seasonably
receive Your Excellencys Assistances unto the Improvement, better Settlement
and Enjoyment of that Peace, which through the prosperousness of His Majesty's
Great and Glorious Undertakings in Europe, we do at this day so far see the
beginning of

We must not now call them Enemies whom we have found to be the most pernicious
of all other. I mean our French Neighbors; but Your Excellency understands
them well enough; and will as well watch and counterwork them in all their
sinister and crafty methods and underminings; Since they cannot but
everlastingly adhere to all their Envyings of us, and of our Prosperity; and to
their most unjust Designs of Encroaching upon us* as to the Bounds, Rights and
Privileges, of this and all other His Majesty's Provinces bordering upon them.

But by this time I have too long delayed Your Lordship and the public
Occasions of the Day. I have only therefore to add for my self, that as it was
a great Honor done me, and far greater than I could reasonably ever aspire
unto, to be placed in the Government of this Province, by His Majesty's Most
Gracious Command; first during the absence of the late Governor, and then to
be continued therein during the Vacancy of the Place, till Your Excellencys
most happy Arrival: So I do now most sincerely own it to be the greatest Honor
that ever I do in this World expect, that I have Resigned it into so Noble
Hands as those of Your Excellency; and so much the more, because the latter is
of so much greater advantage unto the Public, than the former could be capable
of.

And now, My Lord, let the Station that I have Held, which has much increased
the intenseness of my Affection unto the good people of this Province, with
whom I have long been Joined; both in Prosperity and Adversity, and unto whom
(I mean those that shall be gone before) I must ere long nextly be gathered as
unto my people: Let this excuse my freedom and boldness, that I do now by way
of affectionate Request, most humbly and earnestly Recommend them to Your
Excellencys most Generous and Favorable Regards; whom by way of Authority, GOD
and the KING have Committed unto Your Charge and Government, which I pray may
be long and prosperous; both to Your Self, and to us all.

Finally, My Lord, (which indeed should have been the first thing spoken at
this time) we do all most humbly Thank Your Excellency for all the most kind
and obliging Expressions of Favor to us in Your Lordships Speech made this Day.

BOSTON, Printed by Bartholomew Green, and John Allen, Printers to His
Excellency the GOVERNOR and COUNCIL. Sold at the Printing House. 1699.


