To my reverend and (...)
Sir,
It is certainly (...) of a (...) as well As (...) commonwealth, (...) to
advance his and (...) together, (...) force (...) be (...) that scarce (...)
writing but may have them, and (...) principle (...) himself acquainted with
the (...) to be (...), which though (...) is most (...) and (...) Laws (...)
which they (...) of knowledge and (...) which (...) in the (...) being punished
for the breach of (...) of the^, (...) to maxim will appear (...) if ignorance
of the Law (...) could be purished by the law (...) dangerous thing, (...) yet
(...) the experience (...) more knowledge people have (which is (...) to their
government (...) Institution: But this is (...) general, (...), with many (...)
which (...) Gentlemen of this (...) all the Justices of the (...) of the Laws
(...) them so as to read, (...) them, (...) which it is impossible (...) but
(...) a great charge and (...) to be got at any (...) hand.

(...) supposing this, and now that the plain print and easy pr^ce will remove
(...) it cannot I think be (...) the Justices (...) and County Courts will have
them in their (...) for the (...) better to (...) them to give a right judgment
of (...) laws (...) to them, (...) Officers of what nature (...) to the first
place it must needs prevent many tedious (...) themselves in by Ignorance, for
the law (...) and what to (...), and it will (...) because then Neighbors
(...) the law as well (...) will make Men more (...) Neighbors, (...) to the
Courts of Justice.

Secondly, As it w^ll prevent (...) and (...) among private persons, (...) the
several Officers of Courts their (...), which will prevent many (...) their
Offices (...) through (...), and which give great delay (...) Courts, now the
several Officers (...) their (...) will be a (...) to the (...) of the Court

Thirdly, The Justices perfect (...) will be a great means to (...) the (...)
such (...), and prevent (...) Laws, when they shall know at first (...) and
(...) to other laws, and be able to (...) knowledge, (...) the (...) Arguments
of each (...) then the (...).

Fourthly, (...) and (...) will more readily and apply discharge (...) but if
all the (...) if but (...) answer (...) to the Province.

You can (...) will (...) and the (...) pray for (...).

THE INDEX
A
ATtachments and Executions limited etc. (...) (...) and (...) (...) and (...)
Administrators (...) Executors (...) double (...) (...) or payment of (...)
(...) Appeals and (...) of (...)
B
Special ^ail to be taken in the Several Countys (...)
C
Appointing Coroners (...) (...) (...) proceedings judicial etc. between the
death of Governor (...) (...) arrival 24 (...) (...) to be (...) 3^ (...) 41
Court House Lands 4^ (...) Springs 4^ County Courts administration of justice
(...) Commissioners of the County Courts to assess their inhabitants for the
necessary charge of their County (...) (...) Commissarys Office Wills
Administrations etc. 87 Criminals how to be tried (...) Additional Act touching
Coopers (...)
D
For (...) Delegates 16 (...) Days 19 Division of (...) and Baltemore Countys
(...)
E
Evidence (...) foreign (...) (...) by the late Revolution ^5 Against (...) and
deputy (...) 50 Executions (...) of April 5^ Enrolling Conveyance (...) 93
F
Convicted (...) 19 Freeschools (...) 3^ Height of Fences against burners (...)
and the multiplicity of Horses ^7
H
Harbors preserved. 14 Marking High Ways. ^6
I
(...) and (...) Concerning (...) Impo^t (...) several (...) exported (...)
Speedy justi^^ and Encouragement (...) (...) Trade with the (...) etc. (...)
Impo^t for (...) the public charge (...) (...) for small debts 6^ (...) to be
carried to the Indian Towns 7^ (...) and petty (...) (...) differences between
the (...) (...) of Action^ (...) (...) to be published 5 (...) Laws Repealed
others confirmed 18 (...) Repealed and others confirmed 34 For the speedy
conveying public (...) 55 The (...) Law 60 All Laws to be Recorded etc. 78
(...) 81 (...) Temporary ^aws Revived 116 (...) repealed others confirmed 117
(...) to be laid by a (...) 119
M
(...) to be published 20 (...) 99
N
Encouraging the importation of Negro's (...) (...) and learning encouraged ^1
(...) Officers (...) ascertained 28 Naturalization (...) ascertained 32
O
Appointing Officers (...) (...) (...)
P
Quieting Possessions 18 Additional Act for quieting Possessions 30 Additional
Act to the Act for (...) 31 Damage on (...) of exchange 50 (...) and (...)
punished 10^
Q
Of Recognition ^ (...) of several persons secured 3 (...) to the Governor ^^
(...) o^ three pe^ce per hog head to the Governor 59 Religion 109
S
Subbornation and Perjury 11 Standard with weights and measures 14 (...) of
Delegates and (...) of Provincial and County Courts 26 Sunday to be kept Holy
38 (...) Office 71 Servants and slaves 95 Sec^^^ty of the frontiers (...) 114
T
Tobacco seized and received by the (...) and others 9 (...) transporting or
conveying (...) persons without passes 22 Town (...) 36 List of (...) etc. 77
Tobacco received by Merchants and others how to be secured 78
U
Against Usury 15 (...) to assess their Parishoners 52 Against vexations suits,
proving of debts and pleading discount 84
W
Wolves 58 Watermills 85
MARYLAND ss.
At a Session of Assembly begun and held at the City of St Mary's (...)
Majesty's Province of MARYLAND the 10th. Day of May 1693. and in the Fourth
Year of the (...) of our Sovereign Lord and Lady WILLIAM and MARY by the G^^ce
of GOD of England Scotland France and Ireland King and Queen Defenders of the
Faith etc. His Excellency LYONEL COPLET Esquire being then Governor in Chief and
Captain General, These following Laws were Enacted, to the Honor and Glory of
GOD and Welfare of this his Majesty's Province.

AN ACT OF RECOGNITION^.
WE Your Majesty's most Humble and Loyal Subjects of this your Majesty's
Province of Maryland, the Governor and General Assembly, do Beseech your More
Excellent Majesty's that it may be published and declared in this General
Assembly and Enacted by the Authority of the (...), That We do Recognize and
Acknowledge Your Majesty's are, and of Right ought to be by that Laws of the
Realm of England our Sovereign Liege Lord and Lady King and Queen of England
Scotland France and Ireland and the Dominions thereunto belonging, in and to
whose Princely Persons the Royal Estate, Crown and Dignity of the said Realms,
with all Honors, Styles, Ti^les, Regality's, Prerogatives, Powers,
Jurisdictions, and Authority's to the same belonging and appertaining, are most
(...) ^ightfully and Entirely Invested and Incorporated United and Annexed.

An Act (...) what shall be good Evidence to prove Foreign Debts.
WHERE AS diverse People of the Kingdom of England and other places, have in
their Hands Bonds of diverse and sundry Persons now residing in this Province,
(...) send them to certain Attorneys to be put in Suit against the said Debtors
here, which for (...) of a Law to explain, and ascertain what shall be
sufficient proof (...) the proving the said Bonds to be the Act and Deed of the
Debtor (...) sealed and d^^^verd neither is there any way for the Debtors to
discharged (...) of the some if they have satisfied the same, as by bringing
the Creditor (...) his Oath, to declare and set forth if he has received the
said Debts or any part thereof, o^ whether there be not any Accounts between
the Creditor and Debtor whereby he may discount the ^ame, (...) to prove his
Releases; the Witnesses living ^emot^, and impossible to bring them viva voce
to give their Testimony therein (...) proves oftentimes very prejudicial to
both Parties, (...) prevent which (...) R^^ress therein for the future, BE IT
ENACTED by the King and Queen's most Excellent Majesty's by and with the Advice
and Consent of this present General Assembly and the Authority of the same,
That all Debts of Record, whether by Judgment, Recognizance, Deed Enroled and
upon Record, the Exemplification thereof under the Seal of the County's where
the said Judgment was given, (...) the said Judgment was Recorded, shall be a
sufficient Evidence to prove the same. And that all other Debts by Bonds,
Bills, Accounts or otherwise, that shall from and after the publication hereof
be sent hither to be put in Suit against any Person whatsoever, living or
residing within this Province shall be proved by the Oaths of the Witnesses
there unto, by a Notary Public or other Officer Lawfully Authorized there unto
of the County or Place wheresoever it shall happen the said Bonds or Bills
shall be sent from; at which time, and (...) which said Public Notary (...)
public Officer shall be present the Creditors, who shall then likewise (...)
Public Notary (...) other public Officer of the place so (...) and upon (...)
Corporal Oath declare (...) said Debt or any (...) that there is not any
Accounts between the said Creditor and Debtor (...) which the said Creditor may
be likewise indebted to the Debtor (...) the value of the said Debt, or any
part thereof for any matter or (...) time of the da^e of the said Bond Bill or
Instrument, or whether the (...) has not given to the said Debtor any Release
for the same, to be sent together with the proofs under the Hands and Seals of
the Publck Notary or other public Officer thereunto appointed, which if the
Creditor shall refuse or neglect to perform or (...), then the said matter and
thing by the said Public Notary o^ other Officer so (...) them certified as
aforesaid, shall not be received as Evidence to prove the said (...). And if
the said Creditor be dead, and his Executor or Administrator Sue such Bond,
Bill, Account or otherwise Sue any Debtor for the same, the Executor (...)
Administrator in like manner before such Notary Public or other Officer for
(...) purpose appointed, shall set forth and declare upon their Oath whether or
no they have not heard the Creditor in his Life time acknowledge that Debt^^ be
satisfied, or ^hether or not upon fight of (...) Accounts, they have not (...)
Credit given to the Debtor since the Day of the making of the (...) Bills,
(...), or beginning of the Accounts so Sued for, all which (...) manner ^s to
be certified by the public Notary or other Officer (...) ^ppointed under his
Hand and Seal to be sent along to this Country, (...) with the Testimony of the
Witnesses that have testified to the said (...), A^compts or otherwise, all
which if the said Executor or Administrator (...) or neglect to do, then the
said matter and thing by the public Notary or other Officer appointed as
aforesaid certified shall not be received in Evidence for valid against the
Debtor. Provided though the proofs and Evidences are sufficient that (...)
Plai^^if obtain Judgment for the said Debt, no Execution shall Issue forth
against the Defendant until the Original be given up, or delivered up to the
Defendant of his Attorney, or sufficient and legal Releases in case the
Original (...).

And Be it further Enacted that all and every the Attorney (...) Attorneys who
shall be employed in the prosecution of such Suits, shall put (...) pay the
Defendant all such Costs and Charges as shall be by (...) expended. ^n case the
(...) cast in the Suit.

(...) likewise, That no bill, bond, Judgment, (...) and of the Staple or other
Specialty whatsoever tho (...) and ce^ified as aforesaid shall be good and
pleadable, or admitted in Evidence against (...) Person or Persons of this
Province wherein the Debtor and Creditor are both dead, and the Debt, or Thing,
or Action above Twelve Years (...).

An Act for the Ircouragement of the (...) into this Province.
WHEREAS Several of the good People of this Province have been discouraged to
Import into, (...) within this Province any Negro's and other Slaves, and such
as have imported or purchased any such Negro's or slaves, have to the great
displeasure (...) Allmighty God, and the prejudice of the (...) of those poor
People neglected to instruct them in the Christian Faith, or to (...) or permit
them to (...) holy Sacrament of baptism for the Remision of their S^ns upon a
(...) and ungrounded apprehension, that by becoming Christians, they and the
issue of their Bodies are actually manumitted, and made free and discharged
from their Servitude and Bondage.

BE IT DECLARED AND ENACTED by the King and Queens Most Excellent Majesty's, by
and with the Advice and Consent of this present General Assembly and the
Authority of the same, That where any Negro or Negro's, Slave or Slaves being
in Servitude or Bondage, is or shall become Christian or Christians, and have,
or has received, or shall at any time receive the holy Sacrament of Baptism,
before or after his her or their importation into this Province, the same is
not, nor shall, or ought the same to be deemed, adjudged, construed, or taken
to be, or amount unto a Manumition or Free, enlarging or discharging any such
Negro or Negro's Slave or Slaves; (...) Issue or Issues, from his her or their
or any of (...) Bondage or Bondages; but that notwithstanding becoming (...)
receiving the holy Sacrament of Baptism, every such Negro or Negro's Slave and
Slaves, and all and every the Issue and Issues of every (...) Negro and Negro's
Slave and Slaves, is, are and be, and shall at all times hereafter be adjudged,
reputed, deemed, and taken to be and remain in Servitude and Bondage, and
subject to the (...) Servitude and Bondage to all Intents and purposes, as if
he she or they or every or any of them was or (...) in, and subject to before
such his her or their becoming Christian or Christians, or receiving the holy
Sacrament of Baptism, any Opinion or Matter or Thing to the contrary
notwithstanding.

An Act for securing the Rights of several Persons.
WHEREAS many and frequent Complaints have been made by diverse good People of
this Province, who of (...) Years have procured of the Lord Proprietory of this
Province Warrants for the laying out and taking up several quantities of Land
within the same, and have passed their Bonds to his Lordship, according to his
late Conditions of Plantations for the same, and by virtue of their Warrants,
the several Surveyors of this Province, had before the Revolution of Affairs
within the same surveyed and laid our pursuant to the said Warrants, several
Tracts and parcels of Land for them or to their Assigns, and either had
returned Certificate of the same unto the Examiner, or had it in their Hands
ready to return before the Revolution as aforesaid; but the same Certificate
either not arrived at the Land Office of this Province, (...) if the same was,
no Pattents as yet granted for the same; and his Lordship (...) shut up the
Land Office of this Province, and no Persons being qualified to grant Pattents
for the same, they, and others in the like condition are in great danger of
loosing the Benefit and Estate, of, and in their said Lands so laid out and
surveyed as aforesaid. In Tender Consideration whereof, and for prevention of
such Inconveniency within this Province, your Majesty's most Dutyful and Loyal
Subjects the Burgesses and Delegates of this present General Assembly pray that
it may be Enacted. And BE IT ENACTED by the King and Queens most Excellent
Majesty's by and with the Advice and Consent of this present General Assembly
and the Authority of the same, That any Person or Persons whatsoever, being
Fr^^ Denizens and Subjects to the Crown of England, that at any time heretofore
within the space of five Years last past had obtained of his Lordship the Lord
Proprietor of this Province; himself, or from any Person by from or under him,
any Warrant or Warrants for any parcel or parcels of Land either (...) or to be
taken up within this Province, and by virtue of which, any parcel or parcels of
Land whatsoever, was by any Lawful Surveyor of any County within this Province
surveyed (...) my time before the Revolution of Affairs or before the tenth Day
of July, One Thousand Six Hundred Eighty and Nine, and no Pattent as yet from
his Lordship granted for the same, such Person or Persons by himself or his
Attorney, at any time within twelve Months from and after the publication of
this Law in the County where such Land lies, appearing before the Justices of
the respective County in which the Land lies as aforesaid, and producing to
the Justices of the said County Courts a Certificate under Hand of such
Surveyor as made the Survey of any parcel or parcels of Land as aforesaid, and
proving the same by the Oath of such Surveyor i^ living, or by the Book of such
Surveyor or other Evidence if the Surveyor be dead; that the same parcel or
parcels of Land was really and Bona Fide laid out and surveyed for such person
or persons by Warrant for the same, before the Revolution of Affairs in this
Province in the year aforesaid, and filing the said Certificate and Oath in the
Records of the said Court, it shall and may be Lawful to such person or persons
to have, use, occupy, possess and enjoy all such Lands and Tenements so laid
out and surveyed as aforesaid.

And it is hereby Declared and Enacted that such person or persons shall have
and enjoy a pure and Lawful Estate of Inheritance in Fee Simple, of in and to
all such parcel or parcels of Lands and Tenements according to the Conditions
of Plantations, upon which such Warrants were granted as aforesaid, together
with all (...) Grants and imm^^ities whatsoever, incident appertaining (...),
although not in this Act so largely and paticularly expressed, but as fully and
absolutely, as if a Pattent from his Lordship had been granted for the same,
any Law Statute or Usuage to the contrary hereof in any wise notwithstanding.

An Act for Limitation of certain Actions for avoiding Suits at Law.
FORASMUCH as nothing can be more Essential to the (...) and Tranquillity of
this Province, than the quieting the Estates of the inhabitants thereof, end
for the effecting of which, (...) better measures can be taken than a
Limitation of Time for the Commencing such Actions as in the several and
Respective Courts within this Province are brought from the time of the Cause
of such Actions arising.

BE IT ENACTED by the King and Queens most Excellent Majesty's by and with the
Advice and Consent of this present^ General Assembly and the Authority of the
same, That all Actions of Trespass, Qua^e Clausum fregit, all Actions of
Trespass, Detinue, Surtrover, or Replevin for taking away Goods and Chattels,
all Actions of Accounts, Contract, Debt, Book, and upon the case other then
such Accounts as concerns the Trade of Merchandise between Merchant and
Merchant, their Factors and Servants which are no^ Residents within thy s
Province, all Actions of Debt for sending or Contract without Specialty, all
Actions of Debt for Arrearages of Rents, all Actions of Assault, Menaces,
Ba^tery, Wounding and Imprisonment, or any of them, shall be sued or brought by
any Person or Persons within this Province at any time (...) the (...) of this
present General Assembly, shall be commenced and sued within the time and (...)
hereafter expressed and not after, (that is to say) the said Actions son
Account, and the said Actions for Debt, De^in^e, and Replevin for Goods (...)
Ch^ttels and the said Actions for Trespass, quare Claisum fregit, within (...)
^ears ensuing the Cause of such Action and not after; and the said Action on
the Case for Words, and Actions of Trespass, of Assault, Battery, Wounding and
imprisonment or any of them, within one Year from the time of the Cause of such
Action arising and not after.

And Be It Further Enacted by and with the Advice and Consent aforesaid, That
in all Actions of the Case for Slanderous Words to be sued or prosecuted by any
Person or Persons in any Courts of Record of this Province, that has power to
bold Plea of the same, after the end of this present Assembly, if the Jury upon
the Trial of the Issue in such Action, or the Jury that shall inquire of the
Damages do find or assess the Damages under 40 (...) then the Plantif or
Plantifs in such Action or Actions shall have and recover only so much Costs
as the Damages given or assessed amounts unto.

And Be It Further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any Person or
Persons In^ituled to any the Action or Actions aforesaid, shall be at the time
of any such Cause of Action accrewing within the Age of One and Twenty Years
(...) Covert non Compis Mertis. Imprisoned, or beyond the Seas, that then such
Person or Persons shall be at Liberty to bring the same Action or Actions
within such time as is before ^^mited, after their coming to, or being of full
Age, Discover^ Sound Memory, at Large or returned from beyond the Seas, as
other persons having no such Impediment might or should have done.

And Forasmuch as diverse Disputes formerly arose, whether persons absenting the
Province, or wandering from County to County, until the time by the late Act for
the Reasons and purposes aforesaid limited and allowed were Expired, should
have any benefit thereby, and different Judgments given thereon in the several
and Respective County's within this Province, for that the said Act was therein
altogether silent.

Be I^ Therefore Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That from and after the
publication hereof, no person or persons whatsoever absenting themselves out of
this Province, or that shall remove from County to County after any Debt
contracted, whereby the Creditor or Creditors may be at an uncertainty of
finding out the said person or persons, or his or their Effects, shall have any
benefit by the Limitations and Restrictions in this Act specified. Provided
allways, That it is the true Intent and Meaning hereof, that this Act or any
thing herein contained, shall be const^^^ed ^^puted or taken to (...) himself
or Family from one County to County (...) any person leaving this Province for
the time and (...) this Act (...) the benefit thereof, he leaving Effects
sufficient, and known for the payment (...) of his just Debts, in the Hands of
some person or persons who will (...) payment thereof to his Creditors, any
thing in this Act contained to the (...) any wise notwithstanding.

An Act for the Naturalization of John Ouldson and (...) Vander-heyden.

An Act for publication of all Laws within this Province.
FORASMUCH as many new Laws have been made this present Assembly, (...) the
(...) of the (...) People of this (...) is much concerned, and diverse old Laws
not sufficiently pro^^ding against the (...) by them to be punished have been
made more penal, to the end many people of this Province evilly disposed, may
be deterred (...) evil doing* and that notwithstanding all the laws, intend
that every person in this Province is bound ^o take (...) of what is passed in
the Assembly, because every person is there present (...), yet his Excellency
the Governor, the Council and Assembly (...) not the destruction of the very
worst of the people of this Province no^ that they (...) overtaken by any
Intendment in Law in a penal Act, tho (...) all too (...) for the (...) it
intends to punish, do think fit that it ^e enacted, and BE IT ENACTED by the
King and Queen's most Excellent Majesty's by and with the Advice and Consent of
this present General Assembly and the Authority of the same, That from
henceforward all the Acts that shall pass from this and all the succeeding
Assemblies, shall be from time to time fairly (...) into Parchment and by write
under the great Seal of this Province from time to time be passed by the
Chancellor for the time being, to the Sheri^^ of ^ack respective County be
transmitted and commandment to them in the said W^^ts shall be given as well
the said Acts in them several and respective County's, in that place to them
shall seem most convenient (...) and proclaim all the said Acts of Assembly, to
be firmly observed and kept

And Be it Further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That every several and
respective County shall from time to time pay to the Chancellor for the time
being for such transcript of the Laws so much Tobacco, as by the said General
Assembly in which the said Laws were made shall assess and allow.

An Act for taking away all Errors in Proceedings at Law and Equity, and in the
Court for Pro^at of (...) etc. occasioned by the late Revolution.
WHEREAS upon the late Revolution, diverse Differences and Disturbances did
arise and happen within this Province, which occasioned many Errors and
Irregularities in Proceedings of Law and Equity, and in the Court for Probat of
W^lls to be committed for preventing of all Disputes and Troubles that may
happen thereupon.

BE IT ENACTED by the King and Queens most Excellent Majesty's by and with the
Advice and Consent of this present General Assembly and the Authority of the
same, That all Bills, Plaints, Process, Pleas, Judgments, Indictments,
Informations, Proceedings, Causes, Matters and Things whatsoever, commented or
depending in any of the said Courts, since the (...) Day of April 1690 shall be
good and effectual notwithstanding any Errors therein contained by
discontinuances or otherwise whatsoever, by reason of the said late Troubles.

Provided nevertheless, That no person or persons whatsoever shall have, or
take any benefit of this Act for any Error or Mistake in any of the Processes
Pleas or other Proceedings not occasioned by the said late Troubles, but that
the same shall (...) and be as if this Act had never been made, any thing
herein contained to the contrary thereof in any wise notwithstanding.

And forasmuch as by (...) of the late Revolution, all Judicial Proceedings
were impeded and hindered for above two Years last past viz. from the Year of
our Lord 1690, to this present time, being the Year of our Lord 1692.

Be It Enacted and Ordained by and with the Advice and Consent aforesaid and
the Authority of the same, That the said Years shall not be accounted as Years
included and meant in the Statute of Limitations for payment (...) of Debts,
due by Bond Bill or Judgment, or in the Clause for the due (...) of
Certificates upon Warrants for Land granted, or Suing out of (...) according to
the directions and Instructions of any of the Lord (...) of Plantations, (...)
in the Clauses (...) for Lands (...) in his Lordships Conditions of
Plantations, but that in those and such like cases, the said Years of our Lord
be passed by and not accounted for those Years thereby meant or mentioned

An Act against Ingrossers and Regraters.
FORASMUCH as hitherto no Law has been made within this Province for
restraining and prohibiting Engrossing and Regrating, the undue and too
frequent practice whereof has been made, and still is highly oppressive and
injurious to the greater part of the Inhabitants of this Province, who are
(...) means thereof deprived and wholly prevented from the (...) of laying
(...) Cropps of Tobacco or any part thereof with the Merchant, Adventure (...)
Factors or others, bringing all sorts of Goods Merchandises and Servants for
(...) purchase thereof, whilst a Covetous and Active Sort of People, but few in
(...) of the Inhabitants of this Province do buy and purchase all, or most part
of the Goods Merchandises and Servants yearly brought into this Province,
(without Consignment) for the purchase of Tobacco. And albeit they have no^
Tobacco of their own, whereby to pay for the Goods Merchandises and Servants so
by them from time to time bought and parchased, nevertheless, such is the (...)
of the Province, that within a few days after such purchase, they can Regrate
(...) said Goods Merchandises and Servants and be ready for another Market,
(...) by not only Inhancing the prizes of all Goods Merchandises and Servants
and be ready for another, but making several returns in one Shipping season,
and in the mea^ time the greater Number of the Inhabitants of this Province are
disabled and totally hindered from selling their Cropps of Tobacco, unless it be
to and with the (...) said Huksters, or some (...) one of them at their own
dear Rates and Prizes, for ^^^vention therefore of so great a Mischief for the
future, Be It Enacted by the King and Queens most Excellent Majesty's by and
with the Advice and Consent of this present general Assembly and the Authority
of the same, that whatsoever person or persons, that from and after the
publication hereof shall Ingross, or get into his her or their Hands or
Possession, by buying contracting or promise, taking within this Province any
Goods or Merchandises whatsoever, or Servants; to the Intent to sell the same
again within the space of six Months, and the same, or any part thereof shall
within that time sell again for ready Tobacco, or for Tobacco to ^e paid the
Shipping happening at the time of such first Sale, or for Tobacco to be Shipped
for payment of (...) the payment of any Bill or Bills of Exchange, to be drawn
for the payment of the said Goods Merchandises or Servants, with intent to
clude the benefit of this Act, or the same Goods Merchandises or Servants shall
transport out of this Province, shall be accepted reputed and taken for an
unlawful Ingrosser and Regrater, and shall suffer such pains penalties and
forfeitures hereafter expressed, any Law Statute Usuage or Custom to the
contrary hereof in any wise notwithstanding.

And Be It Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any person or persons
from and after the publication hereof offend in any of the things before (...),
and being thereof duly convicted, by confess^on of the party, or the Oaths of
two Witnesses before the justices of the Provincial Court, or the Justi^^s of
the County Courts for the time being where the Offenses were committed, shall
for his her or their first Offense have or suffer Imprisonment for the space of
two Months without Bail or Mainprize, and shall also loose and forfeit the
value of the Goods Merchandises or Servants so by him or them bought or had,
and if any person or persons Lawfully convicted or attainted as aforesaid, of
(...) for the second (...) and be thereof Lawfully convicted or attainted (...)
that then every person or persons so offending, shall have and suffer (...)
their second (...) Imprisonment for the space of of one half Year without Bail
or Mainprize, (...) and shall loose the double value of all the Goods
Merchandises or Servants so by or them bought or had as aforesaid.

(...) Further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any person or
persons (...) Lawfully twice convicted or attainted as aforesaid, of (...) for
the (...), and shall again offend the third time, and be thereof Lawfully (...)
or attainted, that then every person for the third Offense shall be (...) the
(...) in the City Town or in the full County where he shall then inhabi^^ and
dwell and loose and forfeit all the Goods and Chattels he or they have to their
own use, and also be committed to Prison there to (...) the term of one whole
Year, the one moiety of all which Forfeitures to be to our Sovereign Lord and
Lady the King and Queen for the Support of the Government of this Province, and
the other moiety thereof to the Informer, or him or them that shall sue for the
same by Bill Action of Debt, Plaint or Information in any Court of Record
within this Province, (...) no Essoyn or Wager of Law is to be allowed.

Provided that this Act or any thing therein contained, shall not debar or be
construed to debar or hinder any person or persons whatsoever within this
Province by or (...) of any Goods or Merchandises by him or them so bought or
purchased (...) aforesaid, to (...) and pay unto any Workman or Servant the
hire or wages of (...) them due for any work or service whatsoever.

An Act concerning Indians.
TO the End no breach of Peace may happen betwixt the Neighboring Indians and
the Inhabitants of this Province, BE IT ENACTED by the King and Queens Most
Excellent Majesty's by and with the Advice and Consent, of this present General
Assembly and the Authority of the same, That any one whosoever shall take,
entice surprise, transport, or cause to be transported, or sell and dispose of
any Friend Indian or Indians whatsoever, or endeavor or at tempt so to do,
without License from the Governor for the time being, (...) all Access^^y's
thereunto shall be fined and imprisoned at the Discretion of the Governor and
Council for the time being, howbeit any one Informing or causing such Offender
or Offenders to be apprehended, shall have Satis-faction for his pains and
Indulgence therein as the Governor and Council shall think fit.

An Act Limiting (...) Extent of Attachments, (...) d^providing what shall be
Leavied on Attachments and Executions.
FOR Settling the manner of Proceedings on Attachments and Limiting the Extent
of them, and providing what shall be Leavied on Attachments and Executions.

BE IT ENACTED by the King and Queens Most Excellent Majesty's by and with the
Advice and Consent of this present Genearal Assembly and the Authority of the
same, That from henceforth no Attachment shall Issue out of any Court of this
Province before a Writ (...) Summons be first made out, upon which Writ if
the Party Defendant be an Inhabitant or Resident within this province and the
Sherrif shall (...) a non est inventus, one other Writ or Sumons (...)
thereupon in manner aforesaid Issue forth against the said Defendant, and if
the Sherrif shall upon the Second Writ or Summons return (...) est inventus
likewise, an Attachment shall and may thereupon in manner and form hereafter
set down and be awarded, and in case any Writ or Summons shall Issue forth of
any of their Majesty's Courts within this Province against any person or
persons (...) out of this Province, in such case, upon the return of a non est
inventus by (...) Sherrif on such Writts or Summons, and the Party Plant if his
leaving (...) Attorney of such absent Defendant (if he has left an Attorney) a
Copy (...) ^his Declaration or short Notes expressing the true cause of (...),
or if he (...) no Attorney, then the Plantif leaving a Copy of the said
Declaration (...) expressing the true cause of A^tion at the House where ^he
said (...) did last reside or dwell, and making such proof of his Action at the
said (...) Courts shall think (...) shall and may ^e Lawful for the Justices
(...) Courts to award an Attaches (...) the Goods Chattels and (...) said
absent Defendant so (...) and no^ appending (...) Action, which are or shall be
in the (...) possession of any person or persons whatsoever, yea even in the
Plaintiffs own hands for the Defendants use ^it this Province, in which said
Attachement there shall be a Clause commanding the (...) of the respective
County's at the time of executing the soul Attachments (...) known to each
person and persons in whose hands and possession the said (...) and Credits so
as aforesaid in their hands attached should not (...) and (...) thereof had and
made as in other cases of Recovery (...) given (...) Courts of Record, at which
Day of Return of the said (...) the said Defendant shall no^ then appear, nor
the Garnishee in whose hands the aforesaid Good, Chattels and Credits of the
Defendant were attached (...) cause (...) the contrary, the respective Courts
shall and may condemn the said Good Chattels and Credits aforesaid, so as
aforesaid attached and awarded; Execution thereof to be ^ad and made, either by
Capias ad sa^^^^eiendum (...) otherwise (...) other Judgments, (...) said
Plantif so prosecuting as aforesaid, giving good and sufficient Security before
the Justices of each respective Court (...) for the use of the said Defendant
so as aforesaid, being not found (...) this Province or absent out of this
Province as aforesaid, to make (...) of the said Goods Chattels or (...) so as
aforesaid condemned on the value (...) of (...) the Defendant so as aforesaid
prosecuted, shall at any time (...) and a Day to be accounted from the Day of
the said Attachment (...) and either in Person, or by Attorney appear to the
said Original Act, on against (...), and make it appear that the said Plantif
has been and is satisfied and paid the Debtor Demand (...) the (...) Action,
(...) otherwise in Court discount or (...) the said Plantif of the same or any
part thereof, which said Condemnation and Execution of the said Goods Chattels
or Credits of the said Defendant, in the Hands of the Garnishee or Garnishees
as aforesaid ha^ and made, shall be (...) and plea^able ^n Bar, by the said
Garnishee or Garnishees ^n any Action brought against him or them by the said
Defendant for the same.

Provided always, that no Sherrif shall Leavy by way of Execution as aforesaid,
against any the said Garnishee or Garnishees any more than the Plantifs Debt
and Cost, not against any Garnishee or Garnishees then what the said Plantif in
the said Action shall make appear to the said respective Courts, to (...) of
the said Goods Chattels and Credits of the said Defendant in the Hands of each
respective Garnishee or Garnishees, together with such Cost only as the
Garnishee or Garnishees shall put the Plantif to, by d^^ving himself to be
indebted unto such Defendant and contesting the same. Provided also that no
Sherrif in any County within this Province, shall by any Attachment or any
other Execution had upon such Attachment, (...) any other (...) whatsoever
(...) any Court of this Province Leavy, Seize or take the Goods and Chattels of
any the Inhabitants within this Province, so far as to deprive them of all
Livelihood for the future, but that Corn for necessary Maintenance, Bedding,
Gun, Ax, (...) and Laborers necessary Tools, and such like Household Impliments
and Ammunition for Subsistence shall be protected, from all Attachments and
Executions whatsoever.

Provided also that such as shall be ^ound by proof or other Circumstances,
wilfully to absent themselve, into the Woods or elcewhere from the Sherrifs
Sight, whereby they cannot be found to be brought to Trial, and such also as
shall be absent by ^light or Prescription out of this Province to be avered
upon Oath shall have no benefit of any (...) interpretation of this Law.

And Be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That from henceforth any person
or persons having obtained any Judgment in any Court of this Province, or that
shall hereafter obtain any Judgment in any Court of this Province against any
person or persons, it shall and may be Lawful to and for the said Plantif in
the said Judgment at his Will and Pleasure, instead of any other Execution,
without those previous Requisites as above in this Act prescribed and directed,
to take out an Attachment against the Goods Chattels and Credits of the said
Defendant in the said Judgment in the said Plantifs own Hands, or in the Hands
of any other person or persons whatsoever; which said Attachment shall likewise
have the Clause aforesaid, Commanding the Sherrif of the said County to whom it
shall be directed at the time of (...) the said Attachment, to make known to
each person or persons (...) whose Hands and Possessions (...) Chattels and
Credits of the said absent Defendant shall be attached, that he be and appear
at the Respective Courts at the Day of the Return of such Attachment, to show
cause^ if they have any (...) why the said Goods Chattels and Credits so as
above said in their Hands attached should not be condemned, and Execution
thereof (...) as in other Cases of Recoverys or Judgments given in Courts of
(...) Day of the Return of the said Attachment, if the said (...) then appear,
nor the said Garnishee, is whose Hands the said (...) and Credits of the said
Defendant were attached, to show (...) to the contrary, the said Respective
Courts shall and may Condemn the said Goods Chattels and Credits aforesaid so
as aforesaid attached, and award Execution thereof to be had and made, either
by Capias ad satisfaciendum, fieri facias or otherwise, as the said Plantif
might have had against the Defendant himself on the Judgment aforesaid provided
as aforesaid, which said Condemnation and Execution of such Goods Chattels and
Credits of the said Garnishee as aforesaid had and made, shall be sufficient
and pleadable in Bar by the said Garnishee or Garnishees in any Action brought
against him or them by the said Defendant for the same.

An Act Imposing a penalty on all such who shall dispose of Tobacco Seized and
Received by the Sherrifs and others.
WHEREAS livers great Grievances have happened within this (...), through the
many Chears and Deceits that many have used in disposing and (...) marks and
quality's of Tobacco after the said Tobacco has been Seized and Received by
the Sherrifs either for Fines or Leavies, or has been paid away to Merchants
or others and by them marked and Received, whereby the public have been much
abused and wronged, and many private persons have Received (...) in the said
Goods.

BE IT THEREFORE ENACTED by the King and Queens most Excellent Majesty's by
(...) the Advice and Consent of this present General Assembly and the Authority
of the same, That what Person soever shall dispose of any Tobacco or other
(...) Seized on and Received by the Sherrif for Fines or Leavy's or other
public Officers Fees, or that shall alter or scratch out the mark of any
Tobacco so Received, or shall alter or change the quality of Tobacco so
Received; (...) by any Merchant or others Received, either by uncasing or
otherwise, (...) Lawful Order or Warrant in Writing under the Hand of such
Sherrif (...) the same, or of such Merchant or other Person who had received
and (...) the same, or for whose use the same was received and marked, shall ^e
by (...) Convicted by Confession or sufficient (...) some Court of this
Province to (...) four fold to the party grieved, and stand in the Pillory two
full Hours (...) time, with his Offense fairly written in a piece of paper and
placed (...). Provided that no person shall be impleaded or prosecuted upon
this Act after three Years from the time that the Fact shall be committed.

An Act for appointing Coroners in each Respective County.
WHEREAS there has many Inconveniency's happened in this Province for want of
appointing Coroners in (...) County.

BE IT ENACTED by the King and Queens Most Excellent Majesty's by and with the
Advice and Consent of this present General Assembly and the Authority of the
same, That the Governor for the time being do Constitute and appoint such
person or persons from time to time to be Coronets, as he shall judge most able
and best qualified for that Office in each respective County in this Province,
And Be It Further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, by and with the Advice
and Consent aforesaid, that the Governor give out Commission to such persons,
to the Intents and purposes aforesaid, and that the same as near as may be,
concur with the Laws and Constitution of England. And that an Oath be
Administered to every such Coroner by appointments of the Governor of their
entering into the said Office according to the form of the Oath of a Coroner in
England.

An Act for the appointment of certain Officers.
BE IT ENACTED by the King and Queens most Excellent Majesty's by and with the
Advice and Consent of this present General Assembly and the Authority of the
same, That the Justices of Peace in every County at the first County Court,
held after Michaelmas shall nominate and appoint some Inhabitant in every
Hundred or Precinct, who shall execute all Precepts or Warrants to him
directed, and shall in all things have the like power within the said Hundred
or (...) as any Constable has or ought to have in a Hundred or (...) in
England, by the Law or Custom of England; and the said Constable shall (...)
the (...) mentioned in an Act made in the first Year of their said Majesty
(...) An Act for abrogating the Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance in manner and
form following. You shall Swear you will well and truly Serve out Sove^rign
Lord and Lady King William and Queen Mary in the Office of a Constable, you
shall see and cause that their Majesty's Peace be well and duly kept according
to your power, you shall arrest all such persons as in your presence shall
commit any (...), Pray, or other breach of their Majesty's Peace, you shall do
your best endeavor upon complaint to you made to seize all Felons, Barretors,
Riorers, or persons riotously assembled, and if any such Offender shall make
any Resistance with Force, you shall Leavy Hue and Cry and pursue them until
they be taken, you shall do your best endeavor that Hue and Cry he duly raised
and pursued against (...), and other felons and (...) servants, and the Laws
and Orders against vagabonds and such other idle persons coming within your
(...) put in execution, at your County Courts coming you shall persons all
Offenses done against the several Acts made for the suppressing of (...), and
also true presentment make of all Bloodsheds, Affrays, Outcries, Rescues and
other Offenses committed against their Majesty's Peace within your Limits, your
shall well and truly execute all Precepts and Warrantee to you directed from
the Justice of Peace of this County or higher Officer, (...) shall well and
truly according to your knowledge power and ability (...) execute all things
belonging to the Office of a Constable so long as (...) in this Office, So help
you God. And if the person so nominated (...) shall refuse to serve in the said
Office by himself or his Deputy, or (...) when tendered to him by the Justices
of Pea^^ as aforesaid, shall (...) of five hundred pounds of Tobacco one moiety
thereof to their Majesty's their heirs and Successors, for and toward the
Support of this Government, and the other (...) to the Church Wardens of the
Parish in which he shall dwell or reside, to be ^^covered by Bill Plaint o^
Information wherein ^o Essoyn Protection or (...) shall be allowed, or suffer
two Months Imprisonment without Bail or Mainprize.

Be It Further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, by and with the Advice and
Consent aforesaid, that all persons whatsoever that shall hereafter be
nominated or appointed to be Justices of the Peace, Sherrifs or Coroners within
this Province, by his Excellency the Captain General or Governor in Chief for
the time being, that refuses to execute the Office of Justice of Peace Sherrif
or Coroner within this Province, o^ to take the Oaths aforementioned in the Act
of Parliament aforesaid made, and the Oaths of Justice of the Peace Sherrif or
Coroner shall forfeit to our Sovereign Lord and Lady the King and Queen their
Heirs and Successors 1000 (...) Tobacco for the uses aforesaid, to be recovered
(...) aforesaid of four Months Imprisonment without Bail or Mainprize.

And Be It Further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that whosoever shall be
Summoned by Writ out of any Court of Justice of this Province to serve as a
Juror in any Trial in any Court within this Province and refuse to serve in any
Cause depending whether Criminal or (...) (not being by any other Office
exempted) and thereunto Lawfully required, shall forfeit to their said
Majesty's their Heirs and Successors the Sum of five hundred pounds of Tobacco
for the uses aforesaid, to be recovered as aforesaid, or two Months
Imprisonment without Bail or Mainprize.

And Be It Further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that whosoever being by
Writ Lawfully Summoned and thereby required to serve as a Witness in this
Province, and shall refuse to testify upon Oath in any case depending whether
Criminal or Civil, shall forfeit to our Sovereign Lord and Lady the King and
Queen their Heirs and Successors the Sum of five hundred pounds of Tobacco
(...) the uses aforesaid, to be recovered in manner as aforesaid, or suffer two
Months Imprisonment without Bail or Mainprize. Provided this Clause shall not
extend to People called Quakers.

Provided that this Act not any thing therein contained shall no^ extend or be
in (...) to extend to the prejudice of any the Lords of Manors within this
Province, in their privileges of appointing Constables within their respective
(...).

Provided that if any person dissenting from the Church of England shall
hereafter (...) chosen or otherwise appointed to bear the Office of high
Constable Church Warden or Overseer of the poor or any other Parochial or Ward
Office and such person (...) scruple to take upon him any the said Offices in
Regard of the Oaths or any other matter or thing required by the Law to be
taken and done in respect of such Office, every such person shall and may
execute such Office or Employment by his sufficient Deputy by him to be
provided that shall comply with the Laws on this behalf. Provided always that
the said Deputy be allowed and approved of by such person or persons in such
manner as such Officer or Officers respectively should by Law have allowed and
approved.

Provided nevertheless, that it shall be Lawful for any Justice of the Peace or
other Magistrate Lawfully Authorized to commit and punish such person or
persons as shall refuse to take the Oaths mentioned in the said Acts of
Parliament according to the appointment thereof, the same Oaths being rendered
unto him or (...) in such manner as the said Act directs and appoints, any
thing herein contained (...) the contrary thereof in any wise notwithstanding.

An Act for punishment of Persons suborning of Witnesses, or committing willful
and Corrupt Perjury.
WHEREAS several Persons void of Grace and the Dread of the Almighty have and
do still continue for small profits accrewing to themselves to commit willful
and corrupt Perjury, or cause or procure the same to be committed, either out
of a design for the reasons and purposes aforesaid, or merely to revenge an
imaginary Injury done them to the great prejudice of diverse of their Majesty's
Loyal Subjects inhabiting within this Province, and forasmuch as the Laws of
this Province heretofore made for the prevention of the like mischiefs and
inconveniency's (...) upon a (...) and deliberate Consideration by this present
General Assembly (...) found altogether inconsistant with the Constitution of
this Province; (...) of England in such cases made and provided.

BE IT (...) ENACTED by the King and Queens (...) Excellent Majesty's (...) and
with the Advice and Consent of this present General Assembly and the Authority
of the same, That if any person or persons whatsoever from and after the
publication hereof shall (...) his corruptly procure any Witness or Witnesses
by Letters, Rewards, Promises or by any other (...) unlawful Labor or Means
whatsoever, to commit any wilful and corrupt Perjury in any matter or cause
whatsoever now depending, or which hereafter shall depend in Suit and Variance
by any writ, Action, (...), Complain^ or Information in any wise touching or
concerning any Lands Tenements Hereditaments or any Goods, Chattels, Debt or
Damages in any of the Courts of Record within this Province, or that shall
unlawfully and corruptly procure or suborn any Witness or Witnesses from and
after the publication aforesaid, to be Sworn to testify (...) perpetuam Rei
Memoriam, that then every such Offender or Offenders being thereof Lawfully
Convicted or Attainted loose and forfeit the Sum of forty pounds Sterling, and
if it happen any such Offender or Offenders being Convicted or attainted as
aforesaid, shall not have Goods or Chattels Lands or Tenements to the value of
forty pounds as aforesaid, then every such person or persons so being
Convicted or Attainted as aforesaid, shall for his or their said Offense suffer
Imprisonment for and during the space of one whole Year without Bail or
Mainprize, and stand upon the Pillory for the space of one full Hour at the
Pillory next adjoining to the place where he she or they shall be Convicted as
aforesaid

And Be It Further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That no person or
persons being Convict or Attaint as aforesaid, shall be from thenceforth (...)
as a Witness to be deposed and Sworn in any Court of Record within this
Province, until (...) as the judgment given against such Person or persons be
Reversed by Attaint o^ otherwise, and that upon every such Reversal the parties
grieved to recover his her or their Damages against all and every such person
or persons as (...) procure the said Judgment so Reversed, to be given against
them (...) any of them by Action or Actions upon his her or their Case or Cases
according to the common Course or Courses of the Laws of this Province.

And Be It Further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that if any person or
persons, after publication hereof, either by subornation, unlawful (...)
perswas^on or means of any other, or by their own Act, Consent, or Agreement
wilfully and corruptly commit any manner of wilful Perjury by their (...) in
any Court of Record within this Province as aforesaid, or being examined in
perpetuam (...) Memoriam, that then every person or persons so offending and
being thereof duly convicted or attainted by the Laws of this Province, shall
for his or their Offense loose and forfeit twenty pounds Sterling, and suffer
Imprisonment the space of six Months without Bail or Mainprize; and the Oaths
of any such person or persons so offending from thenceforth not to be received
in any Court of Record within this Province, until such time as the Judgment
against any such person or persons shall be Reversed by Attaint or otherwise as
aforesaid, and that upon every such Reversal, the party's grieved to recover
their Damages as aforesaid, and if it happen that the said Offender or
Offenders so offending, shall not have Goods and Cha^tels to the value of
twenty pounds, then he she or they shall be set on the Pillory next adjoining
to the place where he she or they shall be convict as aforesaid, and to have
both Ears (...), and be (...) thence form to be discredited and disabled for
ever to be Sworn in any the Courts of Records aforesaid until such time as the
said Judgment be Reversed, upon which he she or they shall recover his her or
thou Damages in manner and form as is before mentioned, the one moiety of all
the said (...) to be to our Sovereign Lord and Lady the King and Queen for the
Support of Government, and the other moiety to such person or persons as shall
be grieved hindered or molested, by reason of any the Offense or Offenses before
mentioned that will Sue for the same by Action of Debt, Bill, Plaint or
Information or otherwise, in any Court of Record within this Province, wherein
no Essoyn Protection or Wager of Law shall be allowed

And Be It Further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any person or
persons upon whom any Process out of any the Courts of Record within this
Province shall be served to testify or depose concerning any Cause or (...)
depending in any of the same Courts relating to the pr^misses, and having (...)
unto him or them according to their Estate or Calling such reasonable Sum of
Money or Tobacco for his and their Cost and Charges, as having Regard to the
distance of the place in that behalf is necessary to be allowed, do not appear
according to the Tenor of the said Process having not a lawful reasonable (...)
or Impediment to the contrary, that then the party or party's so making default
shall forfeit and loose for every such Offense ten pounds Sterling, and to
yield to the party grieved such further Recompense as by the direction of the
Judge of that Court out of which the said Process shall be awarded, according
to the Loss and Hinderance that the party which procured the said Process shall
sustain by reason of the non appearance of the said Witness or Witnesses the
said several Sums to be recovered by the party so grieved against the Offender
or Offenders by Action of Debt Bill Plaint or Information in any of their
Majesty's Courts of Record in this Province, wherein no Essoyn Protection or
wager of Law to be allowed.

An Act for Settlement of an Annual Revenue upon their Majesty's Governor
within this Province for the time being.
WHEREAS by an Act of Assembly formerly made Entitu^ed An Act for providing a
Support for the Lord Proprietary of this Province, and likewise A Supply for
de^^aving the public Charges of the Government; it was by the said Act
published and declared that from and after the first Day of September then next
ensuing there should be Raised, Leavied, Collected and paid to the said Lord
Proprietary the Sum of two Shillings Sterling for every Hogshead or quantity of
a Hogshead of Tobacco which should be at any time hereafter Shipped in any Ship
or Vessel to be Exported out of this Province, on Condition that his said
Lordship should Receive his Rents and Fines for Alienation of ^ands in good
Sound Merchantable Tobacco when tendered at the Rate of two pence per pound for
one moiety of of the said Imposition, the other moie^ty by the said Act raised
to be employed toward the maintaining a constant Magazine, and defraying other
public (...) necessary charge, of the Government, and whereas the Free Men of
this Province (...) Assembled, upon strict Scrutiny made into the premises, do
find his still Lordship has not only been very deficient, and at small
Charges and (...) maintaining a Magazine as aforesaid, but that this Province
has been obliged to defray all public Charges arising for the Support of
Government, by way of an Equal Assessment upon the Inhabitants thereof, the
several Provison in the before recited Act to the contrary notwithstanding. And
whereas also his said Lordship the aforesaid moiety of two Shillings per
Hogshead under pretext of maintaining a Magazine as aforesaid, has hitherto
converted the same to his own use, to the impoverishing of the Country and
defraud of the public, and being now incapacitated of complying with what by
the said Act for the said moiety of (...) Shillings per Hogshead is required.

BE IT THEREFORE ENACTED by the King and Queens most Excellent Majesty's by and
with the Advice and Consent of this present General Assembly and the Authority
of the same, That the said one shilling per hogshead for the de^^raying the
charges of Government aforesaid, commencing from this present Shipping as well
for such Ships or Vesse^ls as have already cleared before the making of this
Act, as for such remaining in this Province, be Raised, Leavied, Collected and
paid unto our Sovereign Lord and Lady the King and Queens most Excellent
Majesty's their Heirs and Successors for the Support of their Government for
the time being in and over this their Majesty's Province aforesaid, and the
Territories to the same belonging, for every Hogshead and quantity of an
Hogshead of Tobacco which has been for and during the time aforesaid, or which
hereafter (...) at any time Shipped in any Ship or Vessel to be exported out of
this Province, or any the Territory's, Islands, Ports, Rivers, Creeks, or
Places thereunto belonging as aforesaid.

And Be It Further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid by and with the Advice
and Consent aforesaid, that the said duty and Imposition shall be from time to
time paid and satisfied by the Master or Masters of every such Ship or Vessel
respectively, in which any such Tobacco shall be exported upon his or their
Clearing, and taking out his or their dispatch or dispatches or every such
respective Ship or Vessel and before the departure of such Ship or Vessel
coming into this Province, shall at their first Arrival here and before their
loading on Board any Goods or Commodity's, of the Growth, Production or
Manufacture of this Province, give good and sufficient Security to his
Excellency, or to the Officer thereunto especially appointed for the payment of
the said Duty or Imposition accordingly.

Provided always, and it is the (...) and meaning hereof, that this Act nor any
thing herein contained shall be adjudged, construed, reputed, or taken any
thing herein expressed to the contrary notwithstanding, to disanul or make void
his Lordships Right to the other (...) of the said two Shillings per Hogshead,
to be paid in consideration of his Rents and (...) Money, in Tobacco at two
pence per pound during the term of his Natural Life; (but that the same be kept
and hereby preserved to his Lordship in as full and ample manner as by the said
Law is expressed or intended) or in the least (...) discharge his Lordship of
Receiving the Rents aforesaid at two pence per pound as by the said Act is
enjoined during also the term of his Natural Life nor to discharge his Lordship
from accounting for the Arrears of the one Shilling per Hogshead for Supporting
the Government, and finding Arms and Ammunition; but that he be obliged to all
the aforesaid matters and things as fully and strongly as if the said Law were
in full Force.

And Be It Further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That every Master of a
Ship or Vessel as aforesaid, at the time of his clearing shall upon Oath
declare the quality and quantity of his Loading, and that the Naval Officer by
the Governor aforesaid appointed for the time being shall and is hereby
impowerd to Administer the said Oath, and in case the said Master shall refuse
the said Oath, or upon Suspicion of having Goods on Board for which he has not
cleared, It shall be Lawful for the said Naval Officer to Enter on Board any
such Ship or Vessel, and the same to Search for any such, Goods as aforesaid,
any thing in this Act before mentioned notwithstanding.

An Act for the preservation of several Harbors within this Province.
WHEREAS diverse persons as well the Inhabitants of this Province as Foreigners
hitherto trading in Ships of great Burden, as also in other small Vessels have
notwithstanding Laws formerly Enacted against the unloading of Ballast in the
Creeks or Harbors where they usually Ride within this Province, in contempt of
the said Laws, or by pleading Ignorance of them, notwithstanding the
Secretary^s of this Province were by the said Act obliged for the time ensuing
the publication thereof to deliver unto every respective Master a Copy of the
said Law for such a Reward as by the said Law was limited any allowed, Annually
unloaded and cast out their Ballast in such Creeks and Harbors where they
usually Ride to take in their Loading, to the great damage of the chiefest and
most eminent Harbors within this Province, by reason of so great number of
Ships as yearly in them do Reside, for prevention whereof for the future.

BE IT ENACTED by the King and Queens most Excellent Majesty's by and with the
Advice and Consent of this present General Assembly and the Authority of the
same, That from and after the publication of this Act no person or persons
whatsoever, whether Inhabitant or Foreigner here Trading in Ships or Vessels of
greater or lesser Burden having a Deck, shall unload or can out of their said
Ships or Vessels any kind of Ballast (...) the Harbors or (...) where they
usually Ride; and do not lay it to the Shoat, and lay it above high water mark,
shall for every such default forfeit and pay two thousand pounds of Tobacco,
the one half to our Sovereign Lord and Lady the King and Queen to be employed
for the Support of Government, and the other moiety to him or them that shall
Sue for the same, to be Recovered by Action of Debt, or Information wherein no
Essoyn Protection or Wager of Law to be allowed.

And Be It Further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, by and with the Advice
and Consent aforesaid, That every respective Naval Officer within this
Province, or Collector for the time being, or that hereafter shall be, during;
the continuance of this Act, shall be obliged at their own proper Costs, to
take out (...) Copy of this Act from the Office where the Original Transcript
of the (...) of the Laws shall be kept Signed by the Keeper of the said Laws,
and the same affix (...) respective Office Doors, to the End all Commanders and
Masters of Ships or other Vessels Decked as aforesaid may have due Cognizance
thereof on forfeitare of two thousand pounds of Tobacco, the one half to our
Sovereign Lord and Lady the King and Queen to be employed for the use intent
and purpose aforesaid, the other half to the Informer, to be Recovered as
aforesaid, any thing in the former Act to the contrary notwithstanding,

An Act for settling a Standard with English Weights and Measures in the
Several and Respective Counties within this Province.
WHEREAS daily Experience shows that much Fraud and Deceit is practiced in this
Province of Maryland, by false Weights and Measures for prevention whereof for
the future,

BE IT ENACTED by the Kind and Queens most Excellent Majesty's by and with the
Advice and Consent of this present General Assembly and the Authority of the
same, That no Inhabitant or Trader hither, shall buy or sell or otherwise make
use of in Trading any other Weights and Measures then are used and made
according to the Statute of Henry the VII. King of England in that case made
and Provided, and for discovery of abuses of this nature, Be It Enacted that
the Justice^ of the several County Courts shall from time to time, and as often
as need shall require appoint some able or discreet Person in their County
living and residing convenient for the County to take care of, look after, and
preserve the standard weights and Measures that at present are remaining in
their respective County's, which persons so by the (...) appointed, are hereby
required within twelve Months after the publication of this Law at furthest to
provide all such Weights and Measures as are wanting, according to the
direction of a former Law of this Province, Entitled An Act for the providing
of a Standard with English Weights and Measures in the several and respective
County's within this Province, So that the same do contain in each County
twelve half hundred Weights, a quarter, a half quarter of an (...) a seven
pound weight, four pound, two pound, and one pound, together (...) Stamps for
the marking and stamping of Stilliards and Weights the said several Stamps to
be marked according to the direction of the abovesaid' Act, and (...) County to
be marked with the Letter K. and also Brass measure of (...) and Yard to be
Sealed in England, and likewise a Sealed Bushel, half Bushel, Peck; and Gallon
of Winchester measure, with a Gallon, Pottle, Quart, Pint and half a Pint of
Wine measure, with three burnt Stamps for the wooden measures and three other
Stamps for the Pewter measure, such person or persons so appointed, and
procuring the same or what is wanting to make good the several Standards
aforesaid, to be allowed and paid their charges and disburstments in the County
Leavy for the same, to which Standard all persons whether Inhabitants or
Foreigners, are to repair and bring their Stilliards with which they receive
Tobacco yearly, and in every year to be tried stamped and numbered, for which
they are to pay to such person keeping the Standard aforesaid two Shillings for
every time such Stilliards shall be tried and stamped as aforesaid, and every
person or persons shall have their Barrels which are to contain five Bushels at
least, together (...) Bushel, half Bushel, Peck, Gallon, Pottle, Quart and
Pint if they make use of the (...) of them in buying or selling by, shall
likewise have them tried and stamped at the Standard aforesaid, for which they
shall pay for the Barrel one Shilling, and for all other measures six pence a
piece, under the penalty of one thousand pounds of Tobacco to any person
refusing or neglecting the yearly trying and stamping of his Stilliards as
aforesaid, and the Sum of five hundred pounds of Tobacco to any person selling
by any of the measures aforesaid refusing or neglecting to have them tried and
stamped as aforesaid, the one half of which Forfeitures to be to the (...) of
the poor of the Parish in (...) the Offender shall dwell or reside, the other
half to the Informer or Informers to be recovered in any Court of Record within
this Province etc. And if any person or persons shall refuse to pay any Tobacco
by such Stilliards tried and stamped as aforesaid, and shall thereby compel the
Owner of the same to have them tried over again within the year, if the
Stilliards are true, such person so refusing or compelling as aforesaid, shall
pay for the trying the fame, but if not the Owner of the Stilliards to pay for
the same, and if any person or persons having the keeping of such Standard as
aforesaid shall neglect or refuse to supply the defects of the same, as is
before (...), and also to provide a Standard who as there is none, such persons
so neglecting and (...) shall be fined two thousand pounds of Tobacco to the
uses aforesaid, and be (...) aforesaid etc.

An Act against Excessive Usury.
BE It Enacted by the King and Queens most Excellent Majesty's by and with the
Advice and consent of this present general Assembly and the Authority of the
same, that no person or persons whatsoever within th^^ Province whether
Inhabitant or Foreigner, upon any contract, shall from and after the end of
(...) present Seniors of Assembly, take exact directly or indirectly for Loan
of any Money, Wares, Merchandises or other Commodity's whatsoever, to be paid in
Money above the value of Six Pounds for the forbearance of one Hundred Pounds
for one Year, and so after that rate for a greater or lesser Sum, or for a
longer or shorter time, nor shall any person or persons whatsoever within this
Province as aforesaid, from and after the time aforesaid, take directly or
indirectly for Loan of any Tobacco's Wares, Merchandises or other Commodity's
for one Year, to be paid in Tobacco, or other Comodity's of this Province,
above the value of eight pounds of Tobacco for the forbearance of one hundred
pounds of Tobacco, and after that rate for a greater or lesser Sum, or for a
longer or shorter time. And that all Ponds, Contracts, and Assurances
whatsoever made after the time aforesaid, for payment of any principal Money or
Tobacco, Goods or Commodity's aforesaid, to be lent or covenanted to be
performed, upon or for any Usury; whereupon, or whereby there shall be reserved
above the rate of six pounds in the hundred for Money as aforesaid, and above
eight pounds in the hundred for Tobacco or other Goods and Commodity's as
aforesaid shall be utterly void, and that all and every person or persons
whatsoever which after the time aforesaid, shall upon any Contract to be made,
take, accept and receive by ways or means of any corrupt (...) Exchange,
Cl^^vezance, Shift or Interest of any Wares, Merchandises or other thing or
things whatsoever, or by any deceitful ways or means, or (...) Engine or
deceitful Conveyance for the forbearance, or giving day of (...) one whole
Year, of and for their Money, Tobacco, Goods or Commodity's aforesaid, above the
Sum of Money or quantity of Tobacco aforesaid, for the (...) aforesaid, shall
forfeit and loose for every such Offense the treble value of the Money, Tobacco,
Wares, Merchandises and other things, so lent, bargained, sold, exchanged and
shifted as aforesaid, the one half of the said Fine and Forfeiture to our
Sovereign Lord and Lady the King and Queen their Heirs and Successors for the
Support of this Government, the other half to him or them that shall Sue for
the same, to be Recovered in any Court of Record of this Province, by Action of
Debt Bill Plaint or information, wherein no Essoyn Protection or (...) of Law
to be allowed.

An Act directing the manner of Electing and Summoning Delegates and
Representatives to Serve in Succeeding Assembly's.
FORASMUCH as the Chiefest and only Foundation (...) of any Kingdom, State or
Commonwealth is the Providing, Enacting, and Establishing good and wholesome
Laws for the well Ruling and Government thereof, and also upon any necessary
and emergent Occasions to Raise and Leavy Money for the defraying the Charges of
the said Government and Defense thereof, neither of which according to the
Constitution of this Province can be made, ordained, established or raised, but
by and with the Consent of the Free Men of this Province, by their several
Delegates and Representatives by them freely nominated chosen and elected to
serve for their several City's and County's i^ a General Assembly: And
forasmuch as the safest and best (...) for this Province to follow in electing
such Delegates and Representatives, is the Presidents of proceeding in
Parliament in England as near as the Constitution of this Province will admit,
the Governor, Council, and Delegates of this present General Assembly do
humbly pray that it may be Enacted,

And BE IT ENACTED by the King and Queens most Excellent Majesty's by and with
the Advice and Consent of this present General Assembly and by the Authority of
the same, That for the future, (...) as often as his Excellency the Governor
of this Province for the time (...) shall upon any Accident and urgent Affair
of this Province think (...) and Convenient to call and convene an Assembly,
and to send Writts for (...) of Burgesses and Delegates to serve in such
Assembly, the Form of the (...) shall be as follows.

William and Mary by the Grace of God of England Scotland France and Ireland
King and Queen Defenders of the (...) etc. To the Sherrif of (...) County
greeting, Th^se are to Authorize and Empower you immediately upon Receipt
hereof, to call together four or more Commissioners of your County, with the
Clerk, who are hereby required to Sit as a Court, and during their Sitting, by
Virtue of your Office to make or cause to be made public Proclamation, thereby
giving notice to all the Freemen of your said County, who have with in your
said County a Freehold of fifty Acres of Land, or a visible Estate of forty
pounds Sterling at the least, requiring them to appear at the next County Court
to be holden for your County at a certain day within a reasonable time after
such Proclamation made for Electing and Choosing of Deputy's and Delegates to
serve in your County in a general Assembly, to be holden at the City of St.
Mary's the (...) day of (...) at which time of Proclamation aforesaid,, the
said Freemen so required to appear, or the major part of such of them as shall
then appear, shall and may and are hereby Authorized and Required to Elect and
Choose four several and sufficient Freeman of your County, each of them having
a Freehold of fifty Acres of Land, or visible Estate of forty pounds Sterling
at the least within your County; and you shall give to each of them severally
and respectively, by four several and respective Indentures under their Hands
and Seals to be Deputy's and Delegates for your County at the said next General
Assembly, to do and consent to those things, which then by the Favor of God
shall happen to be Ordained by the Advice and Consent of the great Council of
this Province, concerning such Occasions and Affairs as shall Relate to the
Government, State and Defense of this Province. But we will not in any case
that you, or any other Sherrif in our said Province be Elected, which said
(...) shall be between you the said Sherrif of the one part, and the said
Freemen Electing on the other part, and shall bear date the same Day upon which
the said Election shall be made, and that upon such Election, you the Sherrif
shall so soon as conveniently may be, Certify and Transmit to the Chancellor
of this Province for the time being one part of the said several and respective
indentures, close Sealed up under your Hand and Seal, and directed to the
Governor of this Province, and also to the Chancellor; and the other part of
the said Indentures you are to keep for your Justification. Witness Lyonel
Copley Esquire Capt' General and Chief Governor of this Province etc.

And Be It Further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That two Citizens to
Serve in the said Assembly for the City of St. Marys, to be Nominated, Elected,
Chosen and Appointed by the Mayor, Recorder, Aldermen and Common Council as
heretofore has been usual.

And Be It Further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the aforesaid four
Delegates to be Elected in the Respective County's within this Province, and
the (...) Cityzens of the City of St. Mary's, be and are hereby bound and
obliged to attend the time and place of the meeting of such Assembly without
any furth^r Writ or Summons to be to them sent, under the penalty of such Fines
as shall be by the House of Assembly imposed upon them, unless upon sufficient
Excuse to be admitted by the said House of Assembly their Absence to be
dispensed withal, any Law Statute Usuage or Custom to the contrary
notwithstanding

And Be It also Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That any Sherrif that shall
Refuse and Neglect to muke Return of the Delegates so Elected by Indenture as
aforesaid, before the Day of Sitting of such Assembly, or that shall make any
undue or illegal Returns of such Elections, shall for every Fault be fined one
thousand pounds Sterling, the one half for their Majesty's for the Support of
the Government, and the other half to the Informer, or him or them that shall
Sue for the same, to be Recovered in any Court of Record in this Province,
wherein no Essoyn Protection or Wager of Law to be allowed.

Provided nevertheless, That this Act or any thing herein contained shall (...)
Extend to be Construed to Exclude any County or County's, City or City's
Borough or Buroughs hereafter by their Majesty's their Heirs or Successors to
be Elected and made within this Province, from the Liberty of such Elections of
Delegates and Representatives as is before Expressed; But that such Writ as
aforesaid shall upon calling every General Assembly for this Province for the
future, to the Sherrif of every such County when the same shall be erected and
made into a County as aforesaid, And to the Mayor Recorder and Aldermen of
every such City or Borough Commanding of such Sherrif or Mayor Recorder and
Aldermen to cause four Freemen of the said County, and two Freemen of the said
City or Borough qualified as in the said Writ (...) expressed, to Serve as
Delegates and Representatives of the same County City or Borough in the
General Assembly then next ensuing, which said four Delegates for every such
County, and two for the City and Borough shall from henceforth be Reputed and
Esteemed to be Members of the House of the General Assembly of this Province,
any thing in this Act to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

Provided also that no Ordinary Keeper within this Province during the (...) of
his keeping Ordinary, shall be Elected, Chosen, or Serve as a Deputy or
Representative in the said general Assembly, so to be hereafter Called,
Convened and appointed as aforesaid.

An Act of Repeal of all Laws heretofore (...) in this Province, and Confirming
all Laws made this General Assembly.
BE IT ENACTED by the King and Queens most Excellent Majesty's by and with the
Advice and Consent of this present General Assembly, and the Authority of the
same, That all Laws heretofore made within this Province be, and for ever
hereby stand Repealed, Annulled and Void, and that all Laws now made and
assented to this present General Assembly (and no (...) remain in full Force
and Power, according to the true Intent and (...) of; And that the same be
accounted and esteemed as the Body of the (...) this Province, and no other
heretofore made.

Provided always, That this Law shall not Extend, or be Construed (...) make
(...) any persons Right by Acts of Naturalization, or any private Acts
heretofore made relating to any private persons, but that the same be hereby
kept and preserved to the (...) according to the true Intent and Meaning
thereof, any thing herein to the contrary notwithstanding.

An Act for quieting of Possessions,
FORASMUCH as a good and beneficial Law (...) in Act for quieting of
Possessions, was made the seven and twentieth Day of March (...) 16^1. in this
Province, which by the use thereof has been found very much conducing to the
Benefit of the people of the said Province.

BE IT THEREFORE ENACTED by the King and Queens most Excellent Majesty's by and
with the Advice and Consent, of this (...) General Assembly and the Authority
of the same. That all Sales, Gifts and Grants at any time before the said XXVII
Day of March Anno Domini 1671. and (...), of any Lands Tenements or
Hereditaments within this Province, by any person or Persons whatsoever, that
Right had to Sell, give or grant such Lands Tenements or Hereditaments made by
Writing only, with or without Seal, shall for ever hereafter be accounted good
and (...) in Law, so hair the Heirs or (...) of such Vendors, (...) or Grantors
any Error in the Form only of such (...) to the country notwithstanding. And
forasmuch as diverse Assignments, of (...) written on the Back side of such
Pattent for Land are now (...), and (...) so many other sales in Paper either
worn out, or quite (...), for which the purchase Many has been (...) paid.

Be It Further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, by and with (...) by and
(...) aforesaid, That all Sales, Gifts of Grants at any time (...) aforesaid,
made by persons that Right had as aforesaid (...) Payment (...) by Witness such
Sale shall for ever hereafter ^e accounted good and available (...) the (...)
and Executors of such Vendors, Donors', o^ Grantors or other persons (...) from
such Vendor Donor or Grantor (...) to the (...) hereof notwithstanding.

An Act (...) Respective County Courts.
WHEREAS many Inconveniency (...) happened to diverse persons (...) this
Province, by means of Commissioners, Sherrifs, (...) In their Respective Courts
wherein they (...) Office^ for preventions whereof for the future.

BE IT THEREFORE ENACTED by the King and Queens most Excellent Majesty's by and
with the (...) and Consent of this present General Assembly and the Authority
of the (...) That (...) and (...) the publication of this (...) Commissioner,
Sherrif (...) deputy (...), Clark (...) deputy Clark of th^^e Courts wherein
they (...) shall plead as Attorney for or (...) of any person or persons (...)
or being within this Province upon the penalty of three thousand pounds of
Tobacco, the one half thereof to their said Majesty's for the Support of
Government, the other moiety to the Informer, or him or them that shall (...)
for the same, to be recovered in any Court or Courts of Record within this
Province, by Bill Plaint or Information, wherein no Essoyn Protection or Wager
of Law to be allowed

An Act (...)
WHEREAS (...) Sailors and (...) of their Majesty's Courts (...) of (...) and
(...) Merchants, Sailor^ and others (...) others (...) of the Common (...)
dispo^^e of such (...) and (...) to the (...) the good people of this Province,
for prevention (...)

BE IT ENACTED by the King and Queens most Excellent Majesty's (...) with the
Advice and Consent of (...) present General Assembly and the Authority of the
same, That from and after the publication (...) every Office and Place where
Ships and Vessels shall be appear (...) to be (...) and (...) Office (...)
persons appointed for the Clearing and (...) an Oath (...) of a Ship (...)
comes to Enter, (...) whether any Servant on (...) Convict (...) shall appear
by (...) Oath that they are such (...) the said Office (...) of the said
Master, (...) the same (...) or other (...) of in this Province, but (...) them
out of th^^ Province; before he or his said (...) shall (...) Province, (...)
own Ship when the ^^me departs (...).

And it is further Enacted by and with the Advice and Consent aforesaid, That
no Master of a Ship, Merchant, Sailor, or any pother person or persons
whatsoever shall presume to import (...) this Province any such convicted
Felons or Malefactors whatsoever, to sell, pay, give, or in any other manner to
dispose of, either to their own (...) (if any (...)) at (...) this Province
(...).

And Be It Further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any Master of
(...) ship (...) Merchant, (...) other person (...) and after the publication
of this Act, shall import and bring into this Province such convicted persons
(...) and shall (...) dispose unto any (...) shall forfeit, and pay for (...)
such convicted (...) so imported (...) any other ways disposed of (...)
Province the (...) pounds of Tobacco, the (...) the other (...) by Bill (...)
of Law to be allowed.

An Act for (...)
^

BE IT ENACTED by the King and Queens most Excellent Majesty's (...) and with
the Advice (...) present General Assembly and the Authority of the same, tha^
for the (...) St. (...) County Courts shall be held the first (...) September,
November, January, March June for the Orphans^ (...) Charles, (...) set and
(...) County (...) second Tuesday in September, November, January, March June
for the Orphans, and the 2 d Tuesday in August, (...) and Talbot County's, the
third Tuesday (...) September, November, January March June for the Orphans,
and the third Tuesday (...) August. For (...) County the fourth Tuesday in
September, November, January, March June for the Orphans (...) and the fourth
Tuesday in August.

And Be It Further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that every Commissioner
(...) shall not appear and attend are such place appointed for the Court to be
(...) his respective County at the time limited and appointed, shall be fixed
two hundred pounds of Tobacco for and toward the Pillory Stocks and Shipping
Post for the Execution of Justice, or to be disposed of as the Court then
^^itting shall think fit, unless such Commissioner or Commissioners make Lawful
Excuse to be allowed of by the Court, and forasmuch as it happens many times in
the Winter Season especially, that but two or three of the Commissioners do
meet and attend upon the Days set and appointed as aforesaid, whereby all
Process made Returnable that Court do fall and abate, and the several Plaintif^
are fo^ced to Sue out new Writts to the great damage and delay of Suitors.

Be It Therefore Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that any two or three of
the Commissioners, whereof one to be of the Quorum meeting as aforesaid, (...)
hereby fully Authorized and Empowered to adjourn the Court to some short time
after as to them shall seem meet, and that no Suit for want of a full Court do
fall or abate, but the same shall be continued till the next Court, to be held
according to such adjournment as aforesaid, and that if the first Day appointed
by this Act for the holding the several and respective Courts be not time
enough to do the business in that Court depending, then the Justices of such
Court are hereby Empowered to adjourn from Day to Day until such time as the
business returnable and ^ryable in that Court shall be finished, and whereas
there have some Scruples arisen by the Commissioners of the respective County
Courts, whether they shall or may do any other business in every June Court in
every respective Year, then what was concerning Orphans, the true Intent and
Meaning of this Act is, that the Commissioners of every respective County Court
may and ought to do, hear, judge and determine any business depending in the
said Court, at the same June Court between any persons whatsoever, as well as
relating to any Orphans Business.

An Act for the publication of Marriages.
BE IT ENACTED by the King and Queens most Excellent Majesty's by and with the
Advice and Consent of this present General Assembly and the Authority of the
same, That all persons who shall desire Marriage shall apply themselves either
to a Minister, Pastor or Magistrate for the contracting thereof.

And Be It Further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that all persons within
this Province intending Marriage, shall make publication thereof either at the
Church, Chapel, County Court or Meeting House next where they dwell, and that
at such time when such Church, Chapel or Meeting House shall be full, and
thereby capable to take cognizance thereof, and that it shall and may be
Law^^l, upon such Certificate had from the Minister, Pastor or County Court
when such application shall have been made, of three Weeks after the said
publication, for either Minister, Pastor or Magistrate to join in Marriage such
persons aforesaid; and if any person shall presume to contract Marriage without
such publication (...) and Certificate the (...) aforesaid, or without
particular License from the Governor for the time being, do privately within
the Limits of this Province contract Marriage, every person so contracted or
married shall be liable to a Fine of one thousand pounds of Tobacco, and every
such Minister, Pastor or Magistrate joining in Marriage any persons without
such publication or (...) any ways infringing this Act, shall be liable to a
Fine of five thousand pounds of Tobacco, the one half of the said ^ines to our
Lord and Lady the King and Queen their Heirs and Successors for the Support of
Government, and the other half to the Informer, to be recovered by Bill Plaint
Action of Debt or Information in any Court of Record, wherein no Essoyn
Protection or Wage^ of Law to be allowed.

And Be It further Enacted, that all such Marriages as shall not be made before
some Minister, Pastor or Magistrate with five sufficient Witnesses at least,
according to the (...) aforementioned, shall and are hereby declared null and
void.

And Be It further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that all Ministers
Pastors and Magistrates, who according to the Law of this Province do usually
join people ^n Marriage, shall join them in (...) and form as is set down and
expressed in the Liturgy of the Church of England which being finished, the
Minister, Pastor or Magistrate shall say, (I being (...) into by Law Authorized
(...) you Lawful Man and Wi^e)

And Be It Further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that the Minister,
Pastor, or Magistrate by Virtue of this Act are empowered to ask, demand and
receive from the Party's so married or joined together the Sum of one hundred
pounds of Tobacco.

MARYLAND ss.
At a Session of Assembly begun and held at the City of St. Mary's in their
Majesty's Province of Maryland the 21 st. Day of September in the VI Year of of
the Reign of our Sovereign Lord and Lady WILLIAM and MARY by the Grace of God
of England Scotland France and Ireland King and Queen Defenders of the Faith
etc. Anno D^mi^r 1694. His Excellency FRANCIS NICHOLSON Esquire being then
Governor in Chief and Captain General, these following Laws were Enacted, to
the Honor and Glory of GOD, and welfare of this his Majesty's Province.

An Act for the Encouragement of Learning, and Advancement of the Native, of
this Province.
FORASMUCH as that it has frequently happened that persons coming into this
your Majesty's Province of Maryland, either out of Necessity or hopes of
Advancement, have been introduced into the chief places and Offices of trust
and profit upon private recommendation or particular Promise before hand, made
by such person or persons in whose Power and Authority the disposing of, and
preferring of and to such places and Offices of Trust and Profit aforesaid, did
remain to the great discouragement of those persons that are qualified for the
Execution of any the said places and Offices aforesaid, who being Inhabitants
thereof have at all times as occasion required adventured their Lives and
Fortunes for the Defense of this your Majesty's Dominions, against all
Domestic Insurrections and Indian incursions, that have hitherto been made or
attempted to be made to their no small Charge and Expense; therefore we your
Majesty's most Humble and most (...) Subjects do humbly pray that it may be
Enacted,

And BE IT ENACTED by the King and Queens most Excellent Majesty's by and with
the Advice and Consent of this present General Assembly and the Authority of
the same that from and after the publication hereof, no person or persons
whatsoever (...) into this Province, and who have not made it their Seat of
Residency for the full (...) of three Years, shall have, hold, possess or enjoy
any place or Office of (...) Profit within tho same, either by himself or
Deputy, except such person or persons as shall have your Majesty's Immediate
Commission for any such place or Office aforesaid, as also such person or
persons now possessed of any such places or Offices as aforesaid, but that all
and every your Majesty's principal Officers within this Province, having Power,
Pr^heminence, or Authority, by virtue of any Commission from your most S^^red
Majesty's to him or them granted, to dispose of any such Offices or places as
aforesaid, may upon vacancy of any place or Office whereof they have Right
(...) dispose, or to prefer any person or persons thereinto, being obliged to
make Choice of such person or persons as they shall think most worthy and
capable of executing of such place or Office as aforesaid out of the
Inhabitants of this your Majesty's Province, and who have been Resident therein
for and during the time and term aforesaid, (except before excepted) any Costom
or Usuage to the contrary notwithstanding.

And Be It further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that no person or
persons whatsoever, having your most Sacred Majesty's Commission to exercise
any Office within this Province, shall be obliged actually to inhabit within
this Province, and exercise the same in his own proper person, and not by any
Deputy or Deputy's,

An Act prohibiting all Masters of Ships or Vessels or any other Persons from
transporting or conveying away any person or persons out of this P^^ince
without Passes:
BE IT ENACTED by the King and Queens most Excellent Majesty's by and with the
Advice and Consent of this present General Assembly and the Authority of the
same, That from and after the publication here (...) person or persons
whatsoever intending (...) this Province,, shall (...) of his her of their
intended departure (...) up his her or (...) Names at the Secretary's (...) the
full space of three Months, that if in (...) aforesaid, no person shall under
write the said person or persons so setting his or their respective Name or
Names as aforesaid, It shall then be Lawful for the Governor, Keeper of the
great Seal, or Secretary of this Province for the name being, to Sign a Pass to
any such person or persons to depart this Province, for which Pass the Party
shall pay to the person signing the same the Sum of two Shillings and six pence
Sterling, and if any person or persons upon any sudda^n or emergent occasion
are necessitated to depart this Province, not having set up his her or their
Name or Names at the Secretary's Office aforesaid, then such person or persons
giving good and sufficient Security to the Governor, Keeper of the great Seal
or Secretary to discharge and pay all Debts and Accounts whatsoever due and
owing from the said persons to any of the Inhabitants, then the said person or
persons so departing may have a Pass as aforesaid.

And Be It Further Enacted, that any Master of Ships o^ Vessels or other
persons whatsoever, that shall transport or (...) out of this Province by (...)
o^ Water any Freeman being indebted by Bill, Bond, Account or otherwise to any
Inhabitant thereof without such pass under the Hand of the Governor,
Chancellor or Secretary aforesaid, shall be liable to satisfy all such Debts,
Engagements and Damages to the person or persons to whom such Debt or Damages
respectively shall be due within this Province, except the same be otherwise
satisfied, or that the Transportor or Conveyor away of such person or persons
procure such person or persons to return again in one Month after, whereby he
may be liable to Justice here, and every such person as aforesaid as shall
transport or convey away out of this Province any Servant of Servants being
Servants here by Condition, for Wages, Indenture, or custom of the Country,
shall be liable for to pay and satisfy unto the Master or Owner of such
Servant or Servants so carried away all such Damages as he or they shall make
appear to be justly due, to such Master or Owner for want of such Servant or
Servants as the Court before (...) such cause shall be tried shall think fit;
And whereas several evil minded people inhabiting and residing at the Head of
the Bay, have customarily set persons over the Head of the Bay, and Susquehanah
River, being either Felons, Debtors, or Runaway Servants from the more remoter
par^s of this Province, for some small advantage they have in buying or getting
such (...) Apparel as such persons so absenting or flying from Justice
aforesaid (...) them commonly Money, Goods, or Apparel by them feloniously
purloyned from their Masters and other Owners, by which means they may have
easy Access to another Government, in retardation of Justice, and to the great
Damage of such Creditors, Masters or Owners aforesaid.

Be It therefore Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, by and with the Advice and
Consent aforesaid, that from and after the publication hereof, no person or
persons inhabiting or being at the Head of the Bay, or in any other part of
this Province shall transport or convey, or cause to be transported or conveyed
any person or persons over Susqu^^anah River aforesaid, or any other part of
the Bay above the North ^^de of Sassafrass River on the Eastern side of the Bay
not having passes so procured as aforesaid, or a Certificate from under the
Hands of two Justices of the Peace of that County where such person or persons
intending to travel shall inhabit and the County Seal affixed thereunto,
certifying the freedom of such persons, and that he she or they are clear to
the best of their knowledge from any engagements impediting their traveling as
aforesaid, on penalty of answering all such Debt or Damages to Creditors,
Masters or other Owners of Servants, to be recovered as by this Law is
provided, against such as shall actually set them out of this Province, any
matter o^ thing herein contained to the contrary notwithstanding.

An Act Confirming and making valid the last Will and Testament of Augustine
Herman late of Caecil County Gent as it now stands Recorded in the Commissary
Generals Office of this Province.

An Act for the Naturalization of Peter Ferdinando and his Children of Andrew
Imber^. Claudius Dutitree, Gerardus Wee^iels and ^ames his Son, Abraham
Ambrose, Lewis de Roch Brune, John de Vagha Herman Van Burkelo, Nicolaes de la
Montaigne, Henderick Sluyter, and Jacob Sluiter Junior.

An Act touching Coopers, and the Gauge of Tobacco Hogsheads:
BE IT ENACTED by the King and Queens most Excellent Majesty by and with the
Advice and Consent of this present General Assembly and^ the Authority of the
(...), that all Tobacco Hogsheads that shall hereafter he made within this
Province, shall be of the size of 48 Inches in length, and 32 Inches in the
head, and not under the size of 46 Inches in length, and 31 Inches in the head,
(...) what Cooper or Coopers, or other person or persons that shall make
Tobacco Hogsheads and do not observe the Gauge aforesaid shall forfeit the said
Cask, and upon complaint thereof made the matter of fact being proved by two
good and sufficient Evidences, it shall and may be Lawful for the Justices of
that respective County Court where such person or persons do inhabit to give
Judgment thereupon to the party or parties grieved, and that any Cooper or
Coopers person or persons whatsoever, that shall agree with any the inhabitants
of this Province, and undertake with him or them to set up or make his or their
Tobacco Hogsheads and Casks, shall and are hereby enjoined to set up and finish
one half of the said Tobacco Hogsheads and Casks by the tenth Day of October
next ensuing the undertaking the making of such Tobacco Hogsheads and Casks as
aforesaid, and the other moiety or half part of the said Tobacco Hogsheads and
Casks to set up and (...) by or before the tenth Day of December next ensuing
such Contract as aforesaid, (...) if any Cooper or Coopers, person or persons
whatsoever within this Province, so agreeing and undertaking the same as
aforesaid, shall wilfully or otherwise (...) make, set up, complete and finish
the said Tobacco Hogsheads and Cask aforesaid, according to such Gauge and by
such time as aforesaid, he shall forfeit the Sum of one hundred pounds of
Tobacco for every Tun of Cask and Tobacco Hogsheads left at the (...) and times
aforesaid unmade, not set up, or unfinished, to be recovered in the several and
respective County Courts where the party or pari^s, Cooper or Coopers do at
that time dwell or reside, unless the Cooper or Coopers, person or persons
agreeing or undertaking the said work or task aforesaid shall or can before the
Commissioners of such County Court make it sufficiently appear (...) in
performing the said agreement by ^^^ness or some other Lawful Impedement, which
Plea shall be adjudged of by the said Commissioners of the several and
respective County's aforesaid.

And Be it also Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, by and with the Advice and
Consent aforesaid, that from and after the publication hereof, all Merchants,
Traders, Planters and other inhabitants of this Province making any Cropp of
Tobacco shall provide, and cause to be fallen and sawed by the last Day of
April by the furthest every Year Respectively, all such Timber as he intended
or allotted for the making Tobacco Hogsheads to the intent the same may be well
seasoned, under the penalty of one hundred pounds of Tobacco for every Hogshead
he or they shall have set up or made of any other Timber than what shall be
seasoned as aforesaid, one half to our Sovereign Lord and Lady the King and
Queen, their Heirs and Successors for the Support of this Government, the other
half to him or them that shall Sue for the same, to be Recovered in any Court
of Record within this Province, wherein no Essoyn Protection or Wager of Law to
be ^^lowed.

And Be It Further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, by and with the Advice
and Consent aforesaid, that no Tobacco Hogshead or Cask for Tobacco shall be
set up of made by any Cooper or Coopers whatsoever of any (...) than what is
herein before provided, and the same to be hewe^ (...) staves and heading by
the last Day of July in every Year respective (...) Cooper, Coopers or other
persons undertaking to set up such Tobacco (...) aforesaid, do at the
completing and finishing of the said Hogshead (...) ^^spective House, burn in
the Bulge of each respective Hogshead (...) aforesaid (...) a brand (...)
Letters of his Name, (...) by him so branded to weigh, and the true weight
thereof with (...) to cut into the Bulge aforesaid, on penalty and forfeiture
of the Loss of hi^^ Labor for every Cask or Hogshead not branded as aforesaid
to the Imployer of such Cooper, as also the Sum of one hundred pounds of
Tobacco for every Hogshead by him falsely weighed or marked as aforesaid, one
half thereof to our Sovereign Lord and Lady the King and Queen their Heirs and
Successors for the use aforesaid, the other half to him o^ them that shall Sue
for the same to be recovered as aforesaid.

Provided that this Act nor any thing therein contained shall be construed
(...) to prejudice any Cooper or Coopers, or other person or persons from (...)
taking to set up Tobacco Hogsheads as aforesaid for any Error or Mistake (...)
weight of each Respective Hogshead by him so weighed and marked as aforesaid,
not exceeding five pounds weight in the Hogshead; and that all (...) person and
persons whatsoever that shall undertake to make (...) their own Cask shall and
are hereby obliged to brand, mark and weigh every respective Hogshead by him so
made, under the same penalty and forfeiture as is before mentioned and
expressed.

And Be It Further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, by and with the Advice
and Consent aforesaid, that every Master or other Owner of any Servants or
Negro^s Coopers, or that shall employ any Servant or Negro to set up his her
(...) Cask or Tobacco Hogsheads, such Master or other Owner shall be obliged to
(...), hew, and set up such their Tobacco Hogsheads within the several and
respecttive times as by this Law is before limited and appointed, and them
when finished to brand mark and weigh under the same penalties and forfeitures
as (...) before provided against Coopers and other persons undertaking to set
up (...) Hogsheads as aforesaid, In consideration of all which, the Received
(...) Hogshead of Tobacco shall pay and allow to the Owner or Owners (...) for
each Hogshead Received the Sum of forty pounds of Tobacco, (...) out of the
gross Weight the true Weight of each Hogshead marked on the Bulge aforesaid and
no more, any other Act to the contrary notwithstanding.

An Act for Confirmation of all (...) Military and Civil, from the death of his
Excellency Lyonel Copley Esquire* their Majesty's late Governor and Capt' General
of Maryland etc. unto the Arrival of his present Excellency Francis Nicholson
Esquire* the present Governor thereof.
WHEREAS upon the death of L yonel Copley Esquire* la^e Governor of Maryland, Sir
Edmund Andross Knight Governor of Virginia, in their Majesty's Names did
assume and take upon him the Government and Chief Command of this Province, by
virtue of a Commission from their Majesty's, bearing date the third Day of
March Anne Domini 1691. in the fourth Year of their Majesty's Reign under their
Signet and Sign Mannual, wherein and whereby their Majesty's were pleased by
those Presents to constitute and appoint the said Sir Edmund Andross upon the
Death of Capt' Francis Nicholson, and in the absence of the said Lyonel Copley
(and not otherwise) to be Commander in chief in and over this Province, and by
virtue thereof the said Sir Edmund Andross in their Majesty's Names by his
Proclamation bearing date the 25th. day of September 1693. in the fifth Year of
their Majesty's Reign, Reciting that whereas by the death of the said Lyonel
Copley their Majesty's late Capt' General and Governor in Chief in and over
this their Province of Maryland, and the absence of Capt' Francis Nicholson
their Majesty's Lieutenant Governor of the same, the (...) and Government of
the said Province was committed to the charg^^ (...) him the said Sir Edmund
Andross Knight their Majesty's Leivetenant (...) General of their Colony and
Dominion of Virginia, he the said (...) Edmund Andross thereby did proclaim and
declare that all Officers civil and military should hold and (...) their
several and respective Places and Offices by the same as (...) said Commission
and Proclamation remaining upon Record in the (...) more at large may appear;
And because upon reading and (...) Commission of their Majesty's bearing date
the 2^th. Day (...) 1691. to Capt' Francis Nicholson ap^ointing and (...)
Francis Nicholson Lieutenant Governor of and in this Province, and (...) of
the said Lyonel Copley to exercise and execute the several Powers and
Authority's in the said Commission to the said Governor Copley, it appears to
^s that their Majesty's had made express provision that the said Lievt'
Governor Nicholson upon the death of the said Lyonel Copley Esquire* should
Succeed to the Chief Command in this Province, and if not present upon the
place at the death of the said Lyonel Copley, that the Council should take upon
them the Government of the Province; whereof the first in Council to preside;
neither does (...) said Commission to the said Sir Edmund Andross sufficiently
Authorize the said Sir Edmund Andross to take upon him the Government
aforesaid, but upon the (...) of the said Francis Nicholson Esq' and absence of
the said Lyonel Copley Esq', (...) does the Proclamation aforesaid of the said
Sir Edmund Andross agree with the said Commission in Reciting that his Access
to the Government was by the death (...) absence of the said Francis Nicholson
Esq', which in the said Commission (...) expressly confined to the death of the
said Francis Nicholson and not absence, (...) did the said Sir Edmund Andross
take such Oath for observing of a certain Act of Parliament made in the XII.
Year of the Reign of King Charles the II. of Blessed Memory, Entitled an Act
for the Encouraging and Increasing of Shipping and Navigation before his
Entrance into the Government aforesaid, as by the said Statute is commanded,
enjoined, and required of all Governors and Commanders in chief of any their
Majesty's Lands, Islands, Plantations and Territory's, nor administer or
direct, the same to be administered to Colonel Nicholas Greenbury by left him as
(...) Sir Thomas Lawrence at his next coming, and because also that by the
(...) of the said Sir Edmund Andross to the said Government, by his Authority
diverse Acts and Actions Judicial and Civil have been done, executed and
performed in Courts of Record, and otherwise in this Province; which for the
Reasons aforesaid appear precautious and doubtful: In tender Contemplation
whereof, and for the Ease and (...), Peace and Settlement of your Majesty's
most Loyal and Dutyful Subjects of this your Majesty's Province, they humbly
pray and beseech your Royal Majesty's that it may be Enacted.

And BE IT ENACTED by your Sacred Majesty's by and with the Advice and Consent
of this present General Assembly and the Authority of the same, That all manner
of Actions, Suits, Causes and Proceedings in all and every their Majesty's
Courts within this Province, either by holding, setting, adjourning,
continuing, or other proceeding, to hearing and determining any Suit, Action,
Motion, Petition or other Matter whatsoever, shall be had, taken, accepted and
reputed as valid in Law or Equity, and of absolute Force Efficacy and Strength
in Law to all Intents, Purposes, and Constructions as any other Judicial
Proceedings by any other of their Majesty's more ample Commissions for the due
Government of this Province heretofore granted: And all and every Officer and
Minister Civil or Military in this their Majesty's Province, shall and are
hereby confirmed, established and raryfied; for in or by Reason of any Legal
Acting and Proceeding in their Several and Respective Offices Places and
Stations, from the time of the Access of the said Sir Edmund Andross Knight, to
his Excellency's the present Governor Francis Nicholson Esquire* his arrival and
taking the Government upon him, any Clause, Imperfection, or want of Authority
in or to the said Sir Edmund Andross or the Commission aforesaid, to the said
Sir Edmund Andross notwithstanding. Provided that nothing in this Act be taken
and costrued to justify Sir Edmund Andross's taking and disposing of the
public Revennues for the Support of the Government of this Province, or debar
the Assembly or any person whatsoever of their right or claims to the same
which he took.

An Act ascertaining the Expenses of the Delegates of Assembly, and
Commissioners to the Provincial and County Courts.
FOR the ascertaining, limitting and allowing unto the several and respective
Deputy's and Delegates that Serve or shall Serve in the General Assembly's of
this Province, and of the several and respective Commissioners of the
Provincial and County Courts of this Province such Sum and Sums of Tobacco
(...) thought necessary and sufficient for the defraying their Charges (...)
Assembly's and Courts as aforesaid.

BE IT ENACTED by the King and Queens most Excelent Majesty's by and with the
Advice and Consent of this present General Assembly (...) Authority of the
same, That all such Delegates and Burgesses of (...) be allowed the Sum of one
hundred and forty pounds of Tobacco a (...) the time they shall attend such
Assembly's, and no more, (besides their (...) Charges) to be paid and allowed
by them out of the public Leavy's of this Province, and the several and
respective Commissioners of the Provincial Courts for the defraying their
Charges and Expenses during the time they shall Skin, and attend such Courts;
the Sum of one hundred and fou^y pounds of Tobacco per Day and no more, besides
their Itinerent Charges to be paid them likewise (...) of the public Leavy of
this Province as aforesaid, and the several Commissioners of the County Courts
shall be allowed for the defraying of their Expenses during the time they shall
attend such Courts as aforesaid the Sum of Eighty pounds of Tobacco per Day and
no more, which Sum of Eighty pounds of Tobacco as aforesaid the said
Commissioners of the County Courts are hereby empowered to Assess and Leavy
where such Commissioners shall Serve as aforesaid, for defraying the Expenses
aforesaid and no more.

Provided always, and it is the true Intent and Meaning of this Act, that where
any Justices of any County Court, being a full Court, or above the number of
Seven shall agree together in Court Sitting, and consent to lessen any
allowance hereby given, or if it be to take the same totally off, it shall and
may be Lawful to such full Court to lessen and take off any part of the
allowance hereby given and settled to the Commissioners of the said County
Courts, and Entering fitch Rule in the Record, shall for that Year be an
ubsolute Law and Rule for every Justice of that County Court as to their
Expenses, and it shall not be Lawful to collect or raise any more Tobacco for
defraying the County Court Justices Expenses; them so much as by such Consent
and Rule shall be limited and agreed (...) at aforesaid, and if they see sit
to make the same Rule, or such other as they shall agree on as before said, once
on every Year during this Act, any thing herein to the contrary
notwithstanding. And Be It Further Enacted, that one Act of Assembly made at a
General Assembly of this Province, begun and held at the City of St. Mary's the
tenth Day of May Anno Dumini 1692. Entitled An Act ascertaining the Expenses
of the Commissioners of the Provincial and County Courts, be, and is hereby
utterly Repealed and made Void.

An Act for erecting Ann-Arundel and Oxford Town into Ports and Towns.
BE IT ENACTED by the King and Queens most Excellent Majesty's by and with the
Advice and Consent of this present General Assembly and the Authority of the
same, That from and after the publication hereof, the Land called the Town Land
at Seavern in Ann-Arundel County where the Town wa^ formerly, and the Land at
Oxford in Talbot County where the Town was formerly, shall from henceforth be
Towns and Ports, and Places of Trade, where all Ships and Vessels may come to
for Entering and Clearing, to which End the Collector of that District, or his
Lawful Deputy's shall constantly Reside at the said Towns and Ports, and also
Naval Officer, or Officers or their Deputy's shall also constantly Reside
there, for giving dispatch to all Ships or Vessels coming or trading into them
Ports; and that the same Ports and Towns may be capable of being built upon and
inhabited by persons desiring to dwell and inhabit in them.

Be It Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that from and after the proclaiming
of this Act, all and every the persons named herein for Commissioners shall be
Commissioners of and for the said two Towns, and each of them, and they and
every of them shall and may execute the Powers and Authority's (...) them,
according to the directions hereafter given and (...) buying and purchasing the
aforesaid Town Lands of the now (...) of the same, as for the Surveying and
Laying our the same, and (...) the several Lotts to be laid out in them, to the
End the length, breadth, and (...) of each Lot in each Town and Port may be
known and distinguished, (that (...) for the said Town and Port of Ann-Arundel
in Ann-Arundel County (...) Hammond, Major Edward Dorsey, Mr. John Bennet, Mr.
John (...) Mr. Andrew Norwood, Mr. Ph^kip Howard, Mr. James (...) honorable
Nicholas Greenbury Esq'. And for the Town and Port (...) in Oxford aforesaid
Mr. Edward Mann, Mr. John Edmondson, (...), Mr. John Nee^s, Mr. John Hawkins,
Mr. Thomas Robinns and Mr. Thomas Robinns Junior, the honorable George
Roeb^tham, and Mr. Thomas Smithson, and Mr. Robert Smith.

And Be It Enacted that the said Commissioners herein nominated for each
respective Town in each County aforesaid, or the major part of them, are hereby
empowered some time before 25 th. Day of February Anno Domini 1694. to meet
together upon the respective Lands and Places for Towns before mentioned, then
and there treat with and agree with the Owners and all persons interested in
the said Lands, and buy and purchase of such Owners and others interested in
the (...) Lands one hundred Acres of the said Lands, at the discretion of the
persons aforesaid least (...) to the Owners, and they that purchase shall cause
the same (...) and after Survey so made, shall cause the ^ame to be marked,
(...), and divided into convenient Streets, Lanes, and Ally's, with other (...)
places (...) which may be a Church, Chapel, Market House or other public
Building, and the remaining part of the said one hundred Acres to be divided
into one hundred Equal Lotts, marked on some Posts or Stakes toward the
Streets or Lanes with Numbers 1 2 3 4 and so to an Hundred, out of which Lotts
the Owner of such Lands shall have the first choice for one Lot, during the
space of one Year after the said 25 th. Day of February, except his Excellency
Francis Nicholson Esquire* Governor of this Province, who shall have the next
un^^^diate choice of one two or three Lotts in each, or either of the said
Towns if his (...) so please; after which the Lotts shall be taken up by tho
Inhabitants of the (...) only, during six Months after laying out the same,
and if the Inhabitants shall not take up the same Lotts in the time aforesaid,
it shall be then free for any person or persons whatsoever to take up the said
Lot or Lotts, paying the Owner proportionably for the same; And in case any
person or persons shall wilfully refuse to make Sale of any such Lands therein
before mentioned^ or any person or persons through Nonage, Coverture, or non
Sana Memorid or other Impediment or Dissability whatsoever, that then the
Commissioners aforesaid nominated for each respective Town, are hereby
Authorized by virtue of this Act to Issue out Warrants to the Sherrif of the
said, County's, (...) empower him to impanel and return a Jury of Freeholders
to appear before the said Commissioners, which Jury upon their Oaths to ^e
administered by the said Commissioners are to inquite and assess such Damages
and Recompense, is they shall think fit to be awarded to the Owners and all
persons interested, according to their several and respective Interests in the
said Land or any part thereof and what Sum of Tobacco the said Jury shall
adjudge the said Land to be worth, shall be paid to the said Owners and Persons
interested, by such person or persons as shall take up the said respective Lot
or Lotts proportionably thereunto, and the said Commissioners or the major part
of them are hereby empowered by respective Warants under their Hands and S^^ls
to Summon the Surveyor general or the Surveyor of the County to survey and lay
out the said one hundred Acres in the places aforementioned in the manner and
form aforesaid, to be marked and staked out as aforesaid, and when the same is
Surveyed and laid out as aforesaid, and valued a^ aforesaid, that then
whosoever shall make choice of any such Lot as aforesaid and make Entry
thereof before and with the Officer or person as by the Commissioners shall be
appointed to keep the Book for Entry of the same, and pay such Sum or Quantity
of Tobacco as shall by the discretion of the Commissioners be rated upon such
Lot and payable to the Owner of the said Land, and on such Lot shall build
one twenty Foot square dwelling House at least within twelve Months (...)
taking up the same, unless such building be larger than herein (...) shall by
virtue thereof, and of the building and finishing as aforesaid invest (...) and
builder as aforesaid, with an (...) of Inheritance in the said Lot, (...) him
his Heirs and Assigns for ever, and be a perpetual Bar to the Owners and
Persons interested in the said Lands either within or without this Province,
even against his Lordship the Right Honorable Charles Lord (...) Lord
Proprietary of this Province his Heirs and Successors; yielding and (...) to
the said Lord Proprietary his Heirs and Successors for ever, (...) of one Penny
Current Money for each respective Lot as aforesaid, (...) Surveyor of each
Town and Port as aforesaid, shall have and receive (...) and Rewards for laying
our and slaking the Towns and Lotts as aforesaid, as the said Commissioners
shall allow and settle and no more, and any person or persons that shall build
and inhabit in such Port or Town, and shall owe any Sum or Sums of Tobacco and
will pay the same in such Town as he shall be allowed ten per cent. for every
Hogshead of four hundred weight and upwards so paid in Towns, to be deducted
out of the Debt aforesaid; or pleadable in (...) of the Creditor.

And Be It Further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, by and with the Advice
and Consent aforesaid, that any person or persons that have haretofore taken
(...) any Lot or Lotts in either of the Towns by virtue of any former Law of
this Province and built thereon according to the same former Law, they and
every of them their Heirs and Assigns shall have and enjoy a good and sure
Estate of Inheritance to them and their Heirs for ever, under the Rents and
Services herein mentioned, and the several Lotts so built on shall be deemed
and taken as part of the one hundred Lotts as aforesaid, and the same Town laid
out as conveniently (...) as may be. And Be It Enacted by the Authority
aforesaid* that at the Town and Port of Seavern in Ann-Arundel County shall be
bought or valued by the Jury as before in this Act is mentioned, all that
parcel or Neck of Land within Levy Neck Cove and Acton's Cove, lying and
adjoining or near to the Town Land as aforesaid, or so much thereof as by the
Commissioners shall be found convenient to be fenced in and called the Town
Common or Pasture, and paid for and fenced in at the public Charge, and shall
be for the public Use and Service when need shall require: And that the
Inhabitants of the said Towns shall not raise any Stock of Cattle or Hoggs,
Horses or Sheep more than what they can (...) and raise upon their respective
Lot or Lotts and not more, at the discretion of the Commissioners of the said
Towns!

An Act Impowering Richard Bishop of Talbot County Brother and Heir of William
Bishop late of Talbot County Deceased, to sell and dippose of so much Land as
will amount to Fifty Thousand Pounds of Tobacco, for the Payment of the Charges
expended in recovering of the said Estate.

An Act for Asertaining Naval Officers Fees.
BE IT ENACTED by the King and Queens most Excellent Majesty's by and with the
Advice and Consent of this present General Assembly and the Authority of the
same, That the several and respective Master or Masters of all Ships or Vessels
trading and coming into this Province of what Burden soever, shall at the time
of Entering such Ships or Vessels as aforesaid pay unto the Govenour of this
Province for the time being three pence per Tunn, for every Tunn of Burden the
said Ship shall be of, (all such Ships or Vessels as are bona Fide built in and
belonging to the people of this Province excepted,) or give good caution to the
Naval Officer with whom he or they shall Enter for the payment thereof.

And it is hereby Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, by and with the Advice
and Consent aforesaid, that the several and respective Naval Officers of this
Province, within their several and respective Districts, for the several Acts
and things relating to his or their Office by him or them hereby enjoined to be
done, shall have and receive the Fees hereafter mentioned and no more, (to wit)
for Entering any Ship or Vessel coming and trading into this Province being
under the burden of one hundred Tunn, the Master thereof shall pay (...) with
whom he sh^rrif (...) such Ship or Vessel (...) Sum of five Shillings Sterling
and no more, and five Shillings (...) for the (...) thereof: And if such Ship
or Vessel shall be above the burden of one (...) hundred Tunns or upwards, the
Master for the Entry (...) Officer as a (...) ten Shillings, Sterling, and
(...); And the said Naval Officers are hereby obliged to (...) what burden
soever of the built of this Province, (...) ^^habit and reside within this
Province the Sum of two Shillings and (...), which is hereby allowed and
ascertained him as a Fee, therefore, (...) of two Shillings six Pence shall
clear the same.

(...) further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that all small Boats (...)
this Province, and being under eighteen Foot by the Keel, shall pass and (...)
any le^t, hindrance, molestation or seizure of the same, ((...) they (...) have
on Board them prohibited goods, or goods liable to (...) Majesty's not
Co^quetted or Clearing for the same,) without b^ing obliged to take out Permits
for such passing and repassing as aforesaid; And that the Masters of all
Shall^ps or open Sloops trading within this Province (...) pay unto the several
Naval Officers, or their Deputy or Deputy's appointed for the (...) of Permits
the Sum of two Shillings ^ix pence yearly and no more (...) the granting of
such Permits as aforesaid, and shall give good Security to be taken (...)
Officer aforsaid in their Majesty's Name, that he or they shall and (...)
observe the Acts of Trade and Navigation and other good Laws of th^^ (...)
relating thereto.

(...) Be it further Enacted That all and every Collector and Collectors of
this (...) shall have and receive such Fees for Entering and Clearing such Ships
and Vessels (...) aforesaid, as are above allowed to the Naval Officers and no
more; And that all Collectors and Naval Officers shall make a fair Table of all
their (...) and ^ang them up in their Offices, under the penalty of fifty
pounds Sterling to their Majesty's their Heirs and Successors for the Support
of Government, to be recovered in any Court of Record within this Province by
Action of Debt Bill (...) Information, wherein no Essoyn Protection or Wager of
Law shall be allowed.

An Additional Act to the Act for quieting Possessions.
WHEREAS (...) General Assembly begun and held at St. Mary's in the Province of
Maryland the twenty seventh Day of March in the nine and thirtieth Year of the
(...) of C^^cilius, etc. Anno Domini 1671. It was then and there amongst other
things (...) viz. An Act for quieting possessions, which Act did assure and
confirm all (...) by real Purchasers of all Lands Tenements and Hereditaments
whatsoever, before the Day of the date thereof and not after.

And whereas at a General Assembly held at the City of St. Mary's the 13th. Day
of April in the two and fortieth Year of the Dominion of Caecilius and c. Anno
Domini 1674. Entitled An Act of Enroling Conveyances, and securing the Estates
of real Purchasers, it was therein contained amongst other things, viz, that
all that from thenceforth should purchase any Land of Inheritance, should
purchase the same by Deed Indented, or other sure Deed, and inrole the same in
the County where the Land lies,, or in the Provincial Court, or the principal
beads of the same Deed; clearly showing and declaring the manner how Lands
should pass from Man to Man. And forasmuch as the same Law did not provide for
the Security of all those Titl^s that did pass from Man to Man from the 27 th.
Day of March 1671. until the 1^ th. Day of April Anno Domini 1674. not no other
Law extant for Securing those Titles, being under the same circumstances as
those of 1671. We the Deputy's and Delegates of this present General Assembly
do pray that it may be Enacted,

And BE IT ENACTED by the King and Queens most Excellent Majesty's by and with
the Advice and Consent of this present General Assembly and the Authority of
the same, that the aforesaid Law Entitled An Act for quieting of Possessions,
and all the branches and proviso's therein contained be in full force and
^ertue until the 13 th. Day of April Anno Domini 1674. and not after.

measures hereafter to take in cases of that nature, it is prayed that (...)
acted, And

BE IT ENACTED by the King and Queens most Excellent Majesty's by and with the
Advice and Consent of this present General Assembly and by the (...) of the
(...) that from and after the publication hereof no person or persons (...) or
Administrators of any (...) within this Province, (...) or satisfy Debts
contracted out of this Province, of (...), Debts due to their Sacred Majesty's
only excepted, before debts due within this Province, from the Estate or
Estates of any person or persons deceased shall be paid and satisfied; if such
Executors or Administrators shall have Asse^ts (...) his her or their hands
sufficient to satisfy and pay the same, (...) Administrators having respect to
the quality of the Debts due within this Province as aforesaid, unless the
creditor or creditors of the said deceased being persons residing out of this
Province as aforesaid on any Action or Actions by him her or them brought
against such Executors or Administrators as aforesaid, upon any debt or
contract of a higher nature than those contracted within this Province as
aforesaid, be it by Statute Merchant or of the Staple, Judgment, Bend or
otherwise do upon Trial make it sufficiently appear that such Executors or
Administrators (...) knowledge and Cognizance thereof upon due (...) as
aforesaid (...) Executors or Administrators shall have paid debts of an
infe^iour nature, not ^^coveted against them by due course of Law, or suffered
Judgment to go against (...) for any such Debt as aforesaid, without pleading
such foreign Debt in stay (...) Judgment, such Executor or Administrator not
having Asse^ts in his her (...) Hands sufficient to pay the Debt as aforesaid,
and satisfy the same, the (...) whom such Action shall be brought shall give
Judgment and award Execution against such Executors or Administrators de ^ouis
Proprit^s, to such Creditor or Creditors as aforesaid, as the Law in that case
directs, any thing in this present Act contained to the contrary thereof in any
wi^e notwithstanding.

And for that it has been found of evil Consequence, that Bonds, Bills, and
other (...) under, the Hand and Seal of any person or persons within this
Province which are (...) very ancient da^e, and probably have been by the
person or persons who were Debtors thereby long before paid and satisfied, but
for want of due proof thereof or ^he Receipt for payment through length of Time
become casualy lost such Debtors are laid liable by Law to pay and satisfy
such Debt or Debts by them so formerly paid and satisfied as aforesaid. Be it
therefore Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, by and with the Advice and
Consent aforesaid, that for the future no Bill, Bond or other Obligation under
the Hand and Seal of any person or persons whatsoever, that has been, or shall
at any time hereafter be taken of any of the Inhabitants of this Province
aforesaid, that shall not be renewed within five Years from the publication
hereof, or within five Years from the taking of such Obligation as aforesaid,
and so for every five Years successively be suable or impleadable in any Court
within this Province, Debts due to their Sacred Majesty's their Heirs and
Successors, Bonds formerly given, or hereafter to be given into any Office
within this Province, Debts due to any persons under Age, non Sana Memoria, or
beyond the Seas and not returning within five Years as aforesaid. (only
excepted) Provided that this Act not any thing therein contained be construed
or taken to give any advantage or benefit to persons flying out of this
Province and not returning within the time aforesaid, any thing in this present
Act contained to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

An additional Act to the Act for Ports.
BE IT ENACTED by the king and Queens most Excellent Majesty's by and with the
Advice and Consent of this present General Assembly and the Authority of the
same, That the Town Land at Oxford in Talbot County constituted and appointed a
Town and Port by a former Act of Assembly made at a Session of Assembly begun
and held at the City of St. Marys the 21st. Day of September Anno Domini 1694.
be again Surveyed and (...) out, that is to say, some time before (...) last
Day of September next, before the Commissioners in therefore (...) Act
nominated and appointed, bounding the same at low water (...) including the
(...), and so to the old bounded (...) at the Southermost part of (...) that as
well in the said Port and Town as ^n the Port and Town of (...) there be one or
more places laid out and reserved as the Commissioners of the respective Ports
shall think fit for the building of Ships and other Vessels, and that the
Officers of the Lord Proprietary for receiving (...) Duty's (...) payable to
his said Lordship, be hereby obliged by themselves (...) unto Authorized and
appointed to reside at the said Ports (...) patch of Ships and other Vessels
Entering and Clearing at (...) as aforesaid.

And Be It also Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that the (...) Arundel and
Oxford for the fu^ure shall be called known and (...) names (...) appellations
of Annapolis and Williamstad^., that is to (...) (...) Arundel to be called by
the name of Annapolis, and Oxford by (...) William Stad^, and that there be
purchased to the said Town of William (...) one hundred Acres of Land adjacent
to the said Town for a Common (...) Pasture, for the benefit of all persons
within this Province that shall repair to the said Town, and that the same be
laid out as above expressed, and that six Acres of the same be reserved for
public Buildings

An Act for Naturalization of Mathias Mathiason alias Freeman, (...) John and
Joseph Goutee and Joseph and John Sons of the (...) Joseph Goutee, and Leonard
Camperson.

An Act ascertaining the Fees for Naturalization.
WHEREAS diverse complaints have been made, that (...) have taken and exacted
immoderate Fees of persons Naturalized, for prevention thereof for the future,

BE IT ENACTED by the King and Queens most Excellent Majesty's by and with the
Advice and Consent of this present General Assembly and (...) Authority of the
same. That the Fees to be taken by the several Clerks and Officers belonging to
the Assembly for the Naturalization, be such as shall be allowed and adjudged
by the respective Assembly's when and where such persons shall be Naturalized,
and that no person whatsoever presume to demand at exact any more Fees of any
such (...) Naturalized than what are so allowed or (...) allowed, under the
penalty of two thousand pounds of Tobacco to every such person exacting or
extorting more than what is or shall be allowed by such Assembly (...) the Fees
as aforesaid, the said Forfeiture to be recovered in any Court of Record within
this Province by (...) of Debt Bill Plaint or Information wherein no Essoyn
Protection or Wager of Law to be allowed the one half to their Majesty's the
other half to the Party grieved.

An Act for the division and regulating of several County's within this
Province, and constituting a County by the Name of Prince-Georg's County within
the samn Province.
WHEREAS diverse of the Inhabitants of the County of St. Marys and Rent have by
their Petitions complained that through the Irregularities of their County's
being so ^ill ^^itnated that their Court Houses or chief places of Judicature
within their County's, cannot be Seated for the convenience of tho Inhabitants
and (...) to the same, therefore this present General Assembly have taken into
their Serious Consideration to Redress the Agrievances for the future, do
therefore humbly pray that it may be Enacted,

And BE IT ENACTED by the King and Queens most Excellent Majesty's by and with
the Advice and Consent of this present General Assembly and the Authority of
the same, that from and after the twenty third day of April next being St.
Georges Day, after the End of this present Session of Assembly, that the ^ounds
of St. Marys County shall begin at Point Look out, and extend it self up
Potomack River to the lower side of Buds Creek, and so over by a straight Line
drawn from the Head of the main Branch of the said Buds Creek to the Head of
Indian Creek in Patuxent River, and which falls into Patuxent River, including
all that Land lying between Patuxent and Potomack Rivers from the lower part of
the said two Creeks and Branches of Buds and Indian Creek by the Line
aforesaid, and Point Look, ou^ as aforesaid, and upon the upper side of the
said Indian Cree^ and (...) Creek shall the Bounds of Charles County begin
where the upper Bounds of (...) Marys ends, and extend it self upwards as far
as Mattawoman Creek and (...) and bounding on the said Branch by a straight
Line drawn from the head (...) to the ^ead of Swansons Creek in Patuxent River,
including all that land lying on the upper part of Buds Creek and Indian Creek
^ranches where St. Marys County (...) to the lower side of Mattawoman Creek and
Branch Swansons Creek and Branch, between Patuxent and Potomack Rivers as
aforesaid.

And Be It Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, by and with the Advice and (...)
aforesaid, that the Land from the upper side of Mattawoman and Swansons Creeks
and Branches extending upward bounded by Potomack on the West, and by Patuxent
River on the East, shall be and is hereby constituted, founded, and
Incorporated into a County of this Province, and shall be denominated called
and known by the name of Prince Georges County, and shall from and after the
said twenty third day of April next ensuing being o^ Georges Day as aforesaid,
have and enjoy all other Rights Benefits and Priviliges equal with the other
County's of this Province, such as sending Burgesses to Assembly's, having
County Courts, Sherrifs, Justices, and other Officers and Ministers requisite
and necessary and as are used in other County's of this Province.

And Be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, by and with the Advice and
Consent aforesaid, that the several and respective persons hereafter in this
Act mentioned shall and are hereby Authorized Required, and Empowered to call
to them the Surveyors of the County's and cause them to run out the Lines and
Bounds of the said County's of St. Mary's Charles and Prince Georges County's
as aforesaid, that is to say, from the heads of the Branches of Buds and
Mattawoman Creek to Indian and Swansons Creeks as aforesaid, that is to say,
Mr. Robert Mason and Mr. James Keech for St. Mary's County, Mr. John Bayn and
Mr. James Bigger for Charles County, Mr. William Hutchison and Mr. Thomas
Greenfield for Prince George's County, who are Required and Enjoined by this
Act at or before the said twenty third day of April as aforesaid to cause the
said two Lines kom the head of Buds Creek Branch to the head of Indian Creek
Branch, and from the head of Mattawoman Branch to Swansons Creek Branch, fully
to be marked and (...) by a double Line of marked Trees that the same may be
known and perceived by all persons desiring to know the same, and shall return
a Certificate of the due courses thereof, one to each County concerned, that is
to say St. Mary's, Charles and Prince Georges County's, and one more
Certificate to his Excellency the Governor and Council to be Recorded in the
Council Records and each County Courts Records aforesaid, under the penalty of
one thousand pound of Tobacco to each person hereby nominated and appointed
failing, and two thousand pounds of Tobacco to the Surveyor failing, one half
to the Informer, the other half to the Vestry of the Parish where the Offender,
dwells, to be recovered in any Court of Record within this Province, by Action
of Debt Hill Plaint or Information, wherein no Essoyn Protection or Wager of
Law to be allowed.

And Be It Further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, by and with the Advice
and Consent aforesaid, that the place for holding the County Court of St. Marys
County shall for ever hereafter be at the City of St. Mary's in the State House
of the said City, there formerly built at the cost and charge of this Province,
and in no other place of the said County whatsoever, the same State House being
hereby allotted and appointed by this present General Assembly to the County of
St. Mary's for holding and keeping their Courts in, and such other decent
Services as to the Justices of the same County in full Court shall be consented
and agreed to.

And Be It Further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, by and with the Advice
and Consent aforesaid, that from and after the said twenty third day of April
next after the end of this present Session of Assembly the Island of Kent shall
be added (...) and made part of Talbot County and deemed reputed and taken as
part thereof and that that part of Talbot County lying on the North side of
Corsei^a Creek running up the main Eastern Branch to the head thereof, and then
with a course drawn East, to the out side of this Province shall be the
Southerly Bounds of the County of Kent, and on the North by the County of
(...), any Law Statute or Usuage heretofore to the contrary notwithstanding.

And Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, by and, with the Advice
and Consent aforesaid, that the persons herein nominated are authorized and
empowered and hereby appointed some time before the twenty third day of April
^ext to (...) to them the Surveyor of the County of Talbot and cause the Bounds
of the said County's of Kent and Talbot to be run out and marked by a double
line of (...) to be marked between Kent and Talbot County's as aforesaid, that
is to (...) Mr. William Coursey for Talbot County, and Mr. Simon Willmore for
Kent County, who are hereby, authorized and required to see the same done and
performed at (...) before the time aforesaid, and return a certificate thereof
as aforesaid, under the penalty aforesaid,, to be recovered as aforesaid.

An Act of Repeal of all Laws heretofore made in this Province, and Confirming
all Laws made this General Assembly.
BE IT ENACTED by the King and Queens most Excellent Majesty's by and with the
Advice and Consent of this present General Assembly and the Authority of the
same, That those private Acts heretofore made at a General Assembly begun and
held at the City of St. Mary's the 15th. day of May Anno Domini 16^6. to wit,
An Act for Settling the Inheritance of the real Estate of Robert Cager, as also
his Personal Estate upon the Mayor, Recorder, Alderman and Common Council of
the City of St. Mary's and their Successors for the uses in the said Robert
Cagers Will mentioned, as also these other private Acts made at a General
Assembly begun and held at the City of St. Mary's the 20th. day of October Anno
Domini 1678. to wit, An Act for the Naturalization of Joshua Guibert, and one
other Act for the Naturalization of James Peane and Magdeline his Wife, Ann
Peane and Jacob Lookerman of this Province, and one other Act concerning the
securing a Plantation with it is Appurtnances to Mary Ward Executrix of the last
(...) and Testament of Matthew Ward of Talbot County deceased, to her and her
Heirs for ever. And that all other private Acts whatsoever heretofore made be
confirmed, (...), deemed, reputed, and taken to be in full Force, any Act or
Acts heretofore made to the contrary notwithstanding.

The following Laws were made at an Assembly held in October 1695.

An Act for laying an Imposition (...) Commodities Exported out of this
Province.
BE IT ENACTED by the Kings most Excellent Majesty by and with the Advice and
Consent of this present General Assembly and the Authority of the same. That
from and after the publication hereof no person or persons whatsoever
inhabiting or residing within this Province shall Export any Furrs or Skinns
(...) hereafter mentioned and expressed for England, or any his Majesty's
Plantations here in America, but what he she or they shall pay unto his Sacred
Majesty and his Successors to be employed toward the maintenance of a Free
School or Schools within this Province aforesaid, the several Duty's and
Impost: hereafter following; that is to say for every Bear Sin nine pence
Sterling, for a Beaver four pence per Skinn, for an Otter three pence per
Skinn, for wild Catts, Foxes, Minks, Fishers and Woolf Skinns one penny half
penny per Skinn, for Musk^^tt four pence per dozen, for Racoons three farthings
per Skinn, for Elk Skinns twelve pence per Skinn, for Deer Skinns dressed or
undrest four pence per Skinn, for young Bear and Cubb Skinns two pence per
Skinn; And that all non Residents from and after the publication aforesaid,
that shall export out of this Province aforesaid any furrs of Skinns herein
before mentioned and expressed for England or to any his Majesty's Plantations
as aforesaid, shall for every Skinn or Furrs by him exported of what nature or
quality soever being comprised within this Act, pay unto his Majesty or his
Successor for the use (...) the Duty by this Act appointed to be paid by
Persons inhabiting and residing within this Province as aforesaid the same
several Impositions to be (...) by the several (...) respective Naval Officers
within this Province which said Naval Officers shall once (...) tender an
Account of the said Imposition to the Governors Trustees and Visitors of the
aforesaid Freeschool or Schools for the time being who shall and are hereby
authorized and empowered to order and dispose of the same, to the Use (...) and
Purposes aforesaid. And to the end the several Impositions may be (...) and
duly paid without Fraud or Deceit.

BE IT ENACTED By the Authority aforesaid, that any person or persons
whatsoever exporting any Furrs or Skinns our of this Province, shall at or
before the shipping on Board of such Vessel in which such Skinns or Furrs shall
be exported as aforesaid, render upon Oath an Account of the nature quantity
and quality of the said Skinns by him her or them exported as aforesaid, and
whether the same be his her or their proper Goods and Commodity's, or the Goods
and Commodity's of any other person or persons, then whether he she or they to
whom they properly belong as aforesaid, be Inhabitants or Residents of this
Province aforesaid, which said Oath shall be exhibited by the several and
resp^ctive Naval Officers or their Deputy's thereunto especially appointed, and
if any person or persons whether Inhabitants or non Residents shall put on
Board any Ship or other Vessel any Furrs or Skinns for which he she or they
shall not have paid the Imposition aforesaid, or given good and sufficient
caution for the same to the Naval Officer of such Port and Place from whence
such Furrs and Skinns shall be Shipped as aforesaid, or to his Deputy for the
time being, and a Certificate from under the Hand of such Naval Officer or his
Deputy produce for the payment or caution by him given for payment of the
Imposition aforesaid, he she or they so offending shall forfeit and loose all
his her or their Furrs or Skinns so Shipped as aforesaid, one half thereof to
his said Majesty and his Successors for the use aforesaid, the other half to
him or them that shall inform and Sue for the same, to be recovered by action
of Debt, Bill, Plaint, or Information wherein no Essoyn, Protection, or wager
of Law shall be allowed. And that the Master of any such Ship or Vessel that
shall willingly or knowingly take on Board his said Ship or Vessel any Furrs or
Skinns as aforesaid, for which the party or party's Shiping the same shall not
produce a certifi^cate as aforesaid, being thereof Lawfully convict shall
forfeit and pay the Sum of five thousand pounds of Tobacco, one half thereof to
his Sacred Majesty and his Successors for the use aforesaid, the other half to
him or them that shall inform or Sue for the same to be recovered as aforesaid,
and that the several and respective Naval Officers of the several and
respect-Ports may and are hereby Authorized and Empowered when, and as often as
he or they shall think fit to enter into any Ship or Vessel trading to and from
this Province, or into any House, Warehouse, or other Building and open any
Trunck, Chest, Cask or Fardle, and search to make in any part or place of such
Ship or Vessel, Houses or Buildings as aforesaid, where such Naval Officer
shall suspect any such Furrs or Skinns to be as aforesaid, for which no Account
is given or Duty paid as aforesaid, and upon finding any such Furrs or Skinns
unqualified for exportation as aforesaid, them to seize and have condemned, as
by this Law ^s before directed.

And Be It Further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, by and with the Advice
and Consent aforesaid, that from and after the publication hereof as aforesaid,
all persons not being Inhabitants of this Province exporting out of the same
any beef pork or bacon shall pay unto his Sacred Majesty and his Successors for
the use in this Act before mentioned and expressed the several Imposts following,
(that is to say) for dried beef and bacon twelve pence the hundred weight, and
so proportionably for greater or lesser quantity's, and for beef or pork
undried twelve pence the Barrel, each Barrel to contain two hundred weight; And
that no undried beef and pork be exported out of this Province but in Cask as
aforesaid, which said several Impositions shall be collected and gathered by
the said several and respective Naval Officers who shall be accountable for the
same, and have full Authority to enter any Ship or other Vessel as aforesaid
and to make search for every such prohibited Goods as aforesaid, in such method
and manner as in this Act is before mentioned and expressed, and if any person
whatsoever being non Resident as aforesaid, shall put on Board any Ship or
Vessel any beef, bacon or pork for which he she or they shall not have a
certificate as aforesaid, or that shall Ship on Board any beef or pork undried,
not being in Cask as aforesaid, such person or persons (...) offending shall
forfeit and loose all his her or their meats so Shipped as aforesaid, one half
(...) said Majesty and his Successors to the use aforesaid, and the other (...)
informer to be recovered as aforesaid.

And every Master of a Ship or other Vessel that shall wittingly or knowingly
(...) on board his said Ship or Vessel any beef, bacon or pork contrary to
(...) and meaning of this Act, being thereof Legally Convict shall forfeit and
p^y the Sum of five thousand pounds a^ Tobocco, one half thereof to his said
Majesty or his Successors for tho use aforesaid, the other half to the Informer
or him (...) that shall Sue for the same, to be recovered as aforesaid.

And for the better understanding what persons shall be adjudged non Residents,
It is hereby Declared and Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that all persons
whatsoever tra^ing to and from this Province shall be adjudged, deemed, and
taken as non (...) having a Seated Plantation of fifty Acres at the least
whereas he (...) she (...) Family (if any) have resided, for and during the
space of (...), and that within the time and term of twelve Months before any
benefit (...) and by virtue of this Act, or that has, or hereafter shall have
an House (...) some Port or Town as his or their proper Freehold being forty
foot in length and twenty foot in breadth with two Brick Chimneys to the same,
wherein he she or they shall have resided for and during the space of one whole
Year as aforesaid, and that no such person or persons trading to and from this
Province having Houses in any Town or Port within the same, whereby he she or
they may (...) any Benefit or Freedom in this Act given to the Inhabitants
thereof, shall Have Hold or Enjoy, such Benefit and Privilege as aforesaid any
longer then he she or they or his her or their Family shall in such Port or
Town actualy inhabit and reside Provided allways that it is the true Intent and
Meaning of this Act, that no Person or Persons whatsoever as sha^^ trade
directly from England hither be construed, deemed, reputed, or taken as
Foreigners, but that all and every such person ^o trading directly (...)
England to this Province as aforesaid, have free Liberty in the Exportation o^
any Skinns or Furrs whatsoever, or in the Exportation of any meat dried or
undried equal with the Inhabitants of this Province, paying such Duty's and
impositions for the said several and respective Commodity's a^ this Law has
imposed upon the Inhabitants as aforesaid and no more.

And Be it also further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid by and with the
Advice and Consent aforesaid, that one former Act of this Province, Entitled an
Act for the laying an Imposition upon several Commodity's Exported out of this
Province, be and is hereby Repealed.

Provided allways, and it ^s the true intent and meaning of this Act, that no
person or persons whatsoever having in any part Transgressed against the
aforesaid Law during the time it was in force being as yet undiscovered or
unprosecuted for the same: shall have and receive any benefit or advantage by
the repeal thereof but that upon the prosecution or discovery of such person or
persons so having offended as aforesaid the said Laws shall be pleadable in any
Court within this Province, wherein any Plaint or Information shall be brought
against any such person or persons as aforesaid, and Judgment thereupon by the
Justices of the said Court given as the nature of the case shall require, in as
full and ample manner as though the said Law at the time of the prosecution
aforesaid were then actually in Force, any thing before mentioned or ^ecited to
the contrary hereof notwithstanding.

An Act for the securing Persons Rights to Town Lands.
WHEREAS it is represented to this General Assembly that several persons of
this Province and others, that have taken up Lotts i^ several Towns Lands laid
out and Surveyed for Towns according to the directions of several Laws of this
Province heretofore made, that is to say, one Law made at a General Assembly
held at the Ridge in Ann-Arundel County the 2d day of October 1683. entitled
An Act for Advancement of Trade and one other Act (...) General Assembly held
at the City of St. Marys the first day of April 1684. (...) and supplementary
(...) to the Act for advancement of Trade, and one other Act made at a General
Assembly held at the City of St. Marys the 27th, day of October, Entitled a
further additional Act to the Act for advancement of trade (...) Supplementary
Act of the same, as by the same several Acts of Assembly (...) upon Record in
the Secretary's Office of this Province may appear. And notwithstanding
several persons who relying ^ad depending upon the B^nefits and Privileges in
the said Laws granted, have taken up Lotts in the said Towns entered them and
paid for them or were ready to pay for them as the Law directed, and have built
and improved thereon, yet they are now threatened disquieted and disturbed by
the persons claiming Right to the said Lands upon pretense that because that
the said Acts are since repealed the Titles of such Takers up Builders and
Improvers are destroyed and die with the said Acts of Trade, contrary to the
true Sense of rational Construction of the same Laws or any other of like
nature, to prevent therefore and take off all such unnecessary Scruples and
Doubts thereof,

BE IT ENACTED by the Kings most Excellent Majesty by and with the Advice and
Consent of this present General Assembly and the Authority of the same, That
all and every person or persons that during the continuance of the before
mentioned Acts of Assembly did take up, pay for, or rendered or were ready to
pay for any Lot or Lotts of Land in any Town Land laid out and allotted for
Town Lands by the former Laws or any of them and the some Lot made due on try
thereof, and has built and improved upon the same, and followed the directions
of the above mentioned Laws, they the said person and persons so taking up
(...) building on and following the directions of the said Laws, their Heirs
and Assigns shall have hold and enjoy a good sure inde^eazable Estate of
Inheritance in Fee Simple of in and to every such Lot and Lotts of Land so
taken up and built on as aforesaid, according to the said Laws directions to
them and their Heirs for ever, as fully largely and amply to all intents and
purposes as if the said former Laws were still in force or had never been
Repealed.

Provided always, that where any person or persons that has so taken up built
and improved, and has not paid the price set upon the same, that every such
person is hereby enjoined to pay the said value of the said Lot to the Owner
and Claimer of the said Land upon demand without fraud or covin.

An Act for the Naturalization of Michael Curtis and others.

At an Assembly held at the Town of Annapolis the 30th. day of April in the
VIII. Year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord King William the III. of England
etc. Annoq* Domini 1696; (...) Enacted,

An Act impowering the Commissioners of the County of Kent to purchase three
Acres of Land whereon to build a Court House.

An Act for speedy Justice and Encouragement of Trade.
BE IT ENACTED by the Kings most Excellent Majesty by and with the Advice and
Consent of this present General Assembly and the Authority of the same, That
from and after the publication hereof, if any person or persons whatsoever be
owing to any person or persons residing within, or trading into this Province
any Sum or Sums of Tobacco or Money being above the Sum of two hundred pounds of
Tobacco (...) twelve Shillings, and not above the Sum of ten thousand pounds of
Tobacco of fifty pounds Sterling, being due by Bill, Bond, Note, Book or
Account, or by any public o^ County allowance, or any Officers (...) where
Execution is not given by Law for the same, and the party Creditor is desirous
of a speedy recovery of the same, he shall and may by virtue of this Law
recover the same in manner and form following, that is to say, when the Party
Plaintiff Sues out his Writ against the Defend^nt he shall deliver therewith a
true Copy of his Declaration against the Defendant to the Sherrif with the
Writ and if the Sherrif can serve the said Writ eight days before the day of
the return thereof, and at the time of serving the same shall deliver the
Defendant a Copy of the Declaration the said Defendant shall and is hereby
bound and obliged to come to a Trial with the Plaintiff upon the Cause at the
return of the said Writ without any Impar^ance or Reference whatsoever. And it
shall and may be Lawful to the Justices of the several County Courts before
whom such matters shall be brought, to award Judgment against such Defendant
upon his refusal or neglect to plead or answer, except in some very
extraordinary Cases or Accidents at the dis^^^tion of the Justices, and for the
ascertaining the allowances of the public Leavy of this Province and what each
person has therein, and for recovery of the (...) the Sherrif of every County
shall at the next County Court after the public Leavy or allowances comes to
his hands deliver a Copy thereof to the Clerk of the County Court signed by him
as a true Copy under the penalty of two thousand pounds of Tobacco for every
time such Sherrif shall fa^l therein, to the use of the Vestry of the parish
where the Sherrif dwells, and the Clerk shall make a true Copy thereof attested
by him and set up at the Court House, that all persons, having any allowance
therein may take knowledge thereof, and the other part shall Record, under the
penalty of two thousand pounds of Tobacco to the use aforesaid, which Fines and
Forfeitures shall and may be recovered in any County Co^wby the Vestry as
aforesaid, by Action of Debt Bill Plaint or information, where^^ no Essoyn
Prot^ction or Wager of Law shall be allowed.

An Act for the Naturalization of John Edgar of Somerset County:

Laws made in July 1696.
An Act for Sactifying and keeping Holy the Lords Day commonly called Sunday.
FORASMUCH as the Sanctifying and keeping Holy of the Lords Day commonly called
Sunday has been, (...) is esteemed by the present, all the Primitive
Christians and People to be a principal part of the Worship of Almighty God,
and the Honor which is due to his Holy Name.

BE IT ENACTED by the Kings most Excellent Majesty by and with the Advice and
Consent of this present General Assembly and the Authority of the same, that
from and after the publication of this Law, no person or persons whatsoever
within this Province shall work or do any bodily ^abour or Occupation upon the
Lords Day commonly called Sunday, nor shall command of wilfully suffer any of
his her or their Children, Servants of Slaves to work or labor as aforesaid,
(the works of absolute necessity and Mercy allways excepted) no^ shall suffer
or permit any of his her or their children, servants or slaves, or any other
under their Authority to abuse or profane the Lords Day as aforesaid, by
Drunkenness, Swearing, Gaming, bowling, Fishing, Hunting or any other Sports
Pastimes or Recreations whatsoever. And if any person or persons within this
Province from and after the publication hereof shall offend in all, or any of
the Premises, he she or they so offending shall forfeit and pay for every
offense the Sum of one hundred pounds of Tobacco to the use of the poor of the
parish where the said Offender or Offenders do dwell and reside, the said
offenses or any of them being done in view of any Justice of the Peace,
Magistrate or other head Officer of any County, City or Town Corporate within
this Province within their limits respectively, or being proved by the Oath of
two or more Witnesses, or by confession of the party offending before any such
Magistrate, Justice or head Officer within their several Limits respectively
wherein such offence^ shall be committed, to wick End every Justice, Magistrate
or other head Officer shall have power by this Act to administer Oath to such
Witness or Witnesses, any of which Sum or Sums of Tobacco so forfeited shall
and may be executed and leavyed by the Sherrif or Constable by Warrant to any
of them directed from any such Justice or Justices (...) the Peace, Magistrate
or other head Officer as aforesaid within their several (...), where all or any
of the said offenses shall be committed or done, by dis^ress or sale of the
Offenders Goods rendering the party the overplus^, all which Forfeitures shall
be to our Sovereign Lord the King his Heirs and Successors to the use
aforesaid, to be recovered in any Court of Record within this Province by any
person that will Sue for the same, by Bill Plaint or Information, wherein no
Essoyn Protection or Wager of Law to be allowed. And the said Justices,
Magistrates, head Officers, Sherrifs or Constables shall render an Account
thereof at the next Court to be holden for the respective County's, City or
Buroughs where the (...) offense shall be committed; And in default of (...)
distress the Sherrif, under Sherrif, or Constable are hereby Authorized and
Empowered to bring the party offending before the next Justice of (...), who is
hereby authorized and empowered to bind such Offender or Offenders over to the
next Court to be holden for the County, City or Borough respectively, and to
be during (...) interval of good behavior.

And Be It Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, by (...) with the Advice and
Consent aforesaid, that the Minister of each respective Church or Chapel of
this Province, do in pursuance of his Majesty's Royal Letter directed to the
Right Reverend Father in God Henry Lord Bishop of London, and Countersigned by
the Right Noble Prince Charles Duke of Shrewsbury their Majesty's principal
Secretary of State, bearing date the 13th. of February Anno Domini 1689. to be
communicated to the Provinces of Canterbury and (...) by himself or Clark read
four times a Year, all penal Laws of this Province made for punishment of Vice.
together with his said Majesty's Royal Letter within their several and
respective Parishes; on penalty of two thousand pounds of Tobacco to be
recovered as aforesaid, to the use aforesaid.

Be It likewise Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, by and with the Advice and
Consent aforesaid, that no Ordinary Keeper or any other Master or Mistress of a
Family from and after the time aforesaid, either directly or indirectly by any
Color or pretense whatsoever, (unless in cases of absolute necessity) shall or
may upon the Lords Day sell any strong liquor whatsoever to any person
whatsoever, or knowingly or wittingly suffer or permit in or about his her or
their House or Houses any tippling, drunkenness, gaining, exercise or pastime
whatsoever as aforesaid, being Covicted thereof by two sufficient Witnesses
shall forfeit the Sum of two thousand pounds of Tobacco, one moiety thereof to
our Sovereign Lord the King his Heirs and Successors to the use aforesaid, the
other half to him or them that shall Sue for the same to be recovered as
aforesaid, and if an Ordinary-keeper to loose his License.

And It is hereby further Enacted, that the several Clarks of the several
County Courts within this Province be obliged hereby to suffer and permit the
several Clarks of the several Vestry's to take Copy's of all and singular the
Acts of Assembly relating to Religion gratis, without taking or receiving any
Fee therefore, under penalty of two thousand pounds of Tobacco to such County
Clark refusing the same to the use aforesaid, to be recovered as aforesaid.

To his most Excellent MAJESTY,
Dread Sovereign,
FROM the Sincerity of our humble and Loyal Hearts, we offer to your Sacred
Person our most dutyful and sincere thanks for your Royal Care and Protection
to us, for your Majesty's Princely Zeal and Pious Care of our Mother the Church
of England, and extending your Royal Benediction to our Neighboring Colony
your Majesty's Subjects and Territory of Virginia, in your gracious Grant and
Charter for the propagation of the College or Place of universal Study in that
your Majesty's said Colony. In humble Contemplation whereof, and being Excited
by his present Excellency Francis Nicholson Esquire* your Majesty's Governor of
this your Province, his Zeal for your Majesty's Service, Pious Endeavors and
generous Offers for the propagation of Christianity and good Learning, herein
(...) beco^^ humble Suitors to your most Sacred Majesty to extend your Royal
(...) Favor to us your Majesty's Subjects of this Province represented in this
your Majesty's General Assembly thereof, that it may be Enacted,

And MAY IT BE ENACTED by the Kings most Excellent Majesty by and with the
Advice Prayer and Content of this present General Assembly and the Authority of
the same, That for the propagation of the Gospel, and the Education of the
Youth of this Province in good Letters and Manors, that a certain place or
places for a Free School or Schools, or place of Study of Latin^, Greek,
Writing and the like Consisting of one Master, one Usher, and one Writing
Master or Scribe to a School, and one hundred Scholars, more or less according
to the ability of the said Free School, may be made, erected, founded,
propagated and established under your Royal Patronage, And that the most
Reverend Father in God Thomas by Divine Providence Lord Archbishop of
Canterbury Primate and Metropolitan of all England, may be Chancellor of the
said Schools, and that to perpetuate the Memory of your Majesty it may be
called King William's School, and managed by certain Trustees to be chosen and
appointed by your Sacred Majesty, (to wit) as also by the following Trustees
nominated and appointed by this present general Assembly, that is to say, by
your Majesty's said Governor Francis Nicholson Esquire* The Honorable Sir Thomas
Laurence Barro-Knight, Colonel George Robotham, Colonel Charles Hutchins,
Colonel John Addison of your Majesty's Honorable Council of this Province; The
Reverend Divine Mr. Peregrine Cony and Mr. John (...), together with Robert
Smith, Kerielm Cheslodyn, Henry, Cour^ey, L^^ward Dorsey, Thomas Ennals, Thomas
Tasker, Francis Jenkins, William (...), Thomas Smith, Edward Boothby, John
Thompson and John Bigger Gentlemen or the greatest part or the Successors of
them, upon and in a certain place of this Province called Ann-Arundel Town upon
Seavern River, and to such other place or places as by the General Assembly of
this Province shall be thought convenient and sitting to be supported and
maintained in all time coming, and that your Majesty will for your Heirs and
Successors grant and give leave to the said Francis Nicholson Esquire* and Trustees
abovesaid, or the major part or longest Livers of them that they may be enabled
to take, hold and enjoy, and that they may be apt and capable in Law for
taking, holding and enjoying all Manors, of Lands, Tenements, Rent Services,
Rectory's, Portions, Annuity's, Pensions, with all other Inheritances,
Franchisses and Possession whatsoever Spiritual or Temporal to the value of
fifteen hundred pounds Sterling, and all other Goods, Chattels, Money and
Personal Estate whatsoever of the Gift of any persons whatsoever that is
willing to bestow them for the said use, or any other Gifts, Grants, Asignments
Legs eyes, or Appointment of the same, or of any of them or of any other Goods
whatsoever^ with this express intention and trust put in them, That the said
Francis Nicholson and other the Trustees aforesaid, or the major part or
longest livers of them, shall take and hold the premises and shall dispose of
the same and of the Rents, Revenues, and Profits thereof or of any of them;
only for defraying the Charges that shall be laid out in erecting and fitting
the Edifices of the said intended Freeschool or Schools as they or the major
part of them shall think most expedient, unto the said Freeschool or Schools
shall be actualy erected, founded, and established. (...) upon the Trust and
Intention, That as (...) the said Free School or Schools shall be erected and
founded: the said Francis Nicholson and other the Trustees above named, shall
from time to time and at all times hereafter apply all such Lands Tenements
Rents Annuitys Goods Chatels Profits Income or Advantages whatsoever Real or
Personal, or as much as shall not be laid out and bestowed upon building the
laid Freeschool or Schools as aforesaid as shall be hereafter expressed. And
that when the said Freeschool or Schools shall be so erected and established,
the said Francis Nicholson and other the Trustees above named or the major part
or longest litters of them shall Apply and Appropriate to the Use Benefit and
Maintenance out of the Revenues or Incom^ to the said Trustees to the use
aforesaid, the sum of One hundred and twenty Pounds Sterling per Annum for the
salary support and maintenance of the said first mentioned Freeschool, Master
Usher and (...), and the necessary Repairs and Improvements of the same, as to
the said Francis Nicholson and Trustees aforesaid, the major part or Survivors
of them shall seem expedient from time to time to ordain in the Premises, and
that for the uses and purposes aforesaid, they the said Francis Nicholson and
the Trustees aforesaid, the Survivor or the major part of them shall and may be
incorporated into a Body politic by the Name of the Rectors, Governors
Trustees, and Visitors of the Free-Schools of Maryland, with full power to
plead and be impleaded, to Sue and be Sued, to defend and be defended, to
answer and be answered in all and every Cause, Complaint and Action, real,
personal and mixed of whatsoever kind and nature it shall be, whatsoever Courts
and Places of Judicature belonging to your Majesty your heirs or Successors, or
by from or under your Royal Great or Authority, and that your Majesty will be
graciously pleased to give and grant your special License as far as your
Majesty sees expedient to the said Francis Nicholson Esquire* and the other
Trustees aforesaid, that they o r any of them, or that any person or persons
whatsoever after the said Free School or Schools is, or are so erected, founded
and established or before, may have power to give and grant, assign and
bequeath all or any manner of Lands, Tenements, Rents Services, Portions,
Annuity's, Pensions, Inheritances, Franchisses and Possessions whatsoever
Spiritual or Temporal to the value of fifteen hundred pounds Sterling per Annum
besides all Burdens, Reprizals and Reparations to them the said Francis
Nicholson and other the Governors, Trustees and Visitors of the said
Freeschools of Maryland, the major part or Survivors of them incorporate for
the uses aforesaid, to them and their Successors for ever.

And further, that the said Francis Nicholson and other the Governors.
Trustees and Visitors aforesaid the longest Livers and Successors of (...) be
the true, sole and undoubted Visitors, Trustees and Governors of the said
Freeschool or Schools in perpetual Succession for ever, to be continued in the
way and manner hereafter specified, with full and absolute Power, liberty and
authority in making and ordaining such Laws, Orders and Rules for the good
government of the said Freeschool or Schools, as to them the said Trustees,
Governor and Visitors aforesaid and their Successors, shall from time to time
according to the various occasions and circumstances seem most fit and
requisite, all which shall be observed by the Master, Usher, Tutors and Scholars
of the said School upon the penalty therein contained.

Provided notwithstanding, that the said Rules, Laws and Orders be no ways
contrary to your Majesty's Prerogative Royal, not to the Laws and Statutes of
your Kingdom of England or Province of Maryland aforesaid, or to the Canons and
Constitutions of the Church of England by Law Established, and that they the
said Governors, Visitors and Trustees aforesaid and their Successors, shall
for ever be Eighteen Men, and not exceeding Twenty in the whole, to be elected
and constituted in the way and manner hereafter specified, of which one
discreet and fit person that shall be called Rector of the said Freeschool and
Schools, and that from time to time and in all times coming the said Rector
shall exercise the said Office during one Year (Death and Legal Disability
excepted) and after till some others of the said Visitors and Governors of the
said School or Schools shall be duly elected, preferred and Sworn to the said
Office, and that from time to time, and at all times coming after the said Year
is expired; or after the death of the said Rector, the Year the Visitors or
Governors of the said School or Schools or the greatest part of them or their
Successors should have power to elect and nominate another discreet and fit
person from amongst themselves to be Rector of the said Freeschool or Schools,
and that he who is so elected, preferred and nominated into the place of Rector
as aforesaid shall have power to have, exercise and enjoy the said Office of
Rector for one whole Yea^ except before excepted then next ensuing and
thereafter until some other Rector of the said School or Schools, shall be duly
elected, preferred to and Sworn in the said Office, and to perpetuate the
Succession of the said Governors, Rectors and Visitors, and that as often as
one or more of the Governors or Visitors of the said School or Schools, shall
die or remove himself and family out of this Province into any other Country
for good and all; That then and so often, the Rector for the time being and the
other Visitors and Governors of the said Free School and Schools then surviving
and remaining within the Province or the major part of them, shall and may have
leave to Elect, Nominate and Choose one or more of the principal or better
sort of the Inhabitants of the said Province into the place or places of the
said Visitor and Governors so dead or removed, and so to fill up the number of
the Visitors and Governors for the said School and Schools, and that he and
they be elected and chosen shall take his and their Corporal Oath before the
Rector and other Visitors and Governors as aforesaid, or the major part of
them well and faithfully to execute the said Office, which Oath the Rector and
two or more of the said Visitors shall have power to administer, and that after
taking the said Oath he or they shall be of the number of the said Visitors and
Governors of the said School or Schools.

And further, that the said Rector for the time being by and with the Advice
and Consent of three or more of the said Governors and Visitors shall and may
from time to time and as often as need shall require and they see convenient
call and convocate the said Governors and Visitors together, to do, (...) and
(...) to such things as for the propagation, good and benefit of the said
Freeschool or Schools shall be ordained and established, and that the said
Governors and Visitors shall and may hold such their Court or Convocation in
(...) or such part thereof as to them shall seem convenient, and shall and may
from time to time punish any disorders, breaches, misdemeanors or (...) of any
Master, usher, scribe or scholars of any such freeschool or schools, against
any orders, (...) or Decrees of the said Governors and Visitors aforesaid, and
if they find cause to alter, displace and turn out any Master, (...) or (...)
of any such School or Schools, and put others in their Steads and Places as to
the said Rectors, Governors and Visitors of the said School or Schools, or the
major part of them shall seem convenient and fitting, and also that the said
Rectors, Governors and Visitors of the said Freeschool or Schools and their
Successors shall have one co^^on Seal which they make use of in whatsoever
cause and business belonging to them and their Successors relating to the said
Office of Rector, Governors and Visitors of the said Freeschool and Schools,
and that the said Governors and Visitors may have leave to break, change and
renew their said Seal from time to time at their pleasure as they shall see
most expedient.

And further, that it may please your Majesty to grant to the said Rector,
Governors and Visitors aforesaid of the said Freeschool or Schools aforesaid,
that as soon as they shall be enabled by any Gifts, Grants, Pensions, Donations
(...) Incom^ of any Manors, Lands, Tenements or other Estate whatsoever real
or personal exceeding the Sum of one hundred and twenty pounds per Annum,
allotted and allowed for support and reparations of the first streeschool at
Seavern as aforesaid* that then as they shall be enabled as aforesaid, the said
Rector Governors and Visitors shall proceed to erect found and build one other
Free School at the Town of Oxford on the Easter^n shoat of this Province in
Talbot County, or in such place of the same County as to the said Rector
Governors and Visitors aforesaid shall seem most expedient. And after the same
shall be built founded and established, to appropriate and apply to the said
second Free School out of the Treasure acr^wing to them for the Benefit and
Advantage of Free-Schools aforesaid over and above the One hundred and twenty
pounds per Year allowed as aforesaid to the first Free School. The like sum of
One hundred and twenty pounds per Year for the Benefit Advantage and Support of
such second Free School, and shall and may place a Master Usher and Scribe
thereon as in the other first Freeschool as aforesaid, and shall in all
respects be under the same benefits, privileges Injunctions and Restrictions as
the said first Freeschool, and also after the said second Freeschool is built
erected founded and furnished the said Rectors, Governors and Visitors shall
as fast as they shall be enabled as aforesaid, proceed to the erecting other
and more Freeschools in this Province, that is to say in every County of this
Province, at Present one Freeschool, and shall and may be empowered to
establish, constitute, enjoin and restrain to and under the fame benefits
advantages, injunctions and restrictions as aforesaid, and appropriate and
apply such and so much of the said Revennue not before disposed or ordained to
each Freeschool, as to them shall seem most convenient and expedient, not
exceeding one hundred and twenty pounds per Annum as aforesaid.

And Be it hereby Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that a supplementary Act
for Freeschools made at a Session of Assembly begun and held at the City of St.
Marys the (...). day of September 169^. be and is hereby utterly repealed and
made void.

An Act for keeping good Rules and Orders in the Port of Annapolis.

Laws made at a General Assembly held at the Port of Annapolis the 26th. Day of
May Anno Domini 1697.
An Act for the confirming Titles of Land given to the use of the Churches and
several Chapels within this Province, impowering the Commissioners of the
respective Countys and Vestrys of the respective Parishes to take up certain
parcels of Land for the use of the same.
WHEREAS several pious and well disposed persons have given and (...) the
respective Parishes whereto they do belong certain parcels of (...) for the use
and benefit of a Church and Churchyard, which said Land through the neglect of
the Vestry's whereby an Act of Assembly of this Province made at a Sessions of
Assembly held at the sort of Annapolis the twentieth day of July Anno Domini
1696. Entitled ^n Act for the (...) of Almighty God and Establishment of the
Protestant Religion, were thereby capacitated and empowered by the (...) of the
principal Vestryman and the rest of his ^^^thron Vestrymen of such Parish to
take and receive any Dead or Gift for the (...) notwithstanding the charges of
the respective Perishes (...) building Churches (...) Chapels thereon is like
to be lost, or the Title thereunto very disputable for want of such Deed of
gi^t or Conveyance Inroled and Recorded as by the Act of Assembly is required,
the first (...) or Granters thereof being dead, and the Heirs of such Donors or
Grantors either refusing to make over such Lend as aforesaid, or under age not
capable of so doing.

BE IT THEREFORE ENACTED by the Kings most Excellent Majesty by and with the
Advice and Consent of this present General Assembly and the Authority of the
same, that all such Lands as have formerly been given to the use of any Church
or Chapel, and for which the Donors or grantor, thereof in their Life times
having no^ given any Deed of Gift for the same, or otherwise refusing so to do,
and in confidence of whose promise the Perish have been at the charge of
erecting and building their Churches thereon, be and remain to the use of the
Parish for ever, against all Claims or pretensions of Claims made, or that
hereafter shall be made by such Donors or Grantors, or his or their Heirs
Executors or Assigns as firmly and absolutely as if the same had been made over
by Deed of Gift, Grant or otherwise inroled and Recorded as aforesaid.

And to the end it may be known what Lands have been so given to the use of any
Church or Chapel aforesaid and made over and confirmed by Deed of Gift or Grant
as aforesaid, the Grand Jury in (...) respective County within this Province
next after the publication of this Act shall have in charge to inquire by what
titles such Lands, whereupon the several Churches or Chapels aforesaid, within
the respective Parishes and in their (...) are held and to render an Account
there of to the Court, who are hereby empowered where any such Lands shall
appear to be given and not confirmed as aforesaid, in open Court to examine
Witnesses in perpetuam Rei Memoriam, and the same Cause to be Recorded in the
County Records, which shall be deemed, adjudged and taken in all Courts of
Record within this Province as sufficient proof of the Donation or Grant, as
also to the quantity of Acres given or granted as aforesaid, and in case it
shall appear upon such examination, that Lands have been given for the use of
any Church, Chapel and Churchyard as aforesaid, but the quantity thereof not
mentioned by the Donors or Grantors thereof as aforesaid, that then, and in
every such case, the Vestry of the respective Parish where such Gift or Grant
has been made, and the quantity not ascertained as aforesaid, may demand and
take of such Lands for the use of the Church and thereto (...) two Acres and no
more, which they shall cause to be Surveyed and slaked out, and make return of
two Certificates thereof, (...) of which must be Recorded in the County Court,
and the other in the high Court Chancery, there to be Registered in perpetuam
Rei Memoriam as aforesaid.

And Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, by and with the Advice
and Consent aforesaid, that where the Vestry of any Parish with (...) this
Province have, or shall think convenient to place either Church or Chapel of
Ease within their respective Parishes for the better convenience of their
Parishoners, but the Owner or Owners of such Land chosen out and appointed by
such Vestry as aforesaid, for the use of their Parish aforesaid, either
refusing to make sale thereof, o^ being unreasonable in his or their demands
for the same, or otherwise incapacitated by non age, non sa^e memaria, or being
beyond the Seas, that the^ and in every such case, the respective Vestry's of
the respective Parishes shall apply themselves to the Commissioners of the
County Court whereto they belong, upon whose application the said Commissioners
shall forthwith grant their Warrants to the Sherrif of their County thereby
requiring him at a certain day and time to be by them nominated and appointed
to impannel a Jury of substantial Freeholders next adjacent to the Land in quo^
aforesaid, which said Commissioners and Jury aforesaid shall proceed in all
things as by another Act of Assembly Entitled (an Act impowering the
Commissioners of the several and respective Countys to take up (...) purchase
Lands for their County Court Houses) they are directed not (...) two Acres, as
before in this Act is mentioned and expressed, any thing in this Act, or any
other (...) to the contrary notwithstanding.

An Act for the ^etter enabling Mrs. Catherine Herman Widow and Relict of
Colonel Casparus Augustine Herman deceased, to sell Land in the Port of
Annapolis according to the contract of her said deceased H^sband.

An Act impowering the Commissioners of each respective County to purchase
Lands for the use of their respective Courts.
WHEREAS it has been represented to this General Assembly that sundry Court
Houses within this Province, for the better convenience of their respective
Countys have been b^th upon Land whereunto the Countys could make no legal
Claim or Challenge, the Owners thereof either refusing to make sale, or
otherwise incapacitated of so doing by reason of non age, or being beyond the
Seas, which evil if not prevented will be very prejudicial to such Countys who
have already laid out and expended considerable Sums of Tobacco in erecting and
building such Court Houses aforesaid.

BE IT THEREFORE ENACTED by the Kings most Excellent Majesty by and with the
Advice and Consent of this present General Assembly and the Authority of the
same, that the Commissioners of the several and respective Countys within this
Province, whose Court Houses are erected that did otherwise (...) Courts on
Lands whereunto the respective County can say no just Title or (...) to as
aforesaid, do at or before the tenth day of April next ensuing meet at their
respective Court Houses (^f any) or otherwise at such usual place where Courts
are by them held as aforesaid, and there treat, contract and agree to and with
the Owner or Owners of such Lands whereon such Court House shall stand or
Courts be held as aforesaid, for such and so much Land in that part and place
where such court house stands or courts held as aforesaid as to them may seem
convenient for the use thereof not exceeding the quantity of three Acres, and
upon agreement with such person or persons or persons partys Owners as
aforesaid, or his or their Attorney or Attorneys by him or them empowered to
make sale thereof, to receive a Conveyance thereof in the Name of his Majesty
his Heirs and Successors, to the use of the County before mentioned, and the
same shall Record in the County Courts as by Act of Assembly is required, and
the Sum or Sums of Tobacco by them so contracted and agreed for to be Leavied
by an equal assessment on the respective Countys for and in satisfaction of the
purchases aforesaid. But in case such Owner or Owners, or his or their
Attorneys Lawfully empowered shall refuse to make sale thereof, or be
unreasonable in his or the^^ demands, or other wise incapacitated to make sale
thereof by reason either of nonage, non sane memoria or being beyond the Seas,
that then and in every such case, it shall and may be Lawful for the
Commissioners of the said several and respective Countys by virtue of this Act
to issue ou^ Warrants to the respective Sherrifs thereby commanding and
impowering them to impannel a Jury of substantial (...) with in their
respective Precincts at a certain day and time to appear before (...)
Commissioners on the Lands aforesaid, which Jury upon their Oaths (...) by the
said commissioners are to inquire into the true value of such and so much of
the said Land as by the Commissioners they shall be (...) three Acres
aforesaid, and to assess such damage and recompense for the same as they shall
think (...) to be awarded to the Owners and others on their behalf entrusted,
and the return of the Jury to be by them made in two parts, one whereof as to
be (...) his Excellency the Governor and Council of this Province for the
(...) being, (...) other to be Recorded within the several and respective
County Court whereas they properly belong, shall be a perpetual (...) the Claim
or (...) of Claim made, or that shall hereafter be made to the whole or any
part thereof by the owner or owners, or his or their hears (...) for ever. And
the damage or recompense by the several and respective Jury's awarded for and
^n satisfaction of such Lands by them inquired of to the Owner or Owners
thereof as aforesaid, shall be by the Commissioners of the respective Countys
for the time being when thereunto required by such Owner or Owners (...)
Lawfully entitled to the damage thereof, to be leavied and assessed (...) and
(...) as in this Act is before mentioned and expressed. And so the better
ascertaining the bounds of the said Land so purchased o^ taken up (...) the use
of the Countys (...) shall and may be Lawful to and for the said Commissioners
who are also (...) empowered and required to issue our Warrants to his
Majesty's Surveyors of the respective (...) whereto they belong to appear at
such day and place to be by the^^ appointed (...) aforesaid, then and there to
survey and lay out in the (...) of the (...) aforesaid such Lands by them taken
up for the use of the County aforesaid, and the same at the end of each Angle
shall bound with a good and substantial (...), or other durable (...) foot
under ground at the ^east, and ^ive foot (...), as also such and so many Posts
within the Angles, aforesaid, as may be (...) from one to the other, which
Posts when and as often as they shall decay the Commissioners shall cause new
ones to be affixed in their places at the County Charge for ever, and the
respective Surveyors return two Certificates of such Surveys (...) aforesaid
with fair Platts of the same, one whereof to his Excellency the Governor and
Council as aforesaid, the other to be Recorded and kept (...) the County Court
as aforesaid, any Law Statute Custom or Usuage to the contrary notwithstanding.

And Be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, by and with the Advice and
Consent aforesaid, that the Lot whereon, the Court House of Dorchester County
now stands, together with the Tenements thereon being formerly taken up and
purchased as Town Land, but the Records of those Lotts taken up being other
imbezled or casually lost, be and remain to the use of the County for over us
firmly and absolutely as if the same had been actually conveyed by the true
Owner or Owners thereof, any thing herein contained to the contrary
notwithstanding.

An Act directing and appointing to what use the several Rooms in the
State-House in the Town and Port of Annapolis shall be applied to.

An Act for the Naturalization of Stephen Francis an Italian, and George
Sleycomb a German born.

These following Laws were made the 3 d. day of April School. viz.
An Act vesting two Tracts of Land is John Gadsby sold him by George Norman.

An Act ascertaining the ^ounds and Limitts of Ann-Arundel and Baltemore
Countys.
WHEREAS by an Ordinance of Assembly An^o Domini 1696. (...) appointed Capt'
Richard Hill, Major John Hammond and Major Edward Dorsey of Ann-Arundel County
Gent' also Mr. George Ashman, Mr. Richard Crumwel and Capt' Thomas Hammond of
Baltemore County' (...) with the Surveyor, for the better division of the said
County's of Ann-Arundel and Baltemore, it is humbly set forth by Thomas
Richardson Surveyor, and the greatest part of the said Ge^^ appointed, that in
obedience to the said Ordinance they have made a perfect division of the said
County in manner and form following, beginning (...) Trees, viz. a white Oak, a
red Oak and (...) Tree standing about a Mile and a quarter to the Southward of
(...) on the West side of (...) Bay, the marked red Oak on the right (...) for
Baltemore County, the Chestnut Tree on the left Hand for Ann-Arundel; (...)
white Oak in the middle, they standing near a Marsh and a Pond, (...) thence
West until it cross the Road from the Mountains of the mouth of (...) River to
Richard Beards Mill, then continuing, Westward with the said (...) to William
Hawkins path to two marked Trees the one for Ann-Arundel County and the other
for Baltemore County, thence (...) along the said (...) of John Locketts (...)
to two Trees for the end and (...) aforesaid, then (...) the Road by a Line
drawn West to William Stad^s path to two marked Trees as aforesaid, thence
continuing West between the (...) of Maggaty and Potapsco Rivers, until it come
to a Mountain of white (...) Rock, still continuing West to a Road going to
Potapsco to Peter Bonds to two marked Trees as aforesaid for the end and
purpose aforesaid, thence continuing West to the main Road to Potapsco Ferry to
two marked Pines standing near the ready Branch written at large on the North
side of the said Trees Baltemore County, on the South side Ann-Arundel County;
from thence with a Line drawn (...) North West to Elk Ridg^^ Road to two marked
Trees for the end and purposes aforesaid thence continuing the same course of
West North West to Patuxent River, and so up the said River to the Extent
thereof for the Bounds of Baltemore County.

BE IT ENACTED by the Kings most Excellent Majesty by and with the Advice and
Consent of this present General Assembly and the Authority of the same, That
from and after the publication hereof, that all that Tract of Land lying on the
North side of the said division Lines, Trees and Land Marks before expressed,
with all the Inhabitants up the Bay, from the said Lines, Trees and Land Marks
be always taken, reputed and be in Ba^temore County, and, that all the Land and
Inhabitants from the said division Lines, Trees and Land Marks on the South
side of the said Lines Trees and Land Marks to the ancient extent of
Ann-Arundel County be always taken, reputed and be in Ann-Arundel County, any
Law Custom or Usuage to the contrary notwithstanding.

An Act for the Naturalization of Peter Dwdee a Frenchman in Somerset County.

An Act for the better division of St. Paul's and Shrewsbury Parishes.

An Act for Enabling Mrs. Elizabeth Norman Executri^^ George Norman to make
over two Tracts of Lord to John Gadsby and his Heirs for ever.

An Act impowering the Commissioners of Caecil County to hold a Court this
present year in April.

Laws made at Annapolis the 20th. day of October School.
An Act for ascertaining the bounds of a certain Tract of Land to the use of
the Nanticoke Indians, so long as they shall occupy and live upon the (...).
IT Being most just that the Indians, the ancient Inhabitants of this Province,
should have a (...) dwelling place in this their Native Country, free from the
(...) and oppressions of the English, more especially the Nanticok^ Indians in
Dorchester County, who for these many years have lived in peace and concord
with the English, and in all matters in obedience to the Government of this
Province, we the Burges^es and Delegates of this present General Assembly
therefore do p^ay that it may be Enacted,

And BE IT ENACTED by the Kings most Excellent Majesty by and with the Advice
and Consent of this present General Assembly and the Authority of the ^ame,
that all the Land lying and being in Dorchester County, and on the North side
of Nanticoke River, (...) and bounded as follows, beginning at the mouth of
Chickacoan Creek and (...) up the said Creek bounded therewith to the head of
the main branc^ of the same, and from the head of the said main branch with a
line drawn to the head of a branch issuing out of the northwest (...) of
Nanticoke known by the name of Francis Andersons branch, and from the head of
the said branch down the said Andersons branch, bounded therewith to the mouth
of the same, where it falls into the said Northwest Fork, and from thence down
the aforesaid Northwest Fork bounded therewith to the main River, and so down
the main River to the mouth of the aforesaid Chickacoan Creek, shall be unto
Panquash and Annotoughquan and the people under their Government or charge and
their heirs and successors for ever, any ^^aw usuage custom or grant to the
contrary in any wi^e notwithstanding, to be held of the Lord Proprietary and
his Heirs Lords Proprietary's, or Lords Proprietarys of this Province; under
the yearly Rent of one Beaver Skinn to be paid to his said Lordship and his
Heirs as other Rents in this Province by the English used to be pa^^.

Provided allways that it shall and may be Lawful for any person or persons
that has formerly taken up and obtained any Grants (...) the Lord Baltemore
for any Tracts or parcels of Land within the aforesaid (...) upon the Indians
deserting or leaving the said Land, to enter occupy and enjoy the (...), any
thing in this Law to the contrary notwithstanding

And Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that it may not, nor
shall be Lawful for the Lord Baltemore to ask, have or demand any Rent or
Service for any of the said Tracts or Dividends as may or has been (...) up at
aforesaid within the said Indian boundarys until such time that the takers up
or owners as aforesaid do enjoy or possess the same, any Law usuage or custom
to the contrary notwithstanding.

An Act impowering Trustees to purchase Land adjoining to the Fountains of
(...) Waters called the Cool Springs.
WHEREAS by the Favor of Almighty God there has been of late a discovery made
of Fountains of healing Waters called the Cool Springs lying in St. Marys
County, whose healing quality has been experienced by many import^nt and
diseased persons to their great help (...) for that so great Blessing, Benefits
and Gifts of Almighty God may not be neglected, but a right use thereof made,
it is thought most fitting and convenient, that a particular care should be
(...) had of all such poor impotent persons as repair thither for care, and for
that purpose, or other such charitable or pious uses, a small Tract o^ parcel
of Land near adjoining to the said Fountains may be purchased, thereon to build
and erect Houses for the entertainment of the said poor, and Fuel for Firing
and other such necessary's for their Relief, the (...) of this present General
Assembly therefore pray it may be Enacted,

And BE IT ENACTED by the (...) most Excellent Majesty by and with the Advice
and Consent of this resent General Assembly and the Authority of the ^ame, That
(...) hereafter named may and (...) Trustees (...) of Maryland to buy and
purchase in the name of our Sovereign Lord the King his Heirs or Successors for
pious and charitable uses fifty Acres of Land adjoining to and in which the
said Fountains shall be included.

And Be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that Colonel John Courts, Thomas
Brooks Esquire* Capt James Keetch, Capt' Jacob Moreland of St. Marys County, and
Capt Phillip Hoskins, Capt John Hayne and Mr. Benjamin Hall of Charles County,
or any three of them be and are hereby empowered authorized and appointed
Trustees as aforesaid, with sufficient power given them, whereby to ^nable them
to treat with, buy and purchase in the name of our Sovereign Lord the King his
Heirs or Successors for ever as aforesaid, to the uses aforesaid fifty (...) of
Land or under (...) as aforesaid, and (...) to the Owners thereof.

And Be it further Enacted by the Authority (...), that the said Trusting
herein nominated are hereby empowered (...) the tenth day of April next ensuing
to meet together upon the aforesaid (...), and then and there treat with and
agree with the Owners and all (...) in the same, and buy and purchase of such
Owners and persons (...) in the same Lands fifty Acres thereof or under near
adjoining (...) and in (...) the said Fountains and Springs shall be included
(...) aforesaid.

And Be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that if the person or persons
(...) whom the right or property of the (...) it, shall refuse to make sale
thereof, (...) any other Legal Impedi^^ent shall disable him or them from
making a good sure (...) and indefeazable Right and Ti^le to the said fifty
Acres of Land or under, that then the said Trustees before mentioned shall call
to their asistance (...) Sherrif of St. Marys County aforesaid, who is hereby
authorized, and empowered to Summon and Impannel r^^olve good and lawful Men
Freeholders of St. Marys county aforesaid, who upon their oaths shall value the
said fifty acres of (...) or under according as it shall be surveyed or laid
out to which purpose the said trusties are hereby authorized and empowered to
call to their asistance the Kings Surveyor of St. Marys County aforesaid, who
is hereby likewise authorized and empowered to survey, and lay out fifty Acres
of Land or under as aforesaid, according to the direction of the Trustees
before nominated.

And Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that for what Sum of
Money or Tobacco the said Trustees shall agree to be paid for the purchase of
the said fifty Acres of Land or under, shall by an equal ass^i^ment upon the
Inhabitants o^ this Province be leavy'd and paid to the owners or other per
sons by them appointed to (...) the same, and that all and whatsoever the said
Colonel John Courts, Thomas Brook Esquire* Capt' James (...), Capt' Jacob Moreland,
Capt' Phillip Hoskins, Capt' John Bayne and Mr. Benjamin Hall Trustees as
aforesaid, o^ any three of them shall execute and do in pursuance thereof shall
and is hereby ratified, confirmed and approved of, and shall for ever hereafter
be taken and deemed to be sufficient and valu^ in Law, and that the said
Trustees be and are hereby indempnified and saved (...) of and from all manner
of Suits and Damages that may at any time hereafter arise, for or by means of
any Act or Acts by them to be done in and about the premises, any Law usuage
or custom to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

An Act to entitle William Coutsey and Elizabeth his Wife, on the Survivor of
them to (...) and acknowledge such Land as were le^t by Colonel Vincent Low to
be sold for the payment of his just Debts.

An Act prohibiting Trade with the Indians for ^^y Flesh (...) Except Deer and
Wild Fow^e.
WHEREAS sundry complaints have been made by several inhabitants of this
Province, alleging that the Indians under pretense of (...) wild Hoggs, do
hunt and drive away their ^ame Hoggs and ^^attle, and do moreover sell and
trade with the Inhabitants of this Province, and likewise with foreigners and
Strangers for Beef and Pork.

BE IT ENACTED by the Kings most Excellent Majesty by and with the Advice and
Consent of this present General Assembly and the Authority of the same that no
person or persons whatsoever, either foreigner or Inhabitant ^^all buy trade or
barter with any Indian or Indians whomsoever for any flesh dead or living,
except Veni^on, wild Fowl or Vermins, upon penalty of five thousand pounds of
Tobacco, the one Moiety to the King for the Support of Government, the other
moiety to the Informer or him or the (...) shall Sue for the same, the said
Fin^ to be recovered in any Court of Record within this Province, wherein no
Essoyn Protection or Wager of Law to be allowed.

An Act for the better administration of Justice in the County Courts of this
Province.
FOR the administration of Justice (...) Regulation of the County Courts. BE IT
ENACTED by (...) Excellent Majesty by and with the Advice and Consent of this
present General Assembly and the Authority of the same that the Statute Books
of England to this time, and (...) Justice of the Peace be bought by the
Justices of the Peace or Commissioners of the several County Courts at the
charge of the respective County's to be ^^pt to their ^everal County Courts,
that the Justices and Officers and others of the said Courts may have Recourse
to the same as they shall have occasion, and that the Justices of the said
Courts do purchase and procure the same by the first day of April next ensuing,

And Be it also Enact by the Authority aforesaid, that (...) Commissioners of
each respective County Courts shall and may and are hereby empowered from time
to time, and as often as to them shall seem convenient to make and ordain such
necessary Rules and Orders for the well Governing and better Regulating the
said County Courts and the Officers to the same belonging, and Suitors to the
same, as to them in their discretion shall seem requisite, and under such (...)
as they shall th^nk fit, not exceeding one hundred pounds of Tobacco for any
one offense, all which Fines to be employed to the use of the poor of each
respective County, which Rules and Orders so by them to be made and ordained
shall be fairly transcribed by their several County Clarks and at every the
County Courts set up (...) the Court House Door that all persons may view and
peruse the same, and regula^^ themselves accordingly.

And (...) by the Authority aforesaid, that where any Judgment is had in any
(...) Court for any matter or thing whatsoever, and after such Judgment is had
(...) the party against whom the same is had many times flies into (...) of the
jurisdiction of the said Court, it shall and may be lawful ^he (...) procure a
Certificate from the said Justices of such party's flying, and (...) the
Justices of the Provincial Court shall award Execution (...)

(...) Williams Administrator de bo^is non Admini^^^^s of Joseph Williams late
of Baltemore County deceased, (...) fell a certain Tract of Land in Caecil
County on (...) River (...) Land of (...) Joseph Williams called by the name of
Tibauld, and containing about three hundred (...) for the payment of his debts,
pursuant to the Will of the said Joseph.

An Act for transferring over unto Major William Whittington the debts due from
the Officers of Somerset County by virtue of an Act for raising a supply
toward the defraying the public Charge of this Province.

An Act ascertaining w^^t damages shall be allowed upon protested Bills of
Exchange.
BE IT ENACTED by the Kings most Excellent Majesty by and with the Advice and
Consent of this present General Assembly and the Authority of the ^ame, that
there shall not be allowed to any person or persons whatsoever having just
cause to implead any person or persons whatsoever, living or residing within
the Province, in any Court within this Province upon any Bill of Exchange drawn
for any Sum or Sums of (...) whatsoever, payable in England or else where, and
brought in here protested (...) than the Sum of twenty pounds per Cent' damages
over and above the (...) for and Recovered, together with ordinary Cost of
Suit, any Law Statute Usuage or (...) to the contrary notwithstanding.

An Act for Restraining the Extortions of Sherrifs, Subsherrifs and deputy
Commissarys.
WHEREAS there has diverse great Complaints from several Party's of this
Province to this General Assembly, of several Sherrifs, Subsherrif^ and deputy
Commissary's of their exacting and extorting great Sums of Tobacco above their
due, and Lawful Fees ascertained by the Act of Assembly of this Province from
several of the Inhabitants of this Province, and though the Laws of this Province
have inflicted a severe penalty upon any Officer that shall charge and receive
more than his due Fees, yet the said Officers have most cunningly and (...)
evaded the said Laws by taking Bills and Writings Obligatory without ever
delivering any account signed under their hand as the law directs, so that the
Party grieved cannot sufficiently prove the said Extortions, and so is left
without Remedy, for prevention whereof,

BE IT ENACTED by the Kings most Excellent Majesty by and with the Advice and
Consent of this present General Assembly and the Authority of the same, that no
Sherrif, Subsherrif or deputy Commissary within (...) after the publication of
this Act in their several and respective County (...) they dwell, shall take
any Bond, Bill or any other Writing (...) person or persons upon any pretense
whatsoever without endorsing (...) the back of the said Bond, Bill or Writing
Obligatory for which (...) passed, and if any Sherrif, Subsherrif or deputy
Commissary within this Province, shall (...) with (...) taking (...) Office to
(...) for limitation of Actions (...)

Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that the (...) Officers
remain in Office shall not be reckoned or accounted in the (...), and that
whereas it has been the practice of several Sherrifs of this Province where a
person has been in prison at the Suit of two or three several persons, or has
lain for the satisfaction of two or more several Judgments for the Sherrif to
charge twenty a day for each Action or Judgment, for prevention whereof.

Be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that if any Sherrif after the
publication of this Act shall exact or take any more than twenty pounds of
Tobacco per day of any Prisoner, though he lies for the satisfaction of several
Judgments, (...) shall be liable to the pains and penaltys of a certain Act of
Assembly for Settling Officers Fees.

An Act for Amerciaments in the Provincial and County Courts.
WHEREAS many Suits are arisen upon ^ivelous occasions by l^^igi-persons, for
prevention whereof or the future,

BE IT ENACTED by the Kings most Excellent Majesty by and with the Advice and
Consent of this present General Assembly and the Authority of the same, that
all persons whatsoever that are east in any Cause, be they Plaintiff or
Defendant, shall be amerced besides the damage and costs in the Provincial
Court fifty pounds of Tobacco, to be employed as the Governor and Council
shall think fit, and in the County Courts thirty pounds of Tobacco, to be
employed and disposed of toward defraying the County Charge in such manner as
the Commissioners of each respective County shall think sit and for the due
collecting thereof

Be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid that the Clark of the Provincial
Court and the several County Courts keep an exact account of the (...); and
deliver or send the same to the several Sherrifs of the particular Countys, who
are hereby required to collect the same with the Leavy, and are accordingly
empowered for default of payment to make distress, and commanded not to return
any Arrears, except in cases of Executors and Administrators, who cannot pay
without Orders.

And Be it further Enacted, that the Clark of the respective Courts give unto
the chief Judge of such Court a L^st of the Amerciaments that Court imposed.

An Act for stay of Executions after the tenth day of April Yearly.
WHEREAS many of the Inhabitants of this Province are, and have been
exceedingly grieved and burthen^d by Executions laid upon them for Tobacco in
Summer time, when it is not possible for them to procure T^baco for the payment
and satisfaction of their Creditors, by means whereof they are oftentimes kept
in prison a long time, and thereby disabled from making and tending their
cropps, to the great prejudice if not ruin of many the Inhabitants of this
Province, being thereby left destitute of any means to satisfy their
Creditors, for (...) whereof for the future,

BE IT ENACTED by the Kings most Excellent Majesty by and with the (...) and
Consent of this present General Assembly and the Authority of the (...), That
after the tenth day of April in any year, no Execution shall issue out of any
Courts of this Province against the Body or Goods of any person or persons
inhabiting in this Province till the tenth day of October next, or until the
tenth day of October i^ any year during the continuance of this Act for any
debt (...) day of October the (...) Certificate under the hand of the same,
(...) before (...) the said Judgment shall be confessed, and such (...) be a
sufficient Supersedeas to the Sherrif to forbear serving Execution upon the
Body or Goods of the person so obtaining such Certificate, and if the party be
taken in Execution before such Certificate be produced, that then such
certificate being obtained afterward as aforesaid shall be a sufficient
Supersedeas to the Sherrif for the Release of such person out of Prison upon
the Execution, the party paying or giving Security to such Sherrif for his due
Fees for that Imprisonment, and the Justice or Justices before whom such
Judgment shall be confessed as aforesaid shall return the Judgment so confessed
unto the Clark of that respective Court where the (...) Judgment was obtained,
to be entered upon Record, for which entry the Clark shall receive as a Fee five
pounds of Tobacco and no more and that after the said tenth day of October it
shall be Lawful to take out Execution upon the Judgment conf^^t as aforesaid
without any fieri Facias or any other delay against either the Principle or the
Securetys, or all o^ either of them for such Judgment so confessed as aforesaid,
any Law usuage or custom ^o the contrary many wise notwithstanding,

An Act Impowering the Vestrymen etc. to assess their Parishoners for finishing
and reparing of Churches.
WHEREAS by an Act made at a Session of Assembly begun and held at the Port of
Annapolis the ninth day of July in the Year of our Lord 1696 in^ituled An Act
for the Service of Almighty God and the Establishment of the (...) Religion
within this Province, amongst other things is contained, in the sixth Article
that the several Vestrymen of each respective Parish shall within twelve Months
after the publication of this Act provide at the charge of the parish fair
Regist^r Books of paper or parchment, the which the said Registor shall keep
and therein shall Register and fairly enter in writing the publication of all
Marriages, Births of Children, Baptisms burials etc.

And further in the said Clause it is Enacted, that if the Vestrymen aforesaid
shall sail in providing such a Book as aforesaid, within the time aforesaid,
they shall forfeit five hundred pounds of Tobacco each Vestryman (the Minister
excepted) etc. and notwithstanding ways prescribed how the said Vestry men
should assess their Parishes for the purchasing of the said Register Books.

And further it is said in the twelfth Article of the aforesaid Act, Be it
Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that where there is an Incumbent upon the
Benefice and officiate in no other place, the Vestrymen of the said Parish
shall not under color or pretext of finishing the said Church or keeping the
same in Repair, with hold or detain from the said Incumbent any part of the
forty pounds of Tobacco per Pole under any pretext whatsoever, except what is
by this Act before appointed. But forasmuch as most of the Churches in this
Province are either not wholly finished or out of Repair, and no Rule is
provided (by the aforesaid Act) by which the several Parish Churches shall be
finished and kept in Repair, (...) the end therefore that the said Vestrys may
be supplied with such Sum or Sums (...) Tobaco as shall be (...) and necessary
to purchase writing Books and other necessary and useful Books for their better
direction and g^^de in their Proceedings, (...) for repairing their Churches or
other Parochial Charges, it is prayed tha^ it may be Enacted

And BE IT ENACTED by the Kings most Excellent Majesty by and with the Advice
and Consent of this present General Assembly and the Authority (...) of the
same, that (...) Repairs (...) shall apply themselves (...) the (...) of the
laying the County Leavy, who up (...) shall and are hereby empowered to raise
by a^ (...) Inhabitants of such respective parish such (...) shall be adjudged
necessary to supply the (...) County leavy, not exceeding the Sum of (...),
which Sum so raised (...) be collected and gathered by the (...) County, and
paid to the Vestrymen of such respective Parish or (...) at the next County
Leavy or sooner (...) they can give a true account to the said Justices how and
for what they have said out and bestowed the said Tobacco so raised, any Law
Statute or Usuage to the contrary in any (...) notwithstanding

An Act for Appeals and regulating Writts of Error.
FORASMUCH as the Liberty of Appeals and Writts of Error from the judgment of
the Provincial and County Courts of this Province is found to be of great use
and benefit to the good people thereof.

BE IT HEREFORE ENACTED by the Kings most Excellent Majesty by and with the
Advice and Consent of this present General Assembly and the Authority of the
same, that no Execution upon any Judgment obtained either in Provincial or
County Courts, or other inferior Courts of Record within this Province shall
be stayed or delayed, or any Supersedeas upon such Judgment granted or issued
(...) upon Appeal or Writ of Error from any such Court or Courts of Record as
aforesaid to the Court before whom such Appeal ought to be brought, or before
whom such Writ of Error ought to be heard, tried and determined, unless such
person or persons in whose name such Appeal or Writ of Error shall be made or
brought aforesaid, or some other in his her or their behalf shall immediately
upon making such Appeal or Suing out such Writ of Error as aforesaid, enter
into Bond with sufficient Suretys, such as the Justices of the Court by whom
Judgment shall be given as aforesaid or the keeper of the Seal for the time
being, to whom application shall be made for such Writ of Error as aforesaid
shall approve of in double the Sum recovered by such Judgment obtained as
aforesaid, with condition that if the party Appellant, or party Suing out such
Writ of Error as aforesaid, shall not pursue the directions in this Act
hereafter mentioned at the next Court ensuing before whom such Appeal or Writ
of Error to be tried as aforesaid, and prosecute the same with effect; and also
satis fie and pay to the said party his Heirs Executors Administrators or
Assigns in case the said Judgment should be affirmed, as well all and singular
the Debts, Damages and Cost adjudged by the Court before whom such Action from
whose Judgment such Appeal shall be made, or thereon a Writ of Error brought
as aforesaid, shall have been originally tried; as also all costs and damages
that shall be awarded at the Court before whom such Appeal or Writ of Error
shall be heard, tried and determined as aforesaid, then the said Bond to be and
remain in full force and virtue.

And Be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, by and with the Advice and
Consent aforesaid, that no person or persons whatsoever against whom any
Judgment shall be given in any County Court within this Province, wherein the
debt or damages for which such Judgment shall be given, shall have any Appeal
or Writ of Error from the said County Courts or other inferior Court of
Record to the Provincial Courts wherein the debt or damages recovered do not
amount unto the Sum of six pounds Sterling, or twelve hundred pounds of
Tobacco, and that no person or persons whatsoever against whom any Judgment
shall be given in the Provincial Court of this Province, wherein the debt or
damages recovered shall not exceed the Sum of fifty pounds Sterling or ten
thousand pounds of Tobacco shall be allowed any Appeal or Writ of Error to the
Governor and Council of this Province, but the Judgment of the Justices of the
said Courts by whom such Judgments shall be given as aforesaid, and thereupon
entered shall be definitive for any such debt and damages as aforesaid, any Law
usuage or custom to the contrary notwithstanding.

And Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, by and with the Advice
and (...) of Appeals and (...) and (...) as is hereafter mentioned and (...)
out a Writ^ of Error (...) of the full proceedings of the said Court (...) or
against those Judgment a Writ of Error (...) the Hand of the Clerk of the said
Court (...) to be transmitted to the Court before who (...) Writ of (...) or
ought to be heard, tried and determined a (...) also in the (...) Court file in
writing according to the (...) error in the proceedings as the Plaintiff in the
Writ of (...), or such causes (...) reasons as he or they had for making the
(...) Appeal, or suing out such Writ of Error as aforesaid; upon which (...)
Court to whom such Appeal shall be made, or before whom (...) shall be brought
are aforesaid, shall proceed to give Judgment.

And Be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, by and with the Advice and (...)
Appeals made in manner aforesaid, shall be admitted and (...) Court to whom
such Appeal shall be made as aforesaid (...) Writ of Error, and that every
Clerk of a Court shall at time of (...) that Court to which they respectively
belong, and when any Appeal (...) demanded to enter a Memorandum of such
demand, as well in his or their (...) Records of the proceedings of such Co^^t,
and that no Clerk (...) or delay upon the request of any Appellant as
aforesaid, to (...) a transcript of the whole proceedings as aforesaid, under
his (...) Seal of the said Court as aforesaid, upon penalty to pay the
respective (...) which such Appellant shall sustain by such refusal or delay as
aforesaid (...) and party paying or securing to be paid such respective Clerk
his just (...) same according to Law

And Be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that these Officers hereafter
(...) shall have no other (...) than are hereafter mentioned, that is to say
(...) to the Secretary fifty pounds of Tobacco, (...) to the keeper (...) the
Seal thereof one hundred and twenty pounds of Tobacco, for (...), Secretary
fifty pounds of Tobacco, and to the keeper of the Seal (...) hundred and twenty
pounds of Tobacco, for a (...) Fares (...) to the Secretary fifty pounds of
Tobacco, and to the keeper of the Seal one hundred and twenty pounds of
Tobacco, any Law usuage or custom to the contrary notwithstanding.

And Be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, by and with the Advice and
Consent aforesaid, that all Appeals or Writts of Error triable before the
Governor and Council if it so shall happen, that the former Judgment given
shall be by the said Governor and Council afirmed, such a determination shall
be final and without any further Review, unless such Judgment so given shall
exceed the Sum of three hundred pounds Sterling, or the Sum of sixty thousand
pounds of Tobacco; then (...) such case the party against whom such Judgment
shall be given, may appeal to the King and Council in England.

And Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that all and every
person or persons that shall conceive him or themselves relievable in Equity
from any Judgment given or obtained against him in the Provincial or County
Court aforesaid, shall exhibit his Bill and proceed in Chancery before any
Appeal be entered or (...) the Governor and Council and not afterward, and that
all such persons (...) conceive themselves grieved by any Decree in Chancery
shall be at (...) exhibit his Prayer to the Governor and Council to review and
examine (...) and that the Judgment Sentence or Decree of such Court of Review
shall (...) final as aforesaid, unless as aforesaid the original Debt or
Damages shall (...) three hundred pounds Sterling, or sixty thousand pounds of
Tobacco as aforesaid, then and (...) every such cause to apeal to the King and
Council as aforesaid, and that one Act of Assembly made at an Assembly begun
and held at the City of St. Marys the (...) day of September (...) 1694.
entitled an Act for Apeals and Regulating Writts of Error be and is hereby
Repealed, and that all Appeals or Writts of Error already made and brought, or
hereafter to be made or brought before the Governor and Council shall and may
be heard by the said Governor and Council out of Assembly (...) any thing in
the same Writ, any other former Law or Practice (...) contrary notwithstanding
(...) for that it may so happen that the Governor (...) this Province for the
(...) hereafter be concern'd^ in an Apap^al made, (...) Writ of Error brought
(...) of the Provincia^ and County Court to the Governor and Council (...) or
he otherwise indisposed or absent.

Be it therefore Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, (...) with the Advice and
Consent aforesaid, that it shall and may be sufficient (...) such case for the
Council only to hear and determine such matters of (...) whereof the first of
the Council in Commission being then present shall (...) Judgment thereupon
shall be definitive, except before excepted, in as full and (...) manner as
though the said Governor were then actually present and pr^siding, any thing in
this Act to the contrary notwithstanding.

An Act for the more speedy conveying the public Letters and Pacquets of this
Province, and settling a Revenn^e on the Sherrifs for defraying the charge
thereof.
FORASMUCH as several of the inhabitants of this Province having been formerly
subject to great and manifest Inconveniency's by reason of pressing of horses,
under pretext of carrying and conveying of public Letters and Pacquots, for
prevention whereof, and that due care may be taken for the future, that all
public Letters and Pacquets relating to his Majesty, or public Service of
this Province, be securely and expeditiously conveyed according to their
directions, the Delegates of this present General Assembly do pray that it may
be Enacted,

And BE IT ENACTED by the Kings most Excellent Majesty by and with the Advice
and Consent of this present General Assembly and the Authority of the same,
that the Sherrif of each respective County is hereby enjoined and commanded to
take care of all public Letters and Pacquets, and expeditiously to convey them
according to their directions to the next Sherrif or under Sherrif of the
adjacent County, and for the encouragement of the several and respective
Sherrifs and their diligence in conveying such public Letters and Pacquets,
that they may be allowed the several Sums hereafter expressed, to be said in the
public Leavy of this Province, viz. to the Sherrif of Ann-Arundel County
fifteen hundred pounds of Tobacco, who is also hereby obliged to convey all
such Letters and Pacquets as are directed and must go over to the (...) Shear
to Kent Island, and there to be delivered to the Sherrif of Talbot County or
his Deputy, to the Sherrif of Talbot County fifteen hundred pounds of Tobacco,
who is hereby also obliged to convey all such Letters and Pacquets that are
directed to the Port of Anapolis to the said Port, to the Sherrif of Kent
County eight hundred pounds of Tobacco, who is also hereby obliged to convey
all such Letters and Pacquets as are directed to the Port of of Annapolis to
Kent Island, and deliver them to the Sherrif or under Sherrif of Talbot County,
except he can convey them a more ready and expeditious way to Annapolis, who is
also hereby obliged to convey all such Letters and Pacquets to the Port of
Annapolis as aforesaid, to the Sherrif of Caecil County one thousand pounds of
Tobacco, who is also obliged to convey all such Letters and Pacquets as are
directed to the Northward to the Town of New Castle upon Delaware, to the
Sherrif of Dorchester County eight hundred pounds as Tobacco, to the Sherrif of
Somerset County five hundred pounds of Tobacco, to the Sherrif of Calvert
County eight hundred pounds of Tobacco, to the Sherrif of Prince Georges County
one thousand pounds of Tobacco, to the Sherrif of St. Mary's County eight
hundred pounds of Tobacco, to the Sherrif of Charles County one thousand pounds
of Tobacco, to the Sherrif of Baltemore County eight hundred pounds of Tobacco,
which said several and respective Sums of Tobacco shall be Annually allowed and
paid to the several and respective Sherrifs as aforesaid, in consideration
whereof they Sherrifs of the said several and respective Countys shall defray
all such charges as shall ac^rew by reason of conveying any such Letters or
Pacquets, any former Law Usuage or Custom to the contrary notwithstanding.

And Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that any Sherrif under
Sherrif or Deputy that shall neglect or delay the speedy conveying any such
Letters or Pacquets shall (...) his Sacred Majesty (...) every such offense the
Sum of five hundred (...) Tobacco, one (...) Informer or him or them that will
Sue for (...) be employed for the defraying of the County charges where any
(...) shall happen, to be recovered in any of his Majesty's Courts of (...)
this Province, by Action of Debt, wherein no Essoyn Protection or (...) of Law
to be allowed.

And Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that all such public
Letters and (...) for his Majesty's Service, (...) with the persons name that
sends (...) any person or persons shall at any time after the publication of
(...) presume to indorse any Letter or Letters, Packet or Pacquets so as
aforesaid, which are not for the public Service, shall forfeit and pay for
such offense five hundred pounds of Tobacco to be employed for the use
aforesaid, to (...) recovered in manner aforesaid

An Act impowering Commissioners of the County Courts to leavy and raise Money
(...) defray the necessary charge of their Countys.
FORASMUCH as in the interval of Assemblys in this Province, there have been
several necessary charges laid out and expended in the several and respective
Countys of this Province, by the several and respective Commissioners of the
said Countys and others, for the good and welfare and conservation of the (...)
of this Province, and of and within the said Countys, and which ought to be
born by the several and respective Countys distinctly, and have been formerly
used and accustomed to be r^imbursed and defrayed, paid and satisfied, by and
out of the County Leavy, Leavied and Assessed by the Commissioners of the said
respective Countys, by an equal assessment upon the Estates and persons of the
inhabitants of the said several and respective Countys, but the said
Commissioners of the said County Courts not having sufficient Warrant and
Authority to raise such Leavy.

BE IT ENACTED by the Kings most Excellent Majesty by and with the Advice and
Consent of this present General Assembly and the Authority of the same, that
for the future it shall and may be Lawful to and for the several and respective
Commissioners of the several and respective County Courts within this Province,
at their several and respective Courts to be held for the said Countys upon
examination had before them of the public charges of their said several and
respective County's, and allowances by them made of the same, to leavy and
raise Tobacco for payment and satisfaction of the said several and respective
County Charges and the Sherrifs Sallary for the collecting thereof, by an equal
assessment of the ra^able persons of the said several Countys; any Law Act
custom and usuage heretofore had and made to the contrary in any wi^e
notwithstanding.

Provided always that the accounts of the said County charge ^e kept upon
Record in a Book fair written by themselves signed by the Clerk of the said
County Court, and that upon complaint of any person that the said charges are
not allowable, or that (...) over charged or otherwise agrieved, the said Acts
shall be examined and rectified in the Provincial Court of this Province

An Act for the marking high ways, and making the heads of Rivers, Creeks,
Branches and Swamps passable for Horse and Foot
WHEREAS it is thought convenient and very much for the benefit of the
inhabitants of this Province, that Roads and Paths be marked, and the heads of
Rivers, Creeks and Branches be made passable.

BE IT THEREFORE ENACTED by the Kings most Excellent Majesty by and with the
Advice and Consent of this present General Assembly and the Authority of the
same, that all public and main Roads be hereafter cleared and well grubbed fit
for traveling twenty foot wide, and good and substantial Bridges made over all
heads of Rivers, Creeks, Branches and Swamps where (...) shall require at the
discretion of the Justices of the County Courts, and for the better
ascertaining what is or ^^all be deemed public Roads,

Be it likewise Enacted, that the Justices of the County Courts shall set down
and ascertain in their Records once every year what are the public Records of
their respective (...) and appoint Over (...) of the same, and that no person
whatsoever shall after or change any such (...) Roads without the leave o^
license of the Governor and Council or (...) the County Courts, upon penalty
of five hundred pounds of Tobacco; and (...) Overseer so appointed should
neglect to clear the Roads so as aforesaid, (...) five hundred pounds of
Tobacco in Cask, and every Labourer (...) to serve and obey the Overseer, and
every Master of Servants that (...) or warned man refuse to (...) all his
taxable Male Servants to (...) aforesaid, he or they shall be fined, that is to
say, every, Labourer one (...) of Tobacco, and the said Master for every
Servant warned and not (...) one hundred pounds of Tobacco, and the Clerk of
the County is hereby obliged to (...) warrants to the Overseer appointed, upon
penalty of one thousand pounds of Tobacco, and the Sherrifs of each respective
Countys are to deliver the same to the several and respective Overseers so
appointed as aforesaid, ex (...), on penalty of one thousand pounds of Tobacco
in Cask, the one half at all which ^ines shall be employed and disposed of
toward the defraying the County charge in such manner as the Commissioners of
each respective County shall in their discretion think convenient, the other
half to him or them that all inform or sue for the same, to be recovered in his
Majestys Name for the use aforesaid, by Bill Plaint or Information in any Court
of Record within this Province, wherein no Essoyn Protection or Wa^er of Law to
be allowed And that all Roads that lead to any ^^rrys Court house of any County
or to any Church, or leading through any County to the Port of Annapolis shall
he marked on both sides the Road with two notches if the Road leads to
Annapolis. the Road that leads there a^ the leaving the other road shall be
marked on the face of the Tree in a smooth place cut for that purpose with the
letters A A set on with a pair of marking Irons and colored and ^o with two
notches all along the Road, and where ^t any place it leaves any other road
shall be again distinguished with the mark aforesaid on the face of the Tree
with a pair of marking Irons and colored as aforesaid, and any Road on the
(...) Shoat in Talbot County that leads to the Port of Williamstad^, at the
entering into the same, and upon porting with or dividing from any other Road
shall be marked on the face of a tree in a smooth place out for that purpose
with the letter (...) and so with two (...) all along the road, and the roads
that lead to any County Court (...) shall have two notches on the trees on both
sides the road as aforesaid, and another notch a distance above the other two;
and any road that leads to a Church shall be marked at the entrance into the
same, and at the leaving any other road with a slip cut down the face of the
tree near the ground, and any road leading to a Ferry and dividing from other
public road's shall be marked with three notches of equal distance at the
entrance into the same; and (...) rules and methods the several Justices of the
County Courts shall from time to time give in charge to the Overseers of the
high ways by them to be appointed for that purpose, who are likewise enjoined
carefully and strictly to observe and persons the same under the penalty
aforesaid, and where any road shall lead through any Seated Plantation or old
Fields.

Be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, by and with the Advice and Consent
aforesaid, that the several and respective Overseers within their several and
respective Precincts do set up posts, so many as may be perceived from one to
the other, which posts shall be marked and notched according to the place they
lead to a^ before in this Act for the marking and notching of roads have been
appointed, and that the posts of all gates through which any such roads shall
lead as aforesaid, ^e marrked and notched as aforesaid, under the penalty
aforesaid, any thing in this Act to the contrary notwithstanding.

An Act concerning the height of Fences and to punish burners thereof, and also
to restrain the multiplicity of Horses an Mares.
WHEREAS diverse people within this Province have and do make insufficient
Fences about their Corn Fields, whereby Cattle and Horses are apt to get in and
destroy the Corn there planted, for prevention whereof for the future, this
present General Assembly do humbly pray that it may be Enacted.

And BE IT ENACTED by the Kings most Excellent Majesty by and with the Advice
and Consent of (...) present General Assembly and the Authority of the same,
that all (...) intended or de^^gned to enclose Corn ground or preserve Corn
there (...) be at the (...) foot high quite round the Field well and
sufficiently (...) the judgment of two indifferent Men viewing the same wi^en
an (...) committed, and in case any horse, mare or c^ttle shall leap over or
(...) such ^ence as aforesaid thereby getting into such ground, that (...)
owner of such horse or horses, mare or mares, or cattle shall be liable to an
(...) of trespass, if the damage thereby sustained shall in the judgment of two
such persons as aforesaid amount to two hundred pounds of Tobacco or upwards,
or if less, the owner of such beast or beasts to be conveyed before some one
Justice of the ^eace in the same County who is hereby empowered to award such
damages as he shall think convenient upon such evidence as shall be produced
before him, any Law or Custom to the contrary notwithstanding.

And whereas diverse of the good people of this Province, have and do suffer
much damages by the notorious (...) practices of ill disposed and malicious
persons burning Fences, to the end therefore that so great abuses may be either
restrained or punished,

Be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that if any person or persons
whatsoever within this Province, shall wilfully and maliciously burn, pull
down or any ways destroy any Corn Field, Pasture or Orchard, or any other Fence
or Fences whereby any of the inhabitants of this Province are or may be harmed
or damnified, the person or persons so offending being thereof Lawfully
convicted by confession, or the testimony of two Witnesses, or one Witness and
pregnant circumstances agreeable thereto, shall make restitution to the party
grieved by paying of trebble the damage sustained thereby, as the said Justices
before whom such matter shall come shall determine, or a Jury in such case shall
award. And forasmuch as it often happens, that peoples Corn Fields are
generally destroyed by the intolerable number of horses and mares that are
usually suffered to run at liberty in the woods and other places, thereby going
so wild that they are not only prejudicial to most of the Neighborhood, but
also are of little or no use to the owners.

Be it therefore Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that from and after the
tenth day of March next after the publication hereof, when and as often as any
horse mare or (...), or any other Beasts shall happen to get into any Corn
Field, Wheat or (...) ground so enclosed with such a Fence as is above
mentioned, the owner of such ground as aforesaid shall be obliged the first and
second time such ^east shall get into such enclosed grounds as aforesaid to
give notice to the owner or owners of such beast as aforesaid, and if the
aforesaid owner of such Beast or Beasts shall neglect or refuse to restrain
such beast or beasts from committing the like offense, it shall and may be
Lawful for the owner or lawful possessor of such ground to shoot, kill or any
ways destroy upon their said lawful possession such beast or beasts that shall
commit such trespass the third time.

And Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that if any the owner or
owners of any such beast as aforesaid, shall not be known to the party or
partys (...) or damnified as aforesaid, he she or they so agrieved, shall and
are obliged with two sufficient Evidences to take notice of the color, natural
and artificial marks of any such beasts an writing, and the same to afix and
set up at the most public place within the County wheresuch damage as
aforesaid shall happen to (...) for the space of one whole month, at the end of
which no owner appearing, it shall and may be lawful for the partys grieved, to
(...) kill or destroy upon his her or their possession as aforesaid any beast
or beasts as aforesaid, any Law Statute or Custom to the contrary
notwithstanding.

An Act for killing of Woolves.
BE IT ENACTED by the Kings most Excellent Majesty by and with the Advice and
Consent of this present General Assembly and the Authority of the same, that
every person that shall bring the head of a Woolf to any of the Commissioners
or Justices of the Peace in any County within this Province, shall be allowed
two hundred pounds of Tobacco from the County where the Woolf shall be killed,
and that such Commissioner or Justice of the Peace to whom the Woolfs head
shall be brought, shall (...) cut out the Tongue, and cut or cause to be cut
off the Ears of the (...), to prevent the (...) of twice or oftener paying the
same,

And Be it likewise Enacted by the (...), that it shall and may be lawful to
and for the several Justices of (...) respective Countys with in this Province,
and they are hereby authorized (...) and required yearly, and every year during
this Act, at the time of (...) County Leavy, to raise and assess by an equal
assessment upon the taxable, (...) he said County such Sum or Sums of Tobacco
as to the Justices of the several a (...) respective Countys shall seem meet
and convenient, and such Sums of Tobacco raised as aforesaid, shall lay out and
dispose for the purchasing of duffells or matchcoats, and when the (...) is
purchased, shall deliver to such and so many persons residing convenient to the
Indians as the Justices aforesaid shall think fit, who shall render an account
to the said Justices at the next laying out of the Leavy, how such matchcoats
delivered him or them have been disposed, and what part thereof remains in his
or their possession or hands.

And Be it Enacted, that such person or persons having such matchcoats
delivered as aforesaid, be and are hereby required to deliver to any Indian or
Indians for every Woolf or Woolves heads not having been paid for before one
matchcoat containing two yards of duffells, and give a true account of the same
at the next County Leavy as aforesaid to the Justices aforesaid, and shall mark
such Woolves heads as aforesaid to prevent deceit as aforesaid.

An Act to enable the purchasers of the Subscriptions to the Freeschool to
recover the same

An Act for settling a Reven^ua^e in his Majestys present Governor.
WHEREAS his most (...) Majesty out of his Royal Bounty and Prince^^ Favors
has been pleased to constitute and appoint his Excellency Colonel NATHANIEL
BLAKISTON his Capt' General and Chief Governor in and over this his Majestys
(...) of Maryland, to whom we his Majestys most Loyal Subjects yield all own
obedience as by his Royal Commission we are obliged, and the better to
demonstrate out (...) gratitude, and to show the good respects we have for and
(...) Colonel Nathaniel Blakiston our present Governor, and the (...) we have
of his Excellency^ (...) Government over us, we (...) pray that it may be
Enacted,

And BE IT ENACTED by the Kings most Excellent Majesty by and with the Advice
and Consent of this present General Assembly and the Authority of the same,
that an imposition of three pence per Hogshead over and above the one shilling
per Hogshead heretofore granted for Support of his Majestys Governor here,
upon all Tobacco that shall hereafter be exported out of this Province by land
or water, allowing 400 pounds of Tobacco to each Hogshead, and the like
quantity in bulk, may be raised, leavied and paid by the Master of every Ship
Vessel trading into this Province in ready Money or Bills (...) Exchange at the
election and choice of the said Master, to be collected by the Naval Officer of
the Port or District where such Ship or Vessel shall enter, or such other
person as his Excellency shall think ^it to appoint.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that if any Tobacco
should by any casual means be lost after the imposition paid, that then and in
all such cases the Owner or Freightor of all such Tobacco shall have free
liberty to Freight and Ship of the like quantity again without paying the
additional three pence, this Act to endure so long as the said Nathaniel
Blakiston Esquire* shall continue Governor of this Province.

An Act (...) bounds of Land.
WHEREAS a (...) up of Lands in this Province, necessity constrained (...)
commissiona^^ such persons to be Surveyors as was but very (...) the Art of
Surveying, and for the windings, courses and turnings (...) Rivers, Rivolets
Creeks and Coves many times by these Branches (...) another were unknown to the
Surveyors, nor for fear of the (...) then numerous and strong, dar^t they stay
on Shoa^ to examine the (...) and courses aforesaid, but marking some trees by
the sides of such River^ Creeks etc. did without further troubles prescribe
certain bounds and courses to the several tracts by them surveyed or intended
to be surveyed, and the said bounds are generally expressed in such uncertain
terms, and being many times contradictious and incosistant in themselves,
whereby it comes to pass that at this time is very uncertain, and many
chargable and tedious Suits in Law happen about such bounds, which are most
times (as it were) by the favor and inclinations of Jurors arbitrarily
determined differing ways, in parallel cases to prevent which for the future,
and that judgment may go more direct and that Neighbors may more certainly
know their bounds and avoid trespassing upon one another, and for the more
general ascertaining the meers and limits of every particular Man's Lands, there
can be no better way than by a Law, to put one certain interpretation upon such
contradictory expressions observed to be in ancient Certificates, and by
demonstrating one example of each interpretation in a fair parchment to be to
this Act ann^xed as part of the said Act.

Wherefore the Delegates and Representatives of the City of St. Marys and of
the several and respective Countys of this Province humbly prey that it may be
Enacted,

And BE IT ENACTED by the Kings most excellent Majesty by and with the Advice
and Consent of this present General Assembly and the Authority of the ^ame,
that if any Man or his (...) a tract of Land lying in the woods, and from his
first or other marked tree of end of the line, or otherwise run a certain course
and certain number of perches to a Bay River Creek Branch or Beaver damm which
have a constant Steam or certain (...) of a Channel if the courts directs
thereto and the number of perches fall (...) thereof, in such and the like
cases, if adding fifty per cent. thereto will reach the said Bay River, Creek,
(...) of Beaver damm expressed in the said grant, the said line shall be extended
thereto, as in other cases hereafter, being certain natural and unalterable
bounds.

And where the said line intersects the water of the said Bay, River, Creek or
Beaver (...) of the said Branch, which are, or shall be expressed in such grant,
such intersection shall be demand and adjudged the certain prick or point of
such tract of Land, but if the said adding of the said fifty per cent. will not
reach the said Bay or River and. expressed in the said grant, and such (...)
number of perches give the quantity of Land, which by conditions of (...) is
expressed in the grant of the said Land to have been due to him with his said
certain number of perches, and shall not extend his bounds further the^ his
certain number of perches to the prejudice of any latter Survey,
notwithstanding any gift, grant or pattent of confirmation granted or made
after the date of my certificate of latter survey.

And if a tract of Land by a River, Creek or Branch side, and from any marked
tree or end of a line (...) a certain course and number of perches up the River
creek or branch to the head of the said River Creek or Branch, and the Record
of Survey do not express any marks tree to which as an undevidable prick tho
line might be supposed to come, the said tract shall be concluded by the
certain number of Perches, but if in this or the former case, there be a marked
tree expressed in the certificate of Survey and well and sufficiently proved, to
which either the course or the creek, River or Branch directly leads, and may
be attained by adding ten per cent to every hundred perches of that line which
leads to it, the owner or owners of such Land shall hold that surplusage
granted by the said ten per cent. against any latter taker up, and even against
the Right Honorable the Lord Proprietor his Heirs and Successors, at the
granted Rent without any alteration by reason of the words more or less.

And if the said marked tree be attained by adding of fifty per cent. to every
hundred perches of the said (...) which leads to it, the owner of such Land
shall held that surplusage against any latter taker up, that is (...) between
the said trees against the Lord Proprietor, paying Arrears of (...) two pence
per pound in Tobacco, but if the fifty per cent. will not attain (...) tree, it
is out of measure unreasonable, and then the owners of such (...) be concluded
by his pr^ise number of perches as if he (...) had any (...) tree, and if in
either the former cases, or any other case where (...) aforesaid (...) per ce^^
will attain the second tree, so as by this Act the owners may (...) the
surplusage, the second line is drawn from the second tree the just length,
(...) for example one hundred Acres, a line from the first tree be mentioned
North one hundred perches to the second marked tree but is really one hundred
and fifty perches, and then from the second tree a line is drawn (...) one
hundred and sixty perches the just length, then from the end of the said East
line, a (...) is drawn South one hundred perched but no marked tree there
expressed it will leave a gore betwixt a line drawn West to the first tree, and
the end of the hundred perches South, in all such cases by virtue of this Act
the third line shall be extended of equal length with the first and the fourth
line shall be parallel with the second as in the first example demonstrated,
that the tract of Land may be square, and one and the same being laid out
backward or forwards, but if in the certificate of Survey it be expressed in
the third line a certain course and number of perches, and then or from the end
thereof or such like (...) expressions with a straight line to the first
bounded Tree, such straight (...) shall be the bounds thereof, although the third
line be not of (...) longth with the first, and if any second or latter taker
up of Land shall have taken up the said gore or land that may include it, and
not improved or built thereon, the owner of the first tract shall pay him his
seasonable charges expended in taking up the same, and reimburse him all the
Rent paid for the same, and the first owner shall entirely hold the full
square, paying his Lordship his succeeding Rent for the surplusage, but if the
taker up of the said Land or Gore including (...) he shall not be liable to an
Action of Trespass, but if (...) the owner of the (...) Tract do not (...) with
him about paying him for (...) up of the gore shall for the improvements sake
hold it such a number of years, (...) exceeding fourteen years to come as a
Jury of (...) adjudged, (...) all to be required, and the number of years to
(...) when the owners of the (...) tract shall by a Jury resurvey and (...) his
bounds is according to (...)

And if any Man hold a Tract of Land by the side of a Creek River or Branch and
it be described to begin at a marked tree by the side of the said Creek, River
or Branch, and at the last is on that side to be bounded with the said Creek,
River or branch, but it is expressed from the said marked tree to run up or down
the said creek river or branch a certain number of perches or a certain course,
which d^clines from the water side and runs into the Land and no marked Tree
appointed for it to end at, in all such like cases the owners of the said Land
shall reverse his last line, viz. as suppose the first course as North one
hundred perches to the branch creek or river and the other Well one hundred and
sixty perches and then South one hundred perches, and then (...), or on a
straight line to the first marked tree, he shall run from his first tree (...)
one hundred and sixty peches. and then South one hundred perches, and then East
unto the said creek river or branch, and where the said East line intersects or
falls into the water it shall determine his bounds, and he shall ^old from that
intersection by the water side to the first tree, but in this case or any cases
parallel, if fifty per cent. will not intersect the branch, creek or river,
then the precise lines and course to be the bounds thereof, and the reversing
of lines shall determine bounds, when the lines by the water side slants over
the creek, river or branch, and in that case the creek river or branch shall be
the bounds of such tract, and it shall not pass over as in the second third and
fourth example is demonstrated and the reason why fifty per cent. is allowed to
reach the creek, river or branch, that if more is there will be no coherence
between the creek and the course.

And if a Tract be discribed to ^e on a certain side of a creek river or
branch, and begin at a marked tree, and run a certain course, as suppose North
one hundred perches up or down the said creek or river to another marked tree by
the river side, which second marked tree is known and really stands by the water
side, and (...) the breadth of the Land within fifty per cent, there the second
line supposing (...) shall be drawn from the second tree the certain number of
perches, supposing one hundred and sixty and (...) end thereof South, till it
intersect a line drawn also (...) from the (...) said East (...) last mentioned
be more or less in this case than fifty per cent. (...) under, and from that
intersection a line drawn (...) to the (...) the well and the South Line shall
be the bounds of such tract, and all such (...) in cases parallel, because that
generally takers up of such backward (...) and have so allowed the tracts
fronting the River to lie, and that with good reason, and as for the
reasonableness of it, it cannot be otherways enacted, so if it should be other
ways enacted it would make a general confusion in all backward lands, bounded
(...) upon the frontier tracts, and then one upon (...) and in the cases
aforesaid, although there be a great variation betwixt the prescribed course and
the real course, from the first to the second tree, yet all the (...) betwixt
the said trees by its general bounding on the water shall be adjudged part of
the said tracts, and afterward from the second tree it shall be determined by
lines as aforesaid, as in the fifth and sixth example.

And if a tract of land be laid out for a certain number of Acres on such
courses, which tho the length of the lines yet the acuteness of the Angles will
not make the certain number of Acres, yet the tract shall be confined by such
bounds, as supposing the first line be north fifty perches, and then north and
or (...) the like eights perches, and so parallel, and yet the owner shall be
(...) all latter (...) adjoining to such lines shall be good as (...) seventh
example.

And if any Man have a greater number of perches (...) breadth by express
words, then he ought to have, yet he (...) hold the same against any latter
taker up, and against the Lord Proprietor (...), as suppose north fifty
perches, then cast eighty perches, and so (...) for one hundred Acres as in the
eighth example.

Every Man that has an Island entirely granted to him, although he have
Surplusage shall hold the same although (...) courses or number of perches (...)
not rightly, express to conclude the same against ^ay latter taker up and
against the Lord Proprietor (...) Rent, if (...) shall for discover^ i^ such
(...) cause the same to be resurveyed, and (...) his Heirs or successors shall
not for any Surplusage (...) any Pattent upon (...) deceived in (...) or any
other (...), because every Man (...) that by (...) conditions of Plantations
(...) due to him, except where his Lordship has granted any Lands (...).

And whereas by this Act it is provided that if any Man hold fifty per cent.
above his number of perches betw^xt his known bounds he shall maintain the same
against any (...) taker up etc. and (...) resurvey his land in due time, but
that the (...) Surplusage to another, yet if the first taker up have (...) made
his improvement after the certain number of perches (...) determined (...) the
Surplusage shall not be said to be there only after such (...) of such number
of perches, because after the Surveyor has once by (...) as it were shap^ the
land it is then all granted at once (...) flats, and the Surplusage shall be
assigned by a Jury entirely (...) together, but to the least (...) of the first
Grantee.

And if a certain number of perches in any case be prescribed to run by a
Creek, River of (...) and no marked tree nor certain course expressed, the (...)
number (...) shall not be spent away by the several windings of the River Creek
(...) brought to a ^^reight line of that length, or else be regulated by the
other (...) in other cases is provided.

If Land be bounded by a Creek or Cove running a certain course or number of
perches as suppose north one hundred perches, if that branch creek or cove were
not and expire, or unreasonably wind above five points from the course into the
land before the number of perches be determined, so that there be no certain
running Stream or certain (...) or Channel of a Stream communing to the end of
the (...) or if there be such windings as aforesaid, in such cases the lines
shall be the bounds from the beginning to ending; provided that all the
adjacent lands betwixt the creek and the line before it comes to slant over the
branch creek or cove shall be added and (...) to be part of the Land, that is
so far as the creek includes as in the ninth example.

If Land begin at a marked tree by a River, Creek, Branch or Cove, and so go up
(...) down the said River, Creek, Branch or Cove to another marked tree at the
mouth of a Creek or Cove, and then be prescribed to run a certain course or
number of perches by the said creek or cove, and the spending away of the
number of perches upon the winding of the said creek or cove would shorten the
line from extending far enough into the woods, and the creek wind outward from
the land, and varying from the course, in this case the full (...) course
prescribed shall be run out, and from the end of that line shall be drawn a
line rever^ to the next course which is to be run till the line reverse
intersect the said creek or cove, and by that intersection it shall be
described kow far that tract shall be bounded by the creek etc and the (...) of
the bounds shall in such case be ascertained by the four (...) example, as
suppose from the second tree at the mouth of a cove etc. the line prescribed
East one hundred and sixty perches by the cove and bounded by the (...) and the
said creek winds away East North East, the cast line of the one hundred and
sixty perches shall be run out, and in from the end of the east line the course
should be south, then there shall first be drawn a line north to the cove, and
that north line shall describe at the place where it intersects the cove how
far that tract shall be bounded by the cove, and then at the intersection the
south line shall be begun and continued till it intersects a line drawn east to
the first tree as in the fourth example aforesaid, always provided the south
line be not fifty per cent. more than it ought to be, but if the south line be
fifty per cent. than it ought to be then the south line shall be the bounds and
not the creek or cove, and if the south line go to the westward of the first
tree, then the east line aforesaid shall be further extended that the south
line may at least come to the beginning tree

In all cases where positive (...) witness cannot be had, there traditional
evidence viva voce concurring with and agreeable to Record shall be accounted
good proof declaring from whom they had their tradition, and not affirming any
marked tree or bounds other then or dis^ering from what is expressed on Record,
and where the first marked tree is wanting, and the beginning cannot be
reasonably proved, but yet a second or third marked tree is found, the tree so
found shall rule (...) bounds of the whole tract, according to the rules of
this Act mentioned, or hereafter to be mentioned, where a Man holds a
Penninsula or Neck of Land and have several marked or line^ trees upon the
points or capes of his tract which do not very exactly agree in course or
distance, and yet by good extent^ (...) bounds, and the whole (...) as it is
commonly called Penninsula (...), there all things shall be favorably
interpreted, to his hold^ (...) any later taker up although he has built and
improved, because (...) of land shall have the same advantage of (...) as the
other, but ^et if the second taker up be ejected, the first shall not have any
action of (...) against him, except the Court which gives Judgment upon the
titles, being the same Court that Judgment is given and not after in due form
moved allow such action to be brought upon (...) of the reasonableness of the
matter; and that is humbly prayed to (...) enacted because such Penninsula or
Necks of Land do not fall under any ordinary rule of regulation, provided that
nothing be allowed of which is directly-contrary to any other rule of
regulation or clause of this Act.

And if any tract of land be described to begin at the uppermost or lowermost
tree of another tract, when the record of the former and act mentions not any
tree marked for the uppermost or lowermost bounds thereof, in all such cases the
second tract shall begun where the uppermost or lowermost bounds of the first
tract terminates by this Act, except it can positively and very strongly by
good witness be proved that the Surveyor and not the taker up, then and there
at the taking up did mark a tree for the beginning of the second tract be said
to bound upon the first, yet it shall not be allowed to do so to the prejudice
of any latter Survey but may come to it is beginning by (...) prescribed line or
lines parallel to the tract on which its said to bound, and the land betwixt
may be taken up by a common Warrant, as in the tenth example by which all cases
parallel may be adjudged and determined.

If a tract of land (...) to (...) on a certain side of a River. Creek or
Branch with a stream or cove, and at the last by general bounds is described to
be bounded by the said River Creek etc and ^he first line is drawn from the
river etc. into the woods from the river etc. and there are other courses
prescribed, and ^e last come to the river etc. yet if any of the former courses
come to the river branch or cove, the courses shall there determine, and thence
by the water be bounded and shall not pass over, but the owner shall be content
with (...) ^and is between such lines and the water be it never so little, and
apply himself (if he please) to his Lordships favor for the benefit of his
Warrant as in the twelfth example.

If a tract of land be described to begin at a certain tree and ^o run a
certain course expressing no (...) number of perches till it intersect another
(...) of land, which course goes (...) from such lands, and no determinate
number of perches to limit the lines (...) void survey, and shall be deemed to
include nothing by one part of one side and another part of another side of a
river, creek, branch or cove etc.

If a tract of land begin at a certain marked tree, running to the head of a
creek, branch or cove it shall be determined as aforesaid is described in such
like cases, and then if for more breadth it begin again at the head of the said
river, creek, branch are cove, and on the other side thereof, the beginning on
the other side shall be (...) to be right opposite to the ending of the (...),
except there be a marked tree expressed on the second side to regulate that part
otherwise.

If one tract of land be so said out, and the one part of it ^^es on the one
side of a former Survey, and another part of it lies on the other side of the
former survey, and part is taken away by the said former survey, yet the owner
of the second (...) shall hold all that is clear of the former survey, and all
former surveys whatever on both sides, for that the land is not granted perch
by perch as the surveyor (...) he grant is (...) all at once of every part of
it, and if any (...) man's lands, (...) of the said land in (...) land the said
trees stand, shall not on any pretense cut down or destroy the said tree or
trees, except he first give notice to the owner of that land whose bounds such
tree is, and there in his presence either (...) other sufficient Locust or
Cedar post or stone or stones (...) the stead and place of that tree, under the
penalty of six pounds Sterling to be paid to the party whose bounds that tree
was, to (...) by Action of debt etc.

And it is hereby made lawful for every Man (...) such tree or trees within
another Man's land, and having special Warrant of Resurvey or order of
Provincial or County Court for resurvey of their land to ascertain his bounds
having a (...), and being denied with Surveyor, (...) and (...) go on such
land, whereon or wherein his ma^kt tree stands, and from such marked tree (...)
his (...) required, provided he make all senses as good and ^ight as they were
foun^ (...) no^ any along with him in measuring the (...) manifest damage,
detriment (...) har^h to the owner of the land (...) they go or if accidentally
any damage happen; that then in such cases (...) three days make rep^tation and
amends,

And Be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that no Man (...) ten per cent.
given (...) to the precise number of perches, except it, be (...) that addition
of ten per cent. to reach to a marked tree or other natural bounds, but if he
have no marked tree or natural (...) he shall not take ten per cent. to the
damage of any (...) Survey, but if the la^ter Survey begin off from the first
Survey and run toward it and there be ten per cent, betwixt the and of the
precise number of perches the first taker up shall enjoy it, and in all such
cases if ten per cent. added to both will make their lands to bound o^ each
other (...) person shall take up or hold any land betwixt them.

And Be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, (...) if any Man hold land by a
river or creek side, yet so as there lies ma^sh (...) land and the river, such
adjacent marsh shall nor be taken up, or being already taken up by any other
shall not be held, but such adjacent marsh shall be, deemed and adjudged
absolutely to belong to the land to which it is adjacent, and be bounded by the
same courses drawn from the firm land into such river or creek as the firm land
is bounded by, except in Somerset County, and upon Dellaware and the Oc^an.

And Be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that if any Man hold land which
is bounded, or expressed to be bounded by a line drawn from a certain tree or
other undividable (...) of intersections, a certain course to a certain marked
tree in the woods, and the said tree or trees do not correspond to the said
certain course or courses, but that the courses and trees differ very much as
it is too common, and (...) the courses prescribed give the quantity of land
due to the taker up, in such cases wherein it is not otherwise before in this
Act provided (...) ascertaining of the bounds of land by the water side, the
lines shall be the bounds of such lands, and the trees shall be deserted, and
one line shall be drawn from the end of another, because the errors of such
Surveys was in the misplacing of trees, yet so if any second taker up has
begun at any the aforesaid deserted trees and (...) lines parallel to the first
taken up lands, and that by this regulation, some part of the land of the
second taker up will now fall within the (...) of the (...) taker up, in such
case the first taker up shall have no Action of Trespass against the second
taker up for any supposed trespass within his lines which he could not have had
before, but on the contrary, of the second taker up has made any improvement
on the land (...) to be taken away he shall hold his improvement and all the
land that (...) to be within the lines of the first taker up by reason of this
regulation for such number of years as a Jury shall think such improvement
deserves, not exceeding fourteen years, to be reckoned from the time that the
first taker up resurvey'd his land by a Jury, and the said Jury shall there
(...) determine the matter.

And whereas this may occasion that some land may (...) clear by or about these
des^rted trees or otherwise, in such cases the Jury, or the major part of them
shall det^rmin in writing under their Hands and Seals what part of such land
happening to be clear shall be assigned to the first taker up to take up again
by common (...), and what part shall be assigned to the second taker up to take
up again in like manner, which by this Act they are empowered to do, to make
good what disadvantage may happen to either part, and no other person for a
year and a day (...) shall take up any the land so assigned, and if they do it
shall be of no effect, nor shall any grant for the same upon any such
surreptitious Survey be of validity in (...) and if the first taker do not
within a year and a day after the publication of (...) in the County where such
land lies resurvey his land and ascer^^in (...) that then after one year and a
day expired the second taker up ((...) he pleases) for certainty (...) cause
the same to be done at his own cost (...) And (...) Enacted etc that the
Justices of (...) respective (...) may grant a (...) of (...) and a (...) for a
Jury if required when the (...) of Resurvey is only (...) of bounds, according
to (...) petitioner paying only to the cl^rk (...) pounds of Tobacco for (...)
and thirty pounds of Tobacco or (...) six pence to the Commissioners toward
supporting their expenses, (...) Warrant of resurvey is (...) as aforesaid
there the Surveyor shall have only (...) as (...) primitive Survey, any Law
Statute or Custom to the contrary notwithstanding. And (...) that by virtue of
such Warrant ^e has resurveyed a tract of land called A (...) for (...)
described (...) and be bounded as follows, (here the situation and bounds of
land to be expressed) and that he has (...) and regulated the same according to
the first second or other example of the Act for regulating and ascertaining
etc which certificate with a (...) shall be (...) to the Examinor of the
County, and being approved by him to the County Clerk to be recorded, and to
that (...) Be it Enacted that the (...) for the time being may constitute and
apoint one discreet person to be (...) of the said County and to do therein as
to such Office belongs etc. taking for (...) ^ees for every such certificate
fifty pounds of Tobacco, if the same be for five hundred Acres or under and one
hundred pounds of Tobacco if the same shall keep a fair Book, and Record the
certificate an^ platt.

And Be it Enacted etc. that if any person hold a tract of land, which on any
line is said to run a certain course and certain number of perches to another
Man's land, and that certain number of perches and fifty per cent. added on the
same course to that line do not come to the said land, yet the number of
perches give the quantity of land which the taker up had due to him, he shall
be contented with his precise number of perches, and shall not ^^tend his line
further to the damage of any latter Survey, although his Survey be said to be
bounded by the other Man's land, but the land betwixt being surveyed by common
Warrant shall be sure to him that surveyed it, provided that is not already
taken up, he shall have a year and a day from the publication of this Act to
take it up by common Warrant, except in such cases as falls under the
regulation of the eleventh example.

And if any owner of land perceiving that be has more breadth betwixt his
trees which gives him more land then was due to him at first have already
whilst he was owner of the first tract by common Warrant taken up the
surplusage, he shall by virtue of such survey and his Lordships grant hold the
same according to his grant, notwithstanding the said land (...) to have been
formerly surveyed, but there shall not be made any other line then is expressed
in the Record of survey to join the land together.

And be it further Enacted etc. that no warrant or grant to alter any survey
upon presence that the surveyor has not taken up the intended land, or was
mistaken in prescribing his courses or any the like pretenses shall take effect
or be good (...) to the (...) the bounds of any land to the damage of any
latter taker up that has seated and improv^d where the Area of such first
survey includes considerable land of any quanty and has but one marked tree,
but where such Area includes no land at all but water, there the mistake was
manifest, and it shall be adjudged in case of difference according to the
intent of the surveyor manifest^^^ so proved and adjudged, notwithstanding if
any man have a well known trees by (...) water side marked for his breadth of
land, and has seated, improved and paid Rent and (...) for (...) years enjoyed
the (...) betwixt the said trees, and yet by some error or mistake in the
Surveyor or Clark the said land is expressed in the body of his grant or p^ttent
to begin at one of the said trees and run to the other, but the (...)
prescribed runs directly contrary (that is to say) in running up the said river
creek etc. (...) of down the river creek etc. or down in lead of up to the
second (...), and leave out the intended land where such mistake is manif^^^,
and the first taker up has as aforesaid seated and improved betwixt the said
trees, and (...) claimed other land by virtue of that grant, but the land
betwixt the said trees the (...) taker up shall enjoy it as if no such mistake
had been, and if there be any other error, in his back lines it shall be
regulated as ^n like cases is before expressed for other land, and the second
taker up may by virtue of this Act and his Lordship, favor make use of his
Warrant elsewhere, and the (...) taker up shall (...) the second his reasonable
charge for letting his Survey fall, to be (...) by the County Court upon his
petition or motion, the first taker up being first called and heard, and after
such Judgment award Execution by fieri facias or Attachment, but yet if such
second Survey have been made above (...) years before this present Sessions and
has been scared and improved by the second taker up and never yet scared and
improved by the first taker up or his (...), then the first taker up and not
the second shall be (...) to seek for the benefit of his Warrant elsewhere, and
this word up the river creek etc. instead of down, or down instead of (...)
shall not vitiate any grant or deed by which land is conveyed from one Man to
another, where the rest of the words in the said grant or deed manifestly imply
it only to be a mistake, and the first taker up shall rectify his Survey (...)
take a new grant, which shall be under the same rent and no other.

Provided always, and Be it Enacted, that nothing in this Act contained shall
alter, change, make void, make erroneous or defeat any Judgment give^ and
recovered in the Provincial Court before the making of this Act, not make void
any (...) or Award under Hand and Seal given before the making of this Act,
although such Judgments and Awards are given contrary to the meaning of this Act,
but all such Judgments and all such awards though they might not otherwise be
good about (...) shall be and are hereby confirmed, other (...) in Law
excepted, provided such Awards shall within a year and a day be recorded in
their respective County Records after the publication of this Act, and
acknowledged in open Court by one of the Arbitrators or Umpire.

And if a certificate be so defective that one whole line be left out, yet if
the other lines be so expressed that they show what length and breadth were
designed, and that the length and breadth would make out the quantity of land
which the taker (...) had due to him, and the lines expressed do infer to common
Reason and Sense (...) the lines were left out by mistake, in all such cases
the first taker up shall (...) his land against any latter taker up as if the
certificate were good and entire.

And if any Man hold a tract of land which is expressed to bound on another
tract, (...) to began at a marked tree standing in the line of that tract on
which it is said to bound but the first marked tree cannot be proved no^ found,
yet if any other marked tree of the tract be found and proved, that found and
proved tree shall rule the bounds of the tract, yet so as only the precise
number of perches shall be held, but (...) be found the owner may resurvey^ and
lay it out again, beginning in the (...) where it was at first said to begin,
but it shall then be accounted later than any other Survey in them parts, and
the taker up shall not intrude nor hold (...) of any tract of land whereon a
Plantation is seated, and whereof there is certain proof of the bounds because
a certainty is to be preferred before an uncertainty, (...) what land he shall
include by his Survey clear of other tracts he may hold for ever by virtue of
his first Warrant, and the like shall be adjudged in all parallel cases where
no tree is to be found, if the owners shall think it any advantage by saving
his Warrant, but then after such Survey he shall not pretend to his former
Survey any more for ever, yet if any such marked tree was said to begin in the
point of a fork at the mouth of a creek or such other place which is as it were
a natural beginning, there if no tree is found yet if the place is certainly
known and proved, a Jury shall find a point or prick to begin at most agreeabl^
to the description in the certificate of Survey or Grant of the same, no
evidence admitted to prove a marks tree where the Record expresses none.

And lastly, Be it further Enacted etc. that if any controversy happen about
(...) bounds of land, whereof there is no parallel within this Act, the
Provincial Court shall not give Judgment therein, but it shall be put to the
Assembly to be determined by an Act and to be made a president for the future.

An Act of gratuity to Colonel Ninian Bea^^.

The humble Petition of Henry Wallice of Kent County.

An Act for continuing the late Act for imposing three pence per Hogshead upon
Tobacco to the use of his present Excellency from the time of his arrival here
to the end of this Sessions of Assembly.

An Act for settling Assemblys and Provincial Courts at the Port of Annapolis
in Ann-Arundel County,
BE IT ENACTED by the King most Excellent Majesty by and with the Advice and
Consent of this present General Assembly and the Authority of the same, that
the Port of Annapolis in Ann-Arundel County be the chief place and (...) of
Justice within this Province, for holding Assemblys and Provin^^ial Courts, and
that all Writts, Pleas and Process issuing or that has issued out and
returnable to the Provincial as aforesaid, or to the Court of Chancery, shall
from and after the end of this present Sessions of Assembly continue and be
made (...) able to the Port of Annapolis in Ann-Arundel County aforesaid.

An Act for raising a supply toward the drfraying of the public charge of
this Province, and to prevent too great a number of Irish Papists being
imported into this Province.
BE IT ENACTED by the Kings most Excellent Majesty by and with the Advice and
Consent of this present General Assembly and the Authority of the same, that
from and after the publication hereof all Masters of Ships or others importing
Irish Servants into this Province by land or by water, at the time of their
entry shall pay unto the Naval Officer for the time being belonging to such
Port or place where they make their Entry the Sum of twenty shillings Sterling
per Pole toward the defraying of the public Leavy of this Province for every
Irish Servant so imported, on penalty and forfeiture of five pounds Sterling
per Pole for every Servant so concealed at the time of his entry aforesaid, the
one half thereof to be appropriated to the uses aforesaid, the other half to
the informer o^ him or them that shall sue for the same to be recovered in his
Majestys name in any Court of Record within this Province by Action of Debt
Bill Plaint or Information, wherein^^ (...) Protection or Wager of Law to be
allowed.

And Be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that for every Negro so imported
into (...) Province either by land or water, the importor or importors of such
Negro or Negro's shall pay unto the Naval Officer aforesaid the Sum of twenty
shillings Sterling per Pole for the use aforesaid, on penalty and forfeiture of
five pounds Sterling per Pole for every Negro kept back or unaccounted for, to
be applied for the uses aforesaid, and to be recovered as aforesaid.

And Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that from and after the
publication hereof all Masters of Ships or other Vessels that shall either by
land or water import any Rum or Wine into this Province shall pay unto the
Naval Officer aforesaid where they make their entry the Sum of three pence per
gallon for every gallon of Rum or Wine so imported into this Province as
aforesaid, to be applied for the uses aforesaid, Liquors from England always
excepted.

And Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, etc that all Ships or
other Vessels which have been built in this Province or hereafter shall be
built as aforesaid, which are solely and wholly belonging to the inhabitants
thereof, shall be wholly exempted and acquitted from paying the imposition of
three pence per gallon aforesaid.

And Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that no Rum or Wine upon
which the dutys aforesaid are assessed shall be landed or put on shoat out of
any Ship or other Vessel, which shall import the same, or any other without du^
entry thereof made with the Officer thereby appointed (upon Oath of the said
person or persons importing any of the aforesaid liquors) for collecting the
same, in the Port or place where such liquors shall happen to be imported as
aforesaid, or before the duty due and payable for the same be satisfied or
secured to be satisfied, and a Warrant for the landing thereof be signed by the
Officer for that purpose appointed upon pain and peril that all such liquors
landed and put on shoat contrary to the true intent and meaning of this Act
shall be forfeited and lost, or the full value thereof; one half to be
appropriated toward the defraying of the public Leavy of this Province, and
the other half to the informer or him or them that shall Sue for the same, to
be recovered in his Majestys Name, in any of his Majestys Courts of Record
within this Province by Action of debt bill plaint or information, wherein no
essoyn protection or wager of Law to be allowed.

And for the better encouragement of all Masters, Merchants, Owners and other
persons whatsoever to make due entrys and payment of the dutys, rates and
imposts raised by this Act, in consideration of leak^ge and other damages, the
Officer is hereby authorized and empowered to make allowance and abate^^ent of
20 gallons in every hundred gallons of all such liquors so to be duly entered as
aforesaid, and the officers hereby appointed for collecting and gathering the
dutys aforesaid, shall and are hereby empowered upon any suspicion of fraud or
deceit by any importor owner or proprietor of any such liquors, in concealing
and not making due entry of the same, to go and enter on board any Ship or
Vessel, or into any house or ware house on shoat, and from thence to seize,
bring on shoat or secure all such liquors for which the dutys aforesaid are not
duly paid or secured to be paid as aforesaid, and that the said officers and
their deputys may freely stay and remain on board until the goods are delivered
and discharged out of the said Ship or Vessel, and all officers as well
military as civil of this Province, and all masters and officers of Ships are
hereby required and enjoined to be aiding and asisting to such Naval Officers
in discharging of their duty aforesaid, for all which the said Officers and
others asisting them shall be saved and kept harmless by virtue of this Act.

And Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that all such Naval
Officers shall give good security to the Governor of this Province for the
time being, and shall take their several Oaths well and faithfully to gather
the impost so (...) by (...) of this Act or any cla^se herein contained, and
adjust and faithfully to account twice a year, and to give and render to the
public Treasurer of this Province for the time being authorized for receiving
the said impost, for which the said Treasurer shall have for their sallary 4 l.
per Cent' who are to give good Bond for the same, to be accountable and render
account to the next meeting of Assembly, to be by them disposed of toward the
defraying of the public leavy of this Province.

And Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that every Master of a
Ship or other Vessel at the (...) of his entry of such Ship or Vessel wherein
(...) liquors shall be imported as aforesaid, shall render upon oath an account
of the quantity and quality of liquors aforesaid, and several and respective
Naval Officers within this Province for the time being, shall at the time of
the^^ entry of such Ship or Vessel as aforesaid take good and sufficient
security in his Majestys name for the payment of the imposition aforesaid to
such use and purpose and in such manner and form as by this Act is appointed,
all which dutys arising by such impositions upon liquors as aforesaid, shall be
collected and gathered by Naval Officers in their several and respective
Districts, for which they shall have for their Sallary eight pound per Cent.
and no more.

Provided always, that if any importer of Rum or Wine into this Province after
the end of this Sessions of Assembly, and within three Months after his arrival
and such his report made to the Naval Officer or such other Officer legally
empowered as aforesaid to take the same as aforesaid, shall export any of the
said rum or wine by him imported as aforesaid, it shall and may be lawful for
every such importer by way of debenture or draw back Money to stay and detain
three fourth parts of such imposition; always provided that the said exporter
who desires the benefit of the said debenture or draw back shall declare on
his corporal Oath to be administered by the said Officer on the Holy Evangelist
that the said Rum or Wine by him desirous to export is part of the said Rum or
Wine by him imported and made report thereof as aforesaid, This Act to endure
for three years, o^ to the (...) the first Sessions of Assembly which shall
next happen after the end of the said three years.

An Act for speedy Justice for small Debts.
FORASMUCH as this present General Assembly (...) taken into then serious
considerations the great damage and inconveniency accruing to the good people
of this Province for the recovery of small debts by a due course of Law in the
several and respective County Courts thereof, it often happening that such
Creditors rather choose to loose their just (...) and Credits than ^e (...) to
the trouble to Sue for the same, and further, it does also appear to be no less
a grievance and burden to the debtors of such Creditors (persons for the most
part indigent and poor) who being Sued frequently pay three times more cost
than their ^riginal Debts amount unto, for the (...) of both partys for the
future, and the immediate and (...) recovery of just-(...) and (...) of the
like agrievances for the time to come, it is therefore prayed that it may be
enacted,

And BE IT ENACTED by the Kings most Ecellent Majesty by and with the Advice
and Consent of this present General Assembly and the Authority of the same,
that no County Court within this Province shall hold Plea or have jurisdiction
for the hearing, trying or determining of any Action or Actions before them
brought either by Bond, Bill, Assumption, Reckoning or Account wherein the real
Debt or Damages does not exceed the Sum of two hundred pounds of tobacco, or
sixteen shillings and eight pence in money, but that in all such cases it shall
and may be lawful for any one Justice of the Peace within the several and
respective Countys, wherein the person debtor does reside, to try, hear and
determine the matter of controversy between them, the party and partys debtor
and creditor as aforesaid, upon application to him made by any creditor or
creditors of such debtor or debtors as aforesaid, and at the time of such
application such Justice is also authorized and empowered, also willed and
required to issue out his Warrant and to depute such person for to execute the
same as he shall think fit to command and bring before him the person of such
debtor, or debtors, and also (...) to issue out for such witness or witnesses
as either Plaintiff or Defendant shall have occasion to make use of with power
to administer an Oath or Oaths to either Plaintiff or Defendant, or to either of
their Evidences as occasion shall repuite for the better clearing of the matter
in controversy before him, and upon full hearing of the Allegations of both
partys, what may or can be given upon Oath in Evidence by both their witnesses,
to proceed as the nature of the ease shall require, whose determination shall
be final; all which such Justice of the Peace before whom such matter of
controversy shall be brought, shall do the same without any see or reward: and
if such party or partys against whom Judgment shall be given, shall refuse or
delay to pay such debt as shall be awarded against him or them, then it shall
and may be lawful for such Justice' of the Peace to award Execution against the
said party or partys for the debt aforesaid, by fieri facias or capias ad
satisfaciendum directed to the Sherrif of the County, which said Sherrif upon
receipt of such precept^ from such Justice aforesaid shall immediately leavy the
same upon his her (...) their Goods Chattels or Body, as the nature of the
Writ shall require, all which such Sherrif shall do ex officio, saving to such
Sherrif his sees of imprisonment if the party shall remain in custody twenty
four hours.

And Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, etc. that in all Actions
that shall be brought by any person or persons in any of the County Courts of
this Province after the publication of this Law, wherein upon trial it does
appear to the Court that the just balance does not exceed two hundred pounds
of Tobacco (...) sixteen Shillings and eight Pence in Money the Plaintiff shall
be non suited, and Judgment shall not be given any County Court of this
Province to any person or persons for any such balances aforesaid, but that
the Plaintiff shall be nonsuited as aforesaid

And Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid that in any action or
actions after the end of this Sessions of Assembly that shall be brought in the
Provincial Court of this Province and upon trial it does appear to the Court
that the just balance is under fifteen hundred pounds of Tobacco, or six
pounds five shillings in Money the Plaintiff shall be nonsuited as aforesaid.

And Be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that his Majestys high Court of
Chancery within this Province shall not hear, try, determine or give Relief in
any Cause or Causes wherein the original Debt or Damages does not amount to the
Sum of twelve hundred and one pounds of Tobacco or five pounds and one p^ny in
Money but that the Judgments of the County Courts of this Province for 12
hundred pounds of Tobacco or five pound in Money shall be final, any Law custom
or usuage to the contrary notwithstanding.

An Act for rectifying the ill practices of the Attorneys of this Province, and
ascertaining the Attorney General and Clerk of the Indictments Fees.
WHEREAS by a certain Ordinance of Assembly made at a General Assembly held at
the Port of Annapolis the twentieth day of May Anno-Domini 1695. i^ was
ordained that the Attorney General of this Province should have four hundred
pounds of Tobacco Fee for all Actions he should bring upon Bonds taken in the
name of our Sovereign Lord the King, and put in Suit in the Provincial Court of
this Province to be paid by the party bound in the said Bond, and for all
Criminal Causes where the Grand Jury shall find the Bill in the Provincial
Court the Attorney General to have four hundred pounds of Tobacco, and that the
Clerk of the Indictments in the several and respective County Courts should
have two hundred pounds of Tobacco of the Criminals where the grand jury ^ound
the Bill by color of the said Ordinance and lucre of Fees several Bonds have
been put in Suit without any default, and several venires have been issued
before any presentment of the grand jury, or any order of the Court, so that
diverse of his Majestys good Subjects of this Province have been unjustly
grieved, troubled and molested upon every trivial and slight-complaint to the
Attorney General and to the said Clerks of Indictments, for preventing of which
great evil for the future the Delegates of this General Assembly do humbly pray
that it may be Enacted, And

BE IT ENACTED by the Kings most Excellent Majesty by and with the Advice and
Consent of this present General Assembly and the Authority of the same, that
after the end of this Sessions of Assembly no Summons or other Process for any
Criminal matter or misdemeanor shall issue out of any of the Courts of this
Province against any person or persons whatsoever without a presentment be
first ^ound against the said person or persons by the grand jury, unless by a
special order of Court, and if the Attorney General or any other Attorney of
the Provincial Court shall issue forth Summons or any other Process against any
person or persons and no presentment or order of Court appears upon the Record
to justify the same, the said Attorney so offending shall forfeit and pay for
such his offense the Sum of five thousand pound of Tobacco, the one half to his
Sacrad Majesty toward the defraying of the public Leavy of this Province, the
other half to the party grieved, or him or them that shall inform or sue for
the same, to be recovered in the Provincial Court of this Province by Bill,
Plaint or Information, and if any Clerk of Indictments in any of the County
Courts of this Province, or any other Attorney practicing in the said Courts
shall issue forth any summons or other process against any person or persons
for any Criminal, matter or misdemeanor without presentment be found (...) by
the grand jury against the said person or persons or special order of Court
appearing upon Record to justify the same, the said Clerk of indictments or
other Attorney so offending shall forfeit and pay for such his offense the Sum
of two thousand five hundred pounds of Tobacco, the one half to his Majesty
toward the defraying the County Leavy, the other half to the party grieved
(...) to him or them that shall inform or sue for the same, to be recovered in
any Court of this Province, wherein no Essoyn or Protection shall be allowed
Neither shall the party offending have any Appeal or Writ of Error, but the
(...) of the County Court shall be d^e^^nitive therein, and if the Clerk of the
Provincial Court of this Province, or any of the Clerks of the County Courts of
this Province shall issue out summons or other process in criminal causes
without an order for the same, under the ^and of an Attorney practicing in the
said Court or Courts to justify the same, the said Clerk or Clerks so offending
shall be liable to the same forfeitures and penaltys of Attorneys so offending,
and the said forfeitures to be recovered and go to the use aforesaid.

And Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that the Attorney
General of this Provinces shall not recover nor receive any see for any
Navigation Bond put in Suit, either where the certificate was before the Suit
of the said Bond lodged in the Secretarys Office of this Province, or where it
can be proved that he knew there was such certificate returned, either shall
the said Attorney General receive or have any (...) for any Bond taken* for
Country dues, where ^he said Bond appears not to be forfeited, which was the
true intent and meaning of the said Ordinance of Assembly, and if the said
Attorney General after the end of this Sessions o^ Assembly shall sue any bond
taken contrary to Act of Parliament, or any Bond taken for Country dues, and no
Bills of Exchange appearing protested, nor no other failure to forfeit the said
Bond, or where the certificate is returned into the Secretarys office appointed
for keeping the same, any of which cases appearing to the Provincial Court, the
said Attorney General shall not only loose his fee but pay the honorable
Secretarys fees and what other charges the party has been out in defending the
same, to be adjudged by the Provincial Court; and whereas several persons have
been sued in his Majesty's Name for a certain Sum, without ever mentioning for
what the said Bond was taken, so that the said persons do not know what courses
to take or whom to apply themselves to. Therefore

Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that when any Writ is
issued forth upon a Bond taken in his Majestys name it shall be indorsed on the
backside as follows, if a Navigation Bond, for whom the person was bound and
in what year, if a Sherrifs Bond, at whose request and prayer it was sued, or
Bond taken in any of his Majestys Offices in this Province it shall be indorsed
at whose request it was sued, and for want of such indorsment the Writ shall
abate, and the party grieved shall recover his cost against the Attorney that
sued forth the said Writ.

And Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that upon any
presentment of the grand jury upon the breach of any of the penal Laws of this
Province, save that for suppressing of Criminals and trying of them in the
County Court if the party presented confesses his crime and submits to the
Court the Clerk of the indictments shall have his see for the same, but if the
party traverse and puts himself upon a jury, then the said Clerk to have two
hundred pounds of Tobacco fee, and that upon any presentment grounded upon the
Law for suppressing Criminals upon any Statute of England, if Bill be found by
the grand Jury, the Clerk of the Indictments shall have two hundred pounds of
Tobacco fee, and that upon presentment found in the Provincial Court the
Attorney General to have four hundred pounds of Tobacco fee.

An Act of directions for the Sherrifs Office in this Province.
FORASMUCH as great complaint has been made by many the inhabitants of this
Province, that great and many inconveniencys have happened and for the future
may happen and accrue to Merchants and other persons tradeing into or
inhabiting in this Province, who have several debts and Sums of Tobacco due
unto them from several persons in this Province, who for satisfaction of their
said debts have paid away and delivered to their several creditors several
quantitys and hogsheads of Tobacco, and such hogshead or hogsheads of Tobacco
have been received marked and nailed by such Merchants or others trading unto
or residing within this Province as aforesaid, and thereupon the said creditors
have delivered up unto their said debtors their Bills or other Specialtys given
for security of the said debts (...) or otherwise the said debtors have
procured releases and discharges for the said debts. Yet notwithstanding
afterward the Sherrif of such County upon pretense of public debt due from
the said persons debtors have seized the said creditors Tobacco so received,
marked and nailed as aforesaid and (...) in the said debtors tobacco houses,
and by that means the said creditors are (...) without remedy for recovery of
the said debt again to the great discouragement of trade and prejudice of such
creditors, for prevention whereof for the future the Delegates of this present
General Assembly do pray that it may be enacted,

And BE IT ENACTED by the Kings most Excellent Majesty by and with the Advice
and Consent of this present General Assembly and the Authority of the same,
that any person or persons whatsoever Merchants or others within this Province,
that have at any time within twelve months last past received marked and named,
or for the f^ture shall receive, mark or nail any hogshead or hogsheads of
tobacco within this Province of any person or persons debtors within the same,
and which has been paid and delivered to them (...) satisfaction of their said
debts and such Merchant or others have upon recei^, marking and nailing such
hogshead or hogsheads of tobacco delivered up their (...) or other security to
their respective debtor of their said debts, or if the said Merchants o^ others
have given releases or discharges to their said debtors of the said debt and
that before the said Merchant or others could remove the said hogshead or
hogsheads of tobacco from the said debtors tobacco houses, if any Sherrif shall
come and seize such tobacco so marked and nailed as aforesaid, that then and in
every such case, if the party refuse to make and giver (...) the said Creditors
some other full satisfaction for their said debts, it shall and may be lawful
for any two of his Majestys Justices of the respective Countys within this
Province upon due proof thereof made before them of the said debt and Sherrifs
seizure as aforesaid, and the party debtor refusing to make that full
satisfaction to their Creditors for their said debts at the said Creditors
request to award him Execution with Cost, such Cost not exceeding one hundred
pounds of tobacco against the Body Goods and Chattels of such debtor, to be
executed by the Sherrif for satisfaction of the creditors just debt and cost as
aforesaid, in as full and ample manner as if the debt was recovered by due
course of Law.

And Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that no Sherrif, under
Sherrif or Deputy that seize any tobacco (...), not seize or mark any merchant
o^ other tobac^ received marked and nailed as aforesaid for any cause
whatsoever but only for Lea^ys, and the several Sherrif, are hereby empowered
to break the (...) of any tobacco house or other houses where tobacco is or
shall be secured with design to prevent the said Sherrif from seizing such
tobacco for public leavys and any Sherrif so seizing and marking any hogshead
or hogsheads of tobacco containing more than (...) is justly due to the public
for Leavys, without making satisfaction to the person whom such tobacco does
belong, as by giving credit, or (...) him to take the overplus out of such
hogshead of tobacco, at the choice of the party paying or owing ^he same, shall
pay for every such default the sum of two thousand pounds of tobacco, one half
to his Majesty for support of Government, the other hall to the party grieved,
to be recovered in any Court of (...) within this Province by Action of Debt
Bill Plaint or Information, wherein no Essoyn Protection (...) of Law to be
allowed.

And (...) shall so (...) that any time any Sherrif shall seize any hogshead of
tobacco which shall (...) more than such Leavy or Leavys shall amount unto, if
the remaining (...) due to the party (...) from whom they shall receive such
Leavy or Leavys by the greater (...), then and in every such case the said
Sherrif or Sherrifs shall take ou^ of the said hogshead such quantity or
quantitys of tobacco due to him for such leavy or leavys, and the said hogshead
and the remaining part of the tobacco shall be and remain with the party or
partys paying the same, but if the remaining part o^ such hogshead of tobacco
so seized as aforesaid and belonging to the party or partys paying the same
shall be the less quantity than is due to the said Sherrif or Sherrifs for
leavys as aforesaid, then and in every such case the owner or owners of such
tobacco shall take ou^ the overplus of such tobacco, and the hogshead with the
remaining part shall belong to such Sherrif or Sherrifs receiving the same

And Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that no Sherrif within
this Province shall take, exact or receive of or from any person whatsoever
Fees, Sallary, Gratuity or Reward for serving any Writ, Warrant or Precept
from the Governor and Council, or from any Justice of the Peace, or for doing
any other thing in any of the Courts of Record upon any Suit or Suits in
Criminal Causes but the several Sherrifs are hereby enjoined to execute the
same ex (...). And (...) very Sherrif offending shall forfeit the sum of one
thousand pounds of tobacco (...) every such offense, the (...) half to his
Majesty his Heirs and Successors for the support of Government, the other half
to the party grieved, to be recovered in any Court of Record within this
Province by Action of Debt Bill Plaint or Information, wherein no Essoyn
Protection or Wager of Law to be allowed.

And whereas many letigious persons have, and for the future may commence
Actions of Trespass upon the Case rather out of spite and malice than any real
cause of Action and not setting forth in the original Writ the cause of such
Action, yet lay damage to a vast sum to deter persons from being Bail thereto,
for prevention whereof for the future.

Be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that in all Actions of Trespass upon
the Case where damages are said to be above four thausand pounds of tobacco, if
no Declaration be sent with the Writ, expressing the true cause of Action, the
Sherrif shall not require a Bail Bond exceeding the sum of eight thousand
pounds of tobacco, although the damage be laid in the Writ for any greater sum
whatsoever, and any Sherrif offending herein shall forfeit the sum of four
thousand pounds of tobacco, the one half thereof to his Majesty his Heirs and
Successors toward the support of Government, the other half to the party
grieved, to be recovered in any Court of Record within this Province by Action
of debt bill plaint or information, where^^ ^o essoyn protection or wager of
Law to be allowed.

And to the end that public Creditors may be speedily satisfied their debts
due from the public, Be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that every
public Creditor in this Province shall be at his election to make application
to the Governor of this Province for the time being to put such Sherrifs Bond
or Bonds in suit or otherwise may i^^ediatly have an action of debt against
such Sherrif in the County where the fact arises for such public tobacco as
shall be due to such creditor

And to the end that no officer or other person may be surprised or unjustly
molested either upon the account of payment or collection of public dues, Be
it likewise Enacted, that no person or persons having public tobacco to them
due, or fe^s in any Sherrifs hands to collect, and that do not signify to such
Sherrif or Sherrifs their dependence and resolution of making use of the same
on or before the 25 th day of December in the year the same shall to him or
them be due, shall have take or demand any benefit or advantage by this Act
allowed for that present year and so every year successively, nor shall the
Sherrif of any the respective Countys leavy by way of Execution for any public
dues or officers fees, or from any the inhabitants within this Province where
they have not made a demand thereof at or before the 20 th day of January for
that present year, and so every year successively.

And where any person having public tobacco or fees in such Sherrifs hands and
have made their demand thereof as aforesaid, or the said Sherrif demanded any
public dues or officers fees of the respective inhabitants within his
Bailywick within the times before limited, such demandant shall be obliged to
take the same and discharge such debtor, for such and so much as shall be by
him received, and on refusal of receiving thereof, the said tobacco so intended
to be paid as aforesaid, being viewed and sound merchantable by two honest Men
of the neighborhood shall be weighed and marked for the use of such demandant,
and be a sufficient discharge to the person or persons paving the same for so
much as the same did amount unto, provided the same be tendered on or before the
tenth day of April, otherwise such tobacco to lie at the risqu^ of the Sherrifs
or others intending to receve advantage hereby, any thing herein contained to
the contrary notwithstanding.

And Be it also Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that no Sherrif within this
Province have in his hands any public officers fees to collect shall presume
to leavy by Execution on any the inhabitants within this Province any fees to
him committed to collect, where the person or persons from whom such fees
appear to be due produce the former Sherrifs receipt, or otherwise make appear
payment of the same, under forfeiture and penalty of treble the sum, executed
to the party or partys grieved, to be recovered with cost in any Court of
Record within this Province by Bill Plaint or Information, wherein no Essoyn
Protection or wager of Law shall be allowed.

And forasmuch as Sherrifs Bonds have of late years been usually taken in the
County Courts for the better convenience of the Sherrifs getting security
without any certain form thereof prescribed.

Be it therefore Enacted, that all Sherrifs Bonds hereafter to be taken
throughout this Province to be made in manner and form following.

Maryland ss.
KNOW all Men by these presents that we A B etc. of the County of (...) the
Province aforesaid Gent' are holden and firmly bound unto our Sovereign Lord
King William etc. in the full sum and just quantity of two hundred thousand
pounds of good ^ound merchantable leaf tobacco and (...), to be paid to (...)
said Majesty his heirs and successors, to the which payment well and truly to
be (...) we bind our selves and either of us, our and either of our Heirs
Executors and Administrate jointly and severally for the whole and in the whole
firmly by these presents as witness our hands and (...) the (...) day of (...)
in the (...) year of (...) Majestys Reign (...)

THE CONDITION of the above Obligation is such, that if the above bounden A. B.
do well and truly serve his said Majesty his heirs and successors in the office
of high Sherrif of the said County of (...) within this Province aforesaid, and
also shall render unto his said Majesty and other his said Officers a true
faithful and perfect account of all and singular his said Majestys Rights and
Dues and to his Officers a true and just account of their fees, that he shall
or may be entrusted with, by his Majestys Governor and other his Officers
within this Province afo^resaid to receive and collect, and his account to his
said Majesty his heirs and successors, or to his or their Goa^rnour here for
the time being for the fines and forfeitures and other dues belonging to his
said Majestys Government, as also his account of all fees, dues or sums of
money or tobacco for leavys or fees due to any his Majestys Officers and other
good people within this Province, shall pass an account for by the tenth day of
April next ensuing the date hereof, and in all other things as Sherrif of the
said County of (...) shall behave himself well and honestly toward all
persons, according to the best of his power, skill and knowledge, then this
obligation to be void and of no effect, or elce to stand in full force strength
and virtue.

Which said Bond when taken in form aforesaid, if by the County Court the
Commissioners thereof shall transmit the same into the Secretarys Office
together with all former Sherrifs Bonds by them taken, and the said
Commissioners are hereby required and enjoined to take new security yearly, and
every year, of such Sherrifs so long as they shall continue in the said Office,
having especial regard not to admit any person to be security as aforesaid but
such as are good and substantial Freeholders within their County, and also to
make the obligation of such Bond so to be taken from any Sherrif answerable to
the public charge of their respective Countys. And for encouragement of such
persons now bearing or that shall hereafter bear the office of Sherrif and who
shall punctually comply with the public Creditors, it is also hereby further
Enacted, that it shall and may be lawful for his Majestys Governor for the
time being where no just complaint is made against such Sherrif to continue and
make good their Commission for the time and term of three years successively
but no longer.

An Act prohibiting the inhabitants of this Province or any others from carri^^
Liquors to the Indian Towns.
BE IT ENACTED by the Kings most-Excellent Majesty by and (...) the Advice and
Consent of this present General Assembly and the (...) of the same, that from
and after the publication hereof any person or persons whatsoever inhabiting or
trading into this Province, that shall presume ^o carry (...) liquors
whatsoever to any Indian Fort or Town, or within three miles of such Fort or
Town, and shall vend or dispose of the same to any Indian or Indians
whatsoever, such person or persons shall forfeit the sum of five thousand
pounds of tobacco, one half thereof (...) Sovereign Lord the King his Heirs and
Successors toward the (...) Government, the other half to him or them that
shall inform or sue for (...), to be recovered in any Court of Record within
this Province, wherein no (...) Protection or wager of Law to be allowed.

An Act for Summoning grand and petty Juries.
WHEREAS by Law it appears to be the indubitable Right and Property of the King
s Majestys Subjects throughout all his Majestys Dominions (...) all cases,
either ^eum and tu^m or Criminal matters to be tried by their (...) that is a
grand and petty Jury. And for that the constitution of this his Majestys
Province will not admit of such ways and methods as is practiced in the Kingdom
of England by reason of the small number of inhabitants, and diverse other
impediments not to be a voided.

BE IT THEREFORE ENACTED by the Kings most Excellent Majesty by and with the
Advice and Consent of this present General Assembly and the Authority of the
same, that the chief Clerk of the Provincial Court shall issue out several
Writts of ven^re fa^ias for two good and lawful Men Freeholders to serve upon a
grand Jury for the Body of this Province, and several other the like Writts of
ven^re f^^ias for three like good and lawful Men to serve upon petty Juries,
which Writts of Summons shall be directed on the high Sherrifs of each
re-Countys in this Province, by virtue of which said Writts the said Sherrifs
shall 20 days at least before the Provincial Court at which the said Jurors
shall serve summons and give notice to the said party and partys, that they be
and appear as by the Writts of Sumons shall be directed, (Justices of the Peace
and Delegates allways excepted) and for default hereof, the Sherrif so
offending shall forfeit and pay a Fine of one thousand pounds of tobacco, and
each party so summoned and refusing to serve and not appearing at the time and
place appointed shall forfeit and pay a fine of five hundred pounds of tobacco,
and if it so happen by casualty or by accident that there shall not appear a
sufficient number for a grand Jury legally summoned, then the number to be made
good and completed by the high Sherrif attending the said Court of other
persons by standers of the same County if any be present, but if none present,
of the next adjacent County legally qualified to serve as aforesaid, and upon
refusal they shall be subject to the like fines as aforesaid, and for such
their service and attendant^ of the grand Jury at each Court they shall have an
allowance of three thousand pounds of tobacco out of the public Reven^ue of
this Province toward the defraying of their charges and expenses.

And it is hereby further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that the high
Sherrifs of each and every respective County in this Province are hereby
authorized and empowered to summon a sufficient number of Freeholders, good and
lawful Men to serve on a grand Jury in (...) County Courts of this Province
twice (...) at the least, that is to say at March and November Court, and
oftener if need require, at the discretion of the Justices of the said Countys,
and to summon the said grand Jurors at least ten days before each Court, for
which Service the Justices of each respective County Court shall and are hereby
empowered to make such reasonable Allowance as to them shall seem meet, not
exceeding the sum of four hundred pounds of tobacco each court and the said
S^errifs neglecting their office and duty herein as aforesaid, shall for every
such offense forfeit and pay the sum of five hundred pounds of tobacco, and the
party or partys so refusing to serve when legally summoned shall forfeit and
pay the sum of two hundred and fifty pounds of tobacco, and and the said fine
to be leavied upon all petty Jury Men legally sumoned who shall be legally
qualified as before in this Act recited and provided.

And Be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that all and every the Fines and
Forfeitures that shall ^all or accrue by virtue of this before recited Act
shall be paid to our Sovereign Lord the King his Heirs and Successors for the
Support of Government, any Law Stature or Custom to the contrary
notwithstanding. This Act to endure for three years, or to the end of the next
Sessions of Assembly which shall first happen.

An Act for taking special Bail in the several Countys in this Province, upon
Actions and Suits depending in his Majestys Provincial Court.
FOR the greater case and benefit of all persons inhabiting (...) within this
Province in taking Recognizances of special Bail in (...) actions and Suits
depending or to be depending in his Majestys Provincial Court of this Province.

BE IT ENACTED by the Kings most Excellent Majesty by and with the Advice and
Consent of this present General Assembly and the Authority of the same, that
when special Bail is required by the Provincial Court by the Plaintifs Attorney
at the calling over of the appearance Docket, and that the Court does rule that
(...) Bail shall be given, and the partys against whom the rule is that he
shall give special bail be present, the party defendant shall then and there
(...) special bail in open Court, and shall be deemed to be in the custody of
the Sherrif that arrested him in that Action till he give special bail as
aforesaid is required, bu^^ if the said party defendant be not able at the said
Provincial Court then and there to procure special bail, yet the said party
shall remain and be in custody of the same Sherrif that arrested him, and by
him in safe custody kept and guarded, and carried back into the County where
the Defendant was a^^ested, and there in safe custody kept until he can procure
such special bail, but if the said party against whom such rule is that special
bail shall be given be not present at the Provincial Court, then the Sherif of
that County where the said party defendant was arested may and shall by virtue
of such rule aforesaid for special bail to be given take the party unto his
custody again, and there keep till he can procure special bail according to the
rule of Court; And for the greater case of making and taking Recognizances of
such special bail, it shall and may be lawful for any person that shall be by
his Majestys Commission appointed one of the Justices of the Provincial Court
of this Province within such County where such Justice of the Provincial Court
shall inhabit, and in case of death or absence of such Justice of the
Provincial Court then it shall be lawful for the President of the County Court
to take and receive all and every such Recognizance or Recognizances of Bail or
Bails as any person or persons shall be willing of desirous to acknowledge or
make before him in his County, in any Action or Suit depending or hereafter to
be depending in the said Provincial Court; which Recognizance shall be taken in
manner and form as follows, viz.

(...) (...) You A: B. and C: D. and either of you do undertake for the against
I said R: Roe: Defendant in -- pounds of tobacco to

(...): be leavied on your and either^ of your Lands and Tenements, Goods and
Chattels to the use of the said J; Do the Plaintiff, upon condition that if the
said J: -- D. -- obtain Judgment in an Action of Debt or Trespass upon the case
depending in the Provincial Court against the said R: -- R. -- the Defendant,
that then the said R, -- R. -- shall pay the condemnation, or deliver himself
to the person of our Sovereign Lord the King or you will do it for him, they
acknowledge themselves to be content therewith, this -- day of -- before me

To the honorable Justices* Which said Recognizance or Recogninances of Bail
of the Provincial Court. (...) or Bail Prizes so taken as aforesaid, shall be
transmitted to the Justice of the said Provincial Court at the next Provincial
Court sitting when and where such Action or Suit (...) depending; which
Recognizance or Recognizances of Bail Prizes so taken as aforesaid, the said
Court shall receive upon payment of such Fees as have been usually received for
the taking of such special Bail by the Officers of the said Court, and shall be
of like force and effect as if the same were taken de (...) before the Justices
of the said Provincial Court during their sitting, for taking of every such
Recognizance or Recognizances of Bail or Bail Prizes, such Justices of the
Provincial Court, or President of the County Court that shall take such Bail,
shall receive only the sum of five shillings and no more.

And Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that the Justices of the
Provincial Court shall make such rules and orders for the justifying of such
Bails and making the same absolute as to them shall seem m^^t, so as the
Cognizor or Cognizors of such Bail or Bails be not compelled to appear in
person in the Provincial Court to justyfie him or themselves.

And it is hereby further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that such
Justices of the Provincial Court before whom any Recognizance of Bail may
happen to be taken, such Justice has and power is hereby given him to examine
the Suretys (...) on Oath touching the (...) of their respective Estates if
occasion shall require, any Law usuage (...) practice notwithstanding.

An Act for the Constables taking a List of Texables.
BE IT ENACTED by the Kings most Excellent Majesty by and with the Advice and
Consent of this present General Assembly and the Authority of the same, that
from and after the publication hereof every Constable within this Province
(...) at or before the 20th, day of June in every year respectively repair in
(...) to every respective house or habitation within his hundred, and there
require of the Master, Mistress, Dame or other chief person of the Family a
true (...) from under their hands of all their taxable persons they and every
of them have within their respective Familys, out of which List the said
Constable shall make two fair fair Lists under his hand, and one he shall send
to the Sherrif of the County, and the other he shall present to the next County
Court to be set up, and if in case any Master, Mistress, Dame or other chief
person of a Family shall refuse or deny to give such List, or in their absence
leave at their dwelling houses or quarters such a List and Account of their
taxable persons of their several Familys, or in the said account shall conceal
any taxable person or persons in his or their Family, for every such offense
not giving a true list and account of them to the Constables by the time
required, and for every taxable person by them con^ealed shall forfeit and pay
for every such offense the sum of five hundred pounds of tobacco for every
person so by him or them concealed, and every Constable (...) his office
herein, shall forfeit and pay the sum of five hundred pounds (...) every such
offense, (...) half thereof to his Majesty his Heirs and (...) the Support of
Government, the other half to the informer or him or them that will sue for the
same, to be (...) in any Court of Record within this Province, wherein no
Essoyn Protection of wager of Law to be allowed.

And Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid etc. if any inhabitant
within this Province, shall from the time herein appointed for taking the list
of taxables, on the last day of July purchase any taxable person or persons, he
or she shall with all convenient speed give notice of the said taxable or
taxables to the Constable of the said hundred, who is hereby enjoined to give
account to the next County Court, and to the end that no person for the (...)
may be ignorant what persons are taxables and what not.

Be it Enacted by and with the Advice and Consent, aforesaid, that all Male
Children born within this Province and resident in it shall be taken and
accounted taxables at the age of sixteen years and upwards, and all Male
Children Servant^ imported into this Province at the age of sixteen years and
upwards shall be accounted taxables, and all Slaves whatsoever either Male or
Female imported into or born in this Province at or above the age of sixteen
years shall be accounted taxables and so rated, and that all Freemen within
this Province (except (...) Men and likewise such poor impotent persons that
receive Alms from the county) shall be accounted taxables being above the age
of sixteen years.

An Act for the due Recording of all Laws of this Province in the Secretary^
Office, (...) also transmitting the Journal of the house of Delegates into the
Secretarys Office.
BE IT ENACTED by the Kings most Excellent Majesty by and with the Advice and
Consent of this present General Assembly and the Authority of the same, that
the Secretary of this Province in whose custody the Records remain, do it or
before the tenth day of March next cause all such Laws and Acts of Assembly as
shall be of force at the end of this present Sessions of Assembly to (...) upon
Record in a large new Book of a large Folio and good and substantial Paper
(...) bound, either in Leather or Parchment to be writ in a fair legible hand,
as also all other Laws hereafter to be made within six Months after any
Sessions of Assembly that shall hereafter happen, to be kept in the Secretarys
Office only, and also cause the same to be examined by the (...) Acts, to
which the Governor has affixed the broad Seal, and the same so (...) shall be
signed by the Honorable the Secretary and sealed with the lesser Seal, and
that his Honor the Secretary cause a List or Catalogue of the said Laws to be
entered in the said Book, and an Index or Table directing to every Act in the
same, and in default thereof by the time aforesaid, shall pay as a Fine for the
same the sum of ten thousand pounds of tobacco, to be recovered in his Majestys
name, the one half to his Majesty for the support of Government, the other half
for him or them that shall sue for the same, and when the same is written and
done, the said Secretary shall at the next General Assembly be allowed and paid
out of the public Leavy so much as the said Secretary shall reasonably deserve.

And Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that the Clerk of the
House of Delegates for the time being transcribe the Journal of the said House
within two Months after the P^crogation or Dissolution of any Assembly now held
or to be held hereafter, upon penalty of five hundred pounds of tobacco, to be
forfeited and paid to our Sovereign Lord the King one half of which (...) for
the support of Government, and the other half to him or them that shall sue for
the same, to be recovered in any Court of Record within this Province by Bill,
Plaint or Information, wherein no Essoyn Protection or wager of Law to be
allowed.

An Act for securing Merchants and others tobacco after they have received it.
BE IT ENACTED by the Kings most Excellent Majesty by and with the Advice and
Consent of this present General Assembly and the Authoity of the same, that
from and after the publication hereof, every Housekeeper and in habitant within
this Province having a Plantation whereon he makes or causes to be made any
tobacco, shall build and erect, or otherwise ^it up and make ready a good right
House, with a good Door Lock and Key upon every Platation where such tobacco is
made as aforesaid, and sufficient to (...) the tobacco made on every Plantation.

And Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that every Inhabitant or
Housekeeper as aforesaid, having a Plantation whereon he makes or causes to
be made any tobacco as aforesaid, and that shall pay away and dispose of any
tobacco to any Merchant, Master of Ship or Sailor or any other person
whatsoever, shall notwithstanding such disposure or payment, secure and keep
the said tobacco as he would do his own proper Goods for and during the space
of one whole year, commencing from the time of receiving the tobacco and no
longer; and if any tobacco so received as aforesaid for the want of such house
as aforesaid should be damnified or stole, the person neglecting to provide
such house shall make satisfaction to the party that received the same.

Provided always that nothing in this Act contained shall be construed meant
and intended to make any Inhabitant or Housekeeper liable to any damage which
shall or may happen to any tobacco so left with him to keep secure through any
other casuality whatsoever.

An Act for regulating of Ordinarys, and limitting the number of them within
this Province.
FOR the better regulating Ordinary (...) and Inholders within this Province
for the future BE IT ENACTED by the Kings most Excellent Majesty by and with
the Advice and Consent of this present General Assembly and the Authority of
the same, that from and after the publication hereof, the Commissioners of ^ach
County Court, and the Mayor Recorder and Aldermen of the City of St Marys at
the Mayors Court, be and are hereby empowered and authorized from time to time
as often as need shall require to grant Licenses to such person and persons as
they shall think fit to be Ordinary keepers and Inholders for the keeping of
Ordinarys and houses of entertainment, so long time as in such and so many
places within their several and respective Countys and City aforesaid, for the
ease and convenience of the Inhabitants, Travelers and Strangers as to them
respectively shall seem meet, for which Licenses the said persons that shall be
so licensed to keep Ordinarys, except all such persons as shall keep Ordinary
or Ordinarys in the Port of Annapolis in the County of Ann-Arundel, shall at
the time of his or their taking such License or Licenses be bound and obliged
to pay unto the Secretary of this Province for the time being if he or they
keep Ordinary within the Port of Annapolis in Ann-Arundel County or within two
miles thereof the sum of two thousand pounds of tobacco yearly for a fine for
every such License, or if he or they do keep Ordinary within the City of St.
Marys, or at any County Court House, or at the Town and Port of Williamstadt
within this Province the sum of twelve hundred pounds of tobacco, and if any
person or persons shall keep any Ordinary of houses of entertainment in other
remoter parts, for entertainment of travelers shall pay to the said Secretary
for the time being yearly for a fine the sum of four hundred pounds of tobacco
and no more, and give Bond for the payment thereof.

And it is hereby Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, by and with the Advice
and Consent aforesaid, that the Clerk (...) respective County Court within this
Province, and the Clerk of the Mayors Court of the said City of St. Marys shall
cause such License and the fines for granting such Licenses and the security
given for the payment and performance thereof, to be duly entered upon Record in
their several Courts, and then transmit the said Bonds to the Justices of the
Provincial Court for his Majestys said Secretarys use, for which (...) and
Bonds such Ordinary keepers shall pay to such respective (...) of tobacco and
no (...).

And Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, etc. that the
Commissioners of the several County Courts, and the Mayor, Recorder and
Aldermen of the said City be and (...) hereby authorized and empowered at their
several County Courts and Mayors Court in the Month of January and the Month of
August half yearly and every year during the continuance of this Act, having
summoned each respective Ordinary keeper within their respective Countys and
City, th^^ and there to set and assess (...) prices of all liquors whatsoever
in this present Act not hereafter mentioned by them the said Ordinary keepers
vended or to be vended for the year ensuing, and so for every year during the
continuance of this Act, which rates and prices so to be set and assessed,
limited and appointed by the Commissioners aforesaid, and by the Magistrates
of the City aforesaid, shall be by their several and respective Clerks
transcribed and set up at their several and respective County Courts and City
aforesaid, in some public place or places there, that every person or persons
may peruse the same, the Copy of which table and prices of liquors every
Ordinarykeeper within each County are hereby obliged (...) scribe fairly and
keep the same set up in the most public place of their house or houses for the
perusal of all persons that receive any Ordinary accom^dations from them, under
the penalty of one thousand pounds of tobacco* to be applied to the use of the
County where such Ordinary keeper shall live, to be sued (...) in case of non
payment thereof in his Majestys name, for which sums and table of prices every
Ordinary keeper shall pay to such Clerk the sum of forty pounds of tobacco and
no more. And any Ordinary keeper and inholder that shall after the setting and
assessing the rates and prices-aforesaid, directly or indirectly take, exact,
demand or receive for the price and pay for any such liquors for which the
rates and prices shall be set and a (...) as aforesaid of any person or persons
whatsoever above the ^ares and prices so assest as aforesaid shall for every
such offense forfeit and pay the (...) five hundred pounds (...) one half
thereof to his Majesty his Heirs and successors for the use of the County, and
the other half to him or them that (...) in form and sue for the same, and
loose every such debt so unjustly charged, exacted and demanded, (...)
forfeitures to be recovered in any Court of Record within this Province,
wherei^ no Essoyn Protection or wager of Law to be allowed.

And every such Ordinary keeper that shall demand, exact or receive above the
sum of ten pounds of tobacco per gallon for small beer, twenty pounds of
tobacco per gallon for strong beer, for a nights lodging in a bed four pounds
of tobacco, for a p^ck of haled Indian Corn or Oats for a Horse twelve pounds
of tobacco, for part u^age for a horse per night six pounds of tobacco, for hay
or straw for a Horse per night ten pounds of tobacco, shall also pay and
forfeit, for every such offense the sum of five hundred pounds of tobacco, one
half thereof to his said Majesty his Heirs and (...) for the use of the County,
and the order half to (...) or them that shall inform or (...) for the same, to
be recovered as aforesaid, and loose every (...) charged as aforesaid; And to
the intent that all persons inhabitants, strangers and travellors may be
contain of good and sufficient accomodations (...) themselves and their horses.

Be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that every Ordinary keeper or
Inholder to (...) licenced as aforesaid, shall within six months after granting
their respective licenses be hereby obliged to provide and maintain if the said
Ordinary be kept at the Court House in the said County, or the Port and Town of
Annapolis and Williamstadt twelve good and substantial (...) over and above
what is for their own Familys ^se with covering for the same, together with
accommodation of oats, hay, and straw for (...) and indian corn, with stabling
for twenty horses at least, and if any such Ordinary ^e kept at any other part
of the County then at the Court House aforesaid, such Ordinary keeper shall
within the time aforesaid be provided with four spa^e beds with (...), and
sufficient stabling and provinder for six horses at the least, under (...) five
hundred pounds of tobacco, one half thereof to his Majesty his (...) for the
use of the County; the other (...) to him or them that (...) for the same, to
be recovered by B^ll Plaint (...) Protection or (...) of Law to be (...).

Provided (...) or person persons so (...) to keep Ordinary (...) during their
time of such their (...) be Justices of the (...) Comissioners in any County
(...) within this (...), nor any Mayor, Recorder or Alderman of the said (...)
St. Marys, any thing in this present Act to the contrary notwithstanding.

And it is further Enacted by the Authority (...) that if any Ordinary-keeper
keeping evil (...) in his House upon complaint (...) thereof to the Justices of
the County Court of such Ordinary keepers (...) behavior or keeping evil rule
in his house, the said Justices of the County Courts (...) by authorized and
empowered to suppress such Ordinary keeper, and call in such License.

And Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that any Ordinary keeper
disabled or suppres^ as aforesaid, or any other person that shall presume to
keep Ordinary without License first had and obtained as aforesaid, shall for
every month he or they shall keep Ordinary as aforesaid forfeit and pay two
thousand pounds of tobacco, one half to his Majesty for the use aforesaid, and
the other half to him or them that shall sue for the same, to be r^overed in
any Court of Record within this Province by Bill plaint or information, wherein
no Essoyn Protection or wager of Law to be allowed. And

Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that no person or persons
inhabiting within this Province, not having lawful license shall sell by retail
any fider quince-drink or other strong Liquors to be drank in his her or their
houses, or about his her or their Plantations upon forfeiture of every time he
she or they' shall be legally convert thereof the sum of one thousand pounds of
tobacco, one half thereof to his Majesty his Heirs and Successors for and
toward defraying the County charge where such forfeiture shall become due, and
the other half to the informer or to him or them that shall sue for the same,
to be recovered in any Court of Record within this Province by Action of Debt
Bill Plaint or information, wherein no Essoyn Protection or wager of Law to be
allowed.

And Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, by and with the Advice
and Consent aforesaid, that no person or persons whatsoever so licenc^ed to
keep Ordinary as aforesaid, shall refuse to credit any person capable of giving
a Vote for election of Delegates in any County within this Province to the
value of four hundred pounds of tobacco per Annum for any accomodations by him
vended, whereof any such person so capacitated as aforesaid shall have occasion
of or require to be acomodated with, under the penalty or forfeiture of four
hundred pounds of tobacco, by each Ordinary keeper so refusing to credit such
person as aforesaid, one moiety thereof to his Majesty his Heirs and Successors
for and toward the defraying the Countys charge where such forfeiture shall
become due, the other moiety to the informer or him or them that shall sue for
the same, to be recovered as aforesaid.

And whereas it has been found prejudicial to the inhabitants of this
Province, that such Ordinary keepers or Inholders have frequently entertained
diverse Freemen and loose persons a great time tippling at their Houses, as well
to many other persons great damage as their own ruin.

Be it therefore Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, by and with the Advice and
Cons^nt aforesaid, that it shall not be lawful for any such Ordinary keeper or
Inholder to keep such Ordinary or House of Entertainment, until they have
passed before the Justices of each respective County granting their Licenses a
Bond with good Security to the value of twenty pound Sterling that they shall
not entertain any Freeman or other loose person in their House above twenty
four hours, unless such person be capable to give his vote for a (...) in the
said County, or that they be retained as a Servant to the said (...) or
Inholder, any Law usuage or custom to the contrary notwithstanding (...).

And it is also hereby Enacted by the (...) aforesaid, that the Justices of the
Provincial Court and the Commissioners of the respective County Courts shall
give this Act in charge to the several grand (...), and (...) commissione^^
(...) respective Courts, and the Magistrates of (...) several (...) Constables
to inquire into the breach (...) all (...) in the said Ordinarys and present
the (...) the (...) and pu^ished according to (...).

(...) all and (...) and Acts formerly made concerning (...) are hereby
repealed (...) made void. This Law to continue for three years, or the end of
the next Sessions of Assembly, which shall first happen after the end of the
said three years.

An Act for Securing the Parochial Librarys of this Province, and that the care
(...) thereof be committed to some worthy and learned Person.
BE IT ENACTED (...) the Kings most Excellent Majesty by and with the Advice
and Consent of this present General Assembly and the Authority of the same,
that the Librarys appointed for the several and respective Parishes within this
Province shall be and remain in the hands and possession of the Minister of the
Parish and if any Minister be presented, appointed or inducted to the said
Parish during his residence in the Parish aforesaid, who is and shall be
obliged to keep and preserve the said Library from wast and imbezlement, and be
accountable for the same to the Governor and Council and Vestry as often as
required; And to that purpose the said Minister shall pass two receipts for the
said Books, inserting what they are, and the title and page of the same, one
receipt to go to the Governor and Council, and the other to the Vestry of the
Parish to be recorded (...) their Records, and the said Vestrys are hereby
obliged to visit the said Librarys twice in the year, and inspect the same; and
in case of any damage or imbezl^ment thereof to require and cause satisfaction
to be made for the same, and in case any Minister having the charge of such
Library shall be removed from his charge, he shall deliver the said Library to
the Vestry of the Parish and make satisfaction or reparation if any damage or
wast suffered before his departure out of the said Parish, except by ^^re or
such like unavoidable accident, or in case of the death of any such Minister
having the charge of such Library, the Vestry of the said Parish shall
immedia^ly take the said Library into their custody and keeping and pass their
receipts for the same as above directed, and shall in all points be answerable
for the same, except by ^^re or such like accident as aforesaid; And for the
better presserving and securing the said Librarys, the learned and worthy
Doctor Thomas Bray or his Successors is herereby appointed chief Visitor of all
and every the said Librarys within the said Province.

And Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that one Act of Assembly
made (...) General Assembly held at the Port of Annapolis the sixteenth day of
September 1696. entitled An Act for securing the Parochial Librarys of this
Province be and is hereby Repealed and made Void and of no Effect.

An Act for punishment of Blaspheming, Fornication, Adultry, profane swearing
and cursing.
BE IT ENACTED by the Kings most Excellent Majesty by and with the Advice and
Consent of this present General Assembly and the Authority of the same, that
from and after the publication hereof, if any person or persons whatsoever
inhabiting or being within this Province shall blaspheme GOD (that is to say)
curse him, and deny our Savior Jesus Christ to be the SON of GOD, or shall
deny the Holy Trinity, the FATHER SON and HOLY GHOST, or the God head of any of
the three Persons or the unity of the God head, or shall utter any reproachful
Speeches, Words or Languages cancerning the HOLY TRINITY or any of the three
Persons thereof, for his her or their first offense shall be bored through the
Tongue and (...) the Sum of twenty pounds Sterling to his Sacred Majesty
toward (...) the Courty charge where the said offense shall be committed, to
be (...) his her or their Goods and Chattels, (...) and (...) (if any they
have) but if such offender or offenders have not Goods and Chattels, Lands and
tenements to the value aforesaid (...) six months imprisonment without (...)
for (...) whereof every such offender (...) ^^galy (...) so offend as aforesaid
shall be (...) with the (...) to be fined forty pounds (...) and (...)
offending as aforesaid shall (...) to the value aforesaid, every (...) shall
(...) imprisonment for the space of one whole year (...) as aforesaid, and for
every third offense whereof any (...) shall be legally convicted as aforesaid,
he she or they (...) death with (...) of all his her or their Goods and
Chattels to his Majesty his (...) Successors.

And Be it further Enacted by the Authority (...) that every person or persons
committing (...) convicted shall for every time so offending be fined (by (...)
shall be brought) to his Sacred Majesty in the (...) shilling (...) hundred
pounds of tobacco, to be leavied (...) for and toward the defraying the County
Leavy where such fact shall be committed or receive corporal punishment by
whipping at the discretion of the said Court, not exceeding thirty nine lashes,
and that every person or persons committing Adultery and (...) thereof legally
convict shall be fined as aforesaid for the uses aforesaid, in the sum of forty
shillings Sterling or eight hundred pounds of tobacco to be leavied as
aforesaid, or to receive corporal punishment as aforesaid. And

Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, by and with the Advice and
Consent aforesaid, that every person or persons who shall harbor, entertain
and provide for the maintenance of any lewd Woman or Women, or frequent her or
their company^, o^ the company of any such lewd Woman or Women, after public
admonition to avoid the same given by the Minister, or Churchwardens, or Vestry
of the parish or parishes where such person or persons dwell; and in case there
be no Ministers by the Churchwardens of the same Vestry aforesaid, shall for
every time it shall be proved that he she or they shall cohabit together, or
frequent the company of each other after such admonition given as aforesaid
undergo such pains and penaltys as (...) by this Act provided for such who are
legally convicted of fornication or Adultry, and whereas those horrid and
detestable sins of profane sweating and cursing are notwithstanding several
good Laws heretofore made grown so ripe, that is to be found, they provoke the
Divine Vengeance to inflict many and terrible punishments upon us, to prevent
such wickedness for the future,

Be it Enacted by the Kings most Excellent Majesty by and with the Advice and
Consent of this present General Assembly and the Authority of the same, that if
any person or persons whatsoever within this Province after the publication of
this Act profanely swear or curse in the presence or hearing of any one
Justice of the Peace or other head Officer of any Town, City or Borough within
this Province, or that shall be thereof convicted by the Oath of one witness
before any one Justice or other head Officer, or by confession of the party
offending shall forfeit and pay for such offense the sum of five shillings
Sterling to our Sovereign Lord the King for the use of the poor of the County
where the offense shall be committed, to be leavied upon such offender or
offenders immediately by Command or Warrant from such Justice of the Peace or
head Officer of any Town, City or Borough before whom such offeder or
offenders shall be convicted, to the Constable or other person whom such
Justice or he^d Officer shall command or appoint, by distress or sale of his
her or their Goods or Chattels, rendering to them the overplus, and in case any
person should refuse to obey to execute the Command or Warrant of any Justice
of the Peace or head Officer as aforesaid, in this case such person or persons
shall forfeit and pay the Sum of five Shillings to be leavied as aforesaid, to
the use aforesaid. And

Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that for every time any
person or persons shall profanely swear or (...) Court House during the
sitting of any Court within this Province and (...) convict aforesaid, he she
or they so offending shall imediatly forfeit (...) sum of ten shillings as
aforesaid to the uses aforesaid, or set in the Stocks (...) he space of one
hour, by order or command of any such Justice of the Peace or head Officer as
aforesaid.

Provided allways, and it is hereby Enacted, that no (...) prosecuted or
troubled for any such profane swearing and cursing, unless (...) or (...)
within ten days next after the offense committed.

And (...) it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, by (...) with the (...) and
(...) aforesaid, that every Justice of the Peace or head Officer aforesaid,
(...) receive all such forfeitures as aforesaid, (...) as aforesaid and render
a just account thereof to the Justices of each respective County yearly, at the
time of (...) the County Leavy to be by them disposed of to the (...) aforesaid

An Act for recovering (...) due from the public Officers, and transferring
several debts (...) therein.

An Act for payment of fees due from Criminal Persons.
WHEREAS diverse complaints have been made by several Countys of this Province,
occasioned for that they have been forced to pay the fees of imprisonment,
Criminals the persons by whom such fees ought heretofore to have been paid, or
hereafter to be paid being released and going free, to the great encouragement
of offenders, for prevention whereof for the future

BE IT ENACTED by the Kings most Excellent Majesty by and with the Advice and
Consent of this present General Assembly and the Authoity of the same, that
from hence forward no Person Sherrif, Jailer, Clerk or Crier shall charge
either their own County to which they belong or the public with any fees for
any Criminal committed to the charge of the said Sherrif or Jailer, having
sufficient Estate in this Province wherewith to pay the same, or being capable
to pay the same by servitude, but that such Criminals being discharged by order
and due course of Law, shall pay their own fees to Sherrif, Jailer, Clerk,
(...) according to Act of Assembly, either out of his Estate or by Servitude or
otherwise, provided always that this Act shall not extend to malefactors that
are executed, or to such other persons who are banished having no Estate in
this Province, or ^ervants Criminals, for whom the Country shall pay the fees
due to the Sherrif Jailer, Clerk, Crier and other Officers of such Court where
such Criminal shall be convicted.

And Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that all Officers fees
due from Criminal Servants shall be paid by the County where the fact shall be
committed and that all and every such Criminal Servant for whom the County
shall pay the fees due to such Officers as aforesaid, shall after the end and
expiration of his time of servitude to his Master satisfye unto the
Commissioners of the County who pa^^ such his fees for him to the Sherrif and
other Officers as aforesaid, for the use of such County such sums as they have
paid as aforesaid, and the several Commissioners of the several Countys shall
and are hereby empowered to make inquisition after all such Servants Criminals
for whom the County has defrayed the said fees to the Sherrif and other
Officers as aforesaid, (...) they the said Commissioners according to their
best discretion shall order for the said Servants to make such reasonable
satisfaction to the County as they shall think fit, and in such manner as they
shall and convenient, And for the better security of the County which shall pay
such fees for such Criminal Servants as aforesaid,

Be it Enacted, that the Master, Mistress or Dame of all such Servants be and
are hereby enjoined (...) required at the expiration of the time of such
Servants servitude to such Master, Mistress or Dame to render up and deliver to
the Justice or Justices of the County for the use of the County aforesaid such
Servants Criminal as aforesaid, under the penaltys to such Master, Mistress or
Dame refusing or neglecting to deliver up such Servant as aforesaid of making
satisfaction and paying to the County all such fees as by the (...) aforesaid
have been paid for such Criminals as aforesaid, and such Justice (...) to whom
such Criminal-Servant shall be delivered as aforesaid, are (...) to serve such
Servants Criminals as aforesaid in such manner and way as to the said Justice
or Justices shall (...) mee^ or convenient (...) be^and appear at the then next
County Court to be (...) for the said County to be disposed on as the Court
shall consider.

An Act for preventing vexations and unnecessary (...) of debts and pleading
discount in Bar.
WHEREAS diverse and sundry persons (...) this (...) debts by accounts with
Merchants and (...), for which they stand and remain only debtor upon their
Book of Account (...) they (...) honest and well disposed to pay the same upon
demand (...) and acquired of the said debtor, by the creditor or other persons
lawfully (...) receive the same, without which it ^s impossible for the said
debtor (...) to whom to pay the said debt, yet several of the said creditor
(...) and ava^itio^^ humors (...) daily, (...) their Suits at (...) such their
debtors, without any demand of such their debts of their said debtors, whereby
the said debt is much increased, and the said debtor thereby (...) burdened
and impoverished by means of such their vexatious and unjust Suits in Law.

BE IT THEREFORE ENACTED by the Kings most Excellent Majesty by and with the
Advice and Consent of this present General Assembly and the Authority of the
same, that from and after the publication of this Act no person whatsoever his
Executors or Administrators living or trading into this Province, shall for any
debt due or owing to him by account, book or otherwise, and for which the
debtor has not passed his hand and seal^ to such his creditor, sue or implead
at Law such debtor for any such debt contracted as aforesaid, and not under
hand and seal of such debtor as aforesaid, unless he shall first demand and
require the same of the said debtor in the County where he shall inhabit, to
prove which demand the creditor or demandants own oath shall be sufficient, but
if (...) debtor be not at home to bespoke with, then such demanandt shall leave
a noat under the hand of such creditor or demandant, or those he shall empower
to receive the same, what time and to whom the same shall be paid, and if
thereupon the same be not accordingly paid, then it shall and may be lawful for
such creditor to sue and im^dead such his debtor for the said debt, and recover
against him all such co^^ and damages as upon legal ^ryal in any Court in this
Province shall be adjudged against him, and in case any person or persons shall
sue and implead any (...) his debtor as aforesaid contrary to this Act he shall
loose all his costs of such suit, and be liable to satisfy such his debtor all
such damages as shall accrue to the (...) debtor by such his vexatious and
(...) suit at Law.

Provided always, that this Act, not any thing herein contained shall be
construed to intend to the benefit of any person debtor as aforeresaid, either
run away out of this Province, or wilfully absconding himself within the same
from his said creditor, but that he may be proceeded against as before this Law
made, any thing (...) Act to the contrary notwithstanding.

And Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, by and with the Advice
(...) Consent aforesaid, that an account ^worn to by the Plaintiff, or a Bill
proved (...) before any Justice of the Provincial Court, or any two Justices of
the County Courts of (...), ^rovince shall be sufficient evidence to prove the
debts in the Provincial or any county Courts within this Province Provided
allways that the party who shall swear or give evidence as aforesaid to prove
any debt as aforesaid, shall (...) the time declare upon his oath whether he
knows of any payment or discount of any part or parcel of the account or debt
so to be proved, which shall be certifyed ^^der, the hand or hands of such one
Justice of the Provincial Court, or two (...) of the County Court before whom
tho account or debt shall be proved with certificate made and signed as
aforesaid, shall be taken and received as sufficient proof of any such debt or
account as aforesaid.

And Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, by and with the Advice
and Consent aforesaid, (...) if any (...) upon trial can prove either by such
certificate as aforesaid or other sufficient proof that there is any sum of
tobacco or money paid to the plaintiff, or his order in part of the debt sued
for, the Court before whom such trial is (...) may cause the same to be
discounted in Court and give Judgment thereupon against the defendant for so
much only as shall be remaining to the plaintiff with cost of Suit, provided the
(...) exceeds two hundred pounds of tobacco or sixteen shillings and eight
pence in the County Courts, and fifteen hundred pounds of tobacco or six pounds
five shillings sterling in the Provincial Court, otherwise the plaintiff shall
be nonsuited as by other Laws are provided

An Act for (...) of such persons as will undertake (...) Watermills.
DAILY Experience shows tha^ the want of Water-mills is (...) cause that
Husbandry in tilling the ^round and for sowing of Wheat and Ba^ly is but coldly
prosecuted, though the advantage thereby in raising the stock of neat cattle be
great; And forasmuch as for the most part the places fit for setting up of
Water-mills are already in the hands of persons under age, o^ unable to be at
the charge of building a Water-mill, or el^e such as are wilfully obstinate in
forbiding and hindering such persons as would purchase the said places fit for
building Water-mills and set, them up, in the increase of ou^ trade and
navigation, much to the public damage of the Province.

BE IT ENACTED by the Kings most Excellent Majesty by and with the Advice and
Consent of this present General Assembly and the Authority of the same, that if
any person or persons from and after the publication hereof, that shall desire
to set up a Water mill upon any Land next adjoining to any Run of water within
this Province, not being the proper possession or freeholds of such person or
persons, nor leased to them to the intent thereon to set a Water mill, they
shall purchase a Writ out of his Majestys Court of Chancery directed to the
Sherrif of the County where such Land li^th, requiring him by the oaths of
twelve Men of his County to inquire what damage it would be to his Majesty or
others to have a Mill set up in such a place as aforesaid, the form of which
Writ follows. viz.

Will^iam by the Grace of God of England Scotland France and Ireland King
Defender of the Faith etc. To the Sherrif -- County greeting, We command you
that by the Oath of twelve honest and lawful Men of the County by whom the
truth of the matter may be better known, diligently to inquire if it be to the
damage of us or others if we grant -- of -- County twenty Acres of Land lying
at N. -- in the County aforesaid, viz. ten Acres of the one side such Run, and
ten Acres on the other side such run of water, together with liberty to take,
fall, cut down and carry away either by land or water any wood or timber fit
for building a Mill, other then timber fit to split into Clap ^oards upon any
of the Lands next adjoining to the said twenty Acres of Land lying on each side
of the said run of water at N: N. aforesaid in the County aforesaid, and if it
be to the damage and prejudice of us or others, then to what damage and
prejudice of us, and to what damage and prejudice of others, and of whom and in
what manner, and how and of what value they are by the year, according to the
true value thereof now before any further improvement made of the said twenty
Acres of Land, and who are the present (...) of the said twenty Acres of Land,
and what Lands and T^^^ements remain to the present possessors over the said
twenty Acres, and if the land remaining to the present possessors over the said
twenty Acres will suffice to uphold their manner, viz. the sixth part of their
manner allotted by the conditions of (...) for the Demesne as before the
Alienation so as the County by the Alienation aforesaid, in default of the
present possession more than was wont be not charged and grieved, and the
inquisition thereupon openly and distinctly made to us in our Chancery, under
the Seal and Seals of them by whom it was made, with out delay ^end etc.

Upon return of which Writ in case the person or persons whereby the said
inquest shall be found to be true owners and possessors of the said land fit to
build a Mill upon, shall refuse to build a Mill thereon, and give security to
his said Majesty by ^ond of fifty thousand pounds of tobacco, with condition to
build a Mill thereon within one year from that day to be computed and reckoned,
and the same building to prosecute and finish within two years after the said
beginning or laying the foundation as aforesaid for the public good of the
Province, it shall and may be lawful for his said Majesty his Heirs or
Successors, or for their chief Governor here for the time being from time to
time to grant any such twenty Acres of Land (...) a Water mill upon as
aforesaid, together with free egress and regress to the said Water mill, either
by land through any Man's land next adjoining or el^e by water, together with
liberty to fall any timber for building the said water mill, other then boat
(...) fit ^p split or cleave into clap boards for any time or (...) no^ (...)
eighty years then next to come, under the yearly rent of the (...) then (...)
the oath of twelve (...) by virtue of the (...) returned to be paid to (...)
owner of the said (...) so found and (...) as aforesaid, which said grant from
his said Majesty his Heirs and (...) or (...) the chief Governor (...) for the
time being as aforesaid shall be (...) in Law to the (...) as aforesaid for any
term of years, not (...) eighty years as aforesaid against all persons (...)
any Law, custom or usuage heretofore had, made (...) used within this Province
to the contrary notwithstanding.

Provided always that before any person or persons whatsoever shall have such
gran^ to build a Water-mill as aforesaid, they shall (...) with his said
Majesty with two sufficient Surety^ (...) the (...) of fifty thousand pounds of
tobacco with condition to begin to build the said Water-mill within one year
then next to come, and the building to prosecute and finish within two years
after such beginning, and for the great advantage that is already found to the
Province in general by the Mills already built, some of which do stand upon
lands whereof the title is doubtful for want of due form of the Conveyance, or
the (...) wills and testaments by which the lands have been conveyed or devised
to the builders of such Mills.

Be it therefore Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that all and every such
person or persons as aforesaid who have built Mills shall or may have such
Writ or Writts as aforesaid, to inquiry of the true yearly value of the land
where such Mill does stand, and (...) Acres of land on each side of the said
run as aforesaid, and upon return of such Writ as aforesaid, shall have a
grant from his Majestys chief Governor here as aforesaid for any term nor
exceeding eighty years, and yearly rent return as aforesaid to be paid to the
right owner of the said land as aforesaid, any Law or usuage to the contrary
hereof notwithstanding.

And Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that from and after the
publication hereof no person or persons whatsoever, having or that shall
hereafter have obtained any grant for any lands whereof such person or persons
are not the real owners or possessors thereof, and whereupon he she or they
have already built or shall hereafter build a Water mill as this Law has
before directed, shall have any right, title o^ claim to any land granted to
them for any time or term whatsoever after such Mill by him or them already
built as aforesaid, or that shall hereafter be built, shall be casually broke
or gone to decay as aforesaid other then two years for the new erecting,
building, finishing and repairing of such Mill as aforesaid, but that in all
and every cause where any person or persons that have already built or that
shall hereafter build any Water-mill which are or that shall hereafter be broke
or gone to decay as aforesaid, and shall no^ within two years after the
publication hereof, or within two years after such Mill shall become broke or
gone to decay as aforesaid, cause the same to be new built, repaired or
finished as aforesaid, it shall and may be lawful for the real owner or owners
of such land to such person or persons (...) granted as aforesaid to r^enter
upon the same, and in case such person or persons shall deny or (...) to give
the owner and owners of such land as aforesaid peaceable and quiet possession
thereof, such owner or owners shall and may recover his right to the same,
(...) or otherwise as the Law does direct, any thing in this Act contained to
the contrary notwithstanding. And for prevention of the abuse frequently
committed by persons keeping Water-mills by taking excessive tole.

Be it therefore Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, by and with the Advice and
Consent aforesaid, that from and after the publication hereof as aforesaid, no
Master, Owner, Miller or other Person properly belonging to otherwise owning
any Mill within this Province, shall ask, demand or receive for grinding any
quantity or quantitys of Indian corn or Wheat whatsoever above the sixth part
of every bushel of Indian corn, and eighth part of every bushel of Wheat by him
or them so ground as aforesaid, upon penalty and forfeiture of one thousand
pounds of tobacco to the use of his Majesty his Heirs and Successors for the
support of Government, to be recovered in the respective County Courts by
Action of Debt Bill Plaint or Information, wherein no Essoy Protection or wager
of Law shall be allowed, any other Act usuage or custom to the (...)
notwithstanding.

Provided always that if any person upon encouragement of former Acts hereby
repealed have begun to build any Mill they shall still have all those
advantages that they might have had by such Act hereby repealed, (...) the
former Act or Acts were still in force.

An Act for the shetter administration of Justice in Probat of Wills and
granting (...), recovering of Legacys, and securing Filial Portions.
WHEREAS for the d^e administration of Justice it is most necessary that there
be a settled Succession from the dead to the living, and that the Wills of all
Persons may be du^y proved, and Letters of Administration of the Estates of all
persons dying without Wills may be granted to such persons who have the (...)
to succeed thereto, that there may to that case be no failure of Justice, (...)
it may be duly administered within this Province, and all ^egacys speedily
(...), and Filial Portions and Orphan, Estates duly secured and easily (...),
according to the true intent of the Laws heretofore made, (now in force) or
hereafter to be made.

BE IT ENACTED by the Kings most Excellent Majesty by and with the Advice and
Consent of this present General Assembly and the Authority of the same, that
the Judge or Commissary General for probat of Wills and granting
Administrations shall hold his Court once in two Months at the least, or oftener
as the case shall require, regard being had to the distance of the inhabitants
of the Suitors in the said Court, and the dispatch of persons not inhabiting in
this Province who have frequent occasion to seek Justice in the Court for
probat of Wills and granting Administration before the Judge thereof, and
forasmuch as certainty is the Mother of Repose, and that our dependence upon
England obliges us to make all our Laws as near as may be consonant to the Laws
of England.

Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that the Judge for probat of
Wills and granting Administrations within this Province in all cases relating
to probat of Wills and granting Administrations shall proceed according to the
(...) of England now in force or to be hereafter in force within twelve Months
after (...) Law shall be published in the Kingdom of England if pleaded before
him, (...) such cases as by this present Act is provided, and that it shall and
may (...) for the judge for probat of Wills to prove any last will within this
Province although the same concern title to land, any law usuage or custom of
England to the contrary notwithstanding.

And to the end that all Filial Portions may be secured to the Children of all
persons dying intestate, and legacys paid to legatees of persons who (...)
wills, Be it likewise Enacted, first that the Judge for probat of wills and
granting administrations shall call all Executors and Administrators to account
for the Estate of all persons deceased within twelve Months next after
administration committed, and if any Administrator shall fail to give an
account within the time aforesaid being lawfully thereunto cited, that then the
said Judge shall revoke the first letters of administration to such
Administrators committed, and shall grant administration de (...) Administrat'
to some other person as in his discretion he shall think fit, which said
Administrator duly appointed shall give security as all other Administrators,
do, and shall sue and implead the former Administrator before the Judge
aforesaid for an account of the Estate of the (...), and (...) it shall appear
to the Judge aforesaid, that the former Administrator has wasted and imbe^ded
the Estate of the Interstate, then the Judge shall assign the Bond entered into
by the former Administrator and his Surety unto the latter Administrator to be
relieved against them for such wasting or imbezling.

secondly, That the Judge upon account given by the first Administrator as
aforesaid shall make division of the clear Estate of the d^ceas'd after debts
paid and funeral expenses defrayed, that is to say, shall allow to the Widow
or Reli^^ of the (...) intestate (if any such be) one full (...) part thereof,
and the (...) two thirds be equally divided among the children of the said
deceased (if any such be) and if no such be, then between the next of blood of
the said Intestate, and after such division (...) shall transmit the account
thereof to the several and respectiv^ Justices of the County Courts where the
said Estate shall be and remain, who are (...) this Act appointed, authorized
and enjoined to put the persons Lands, Goods and Chattels of the Orphans into
the hands of such persons as they shall think fit, taking Bond with two
sufficient suretys in the names of the Orphans themselves, for the securing,
and (...) of the said Estate to the said Orphans (...) their Guardians (...)
lawfully called, according to the rules and directions hereafter by this (...),
established and ordained and not otherwise, which rules shall be rules not only
for the Justices of the County Courts to proceed by (...) taking the accounts
of Guardians or Trustees for Orphans, but also for the Judge for (...) of (...)
granting Administrations in (...) of Admin^strators and have Executors to the
benefit of others, no^ (...) Judge give any other allowances to any
Administrator or Administrators upon his (...) their account (...) for debt
bona ^ide owing from the deceased, and realy (...) to be paid by the several
and respective Administrators.

1. No Negro or other slave shall be sold or disposed of (...) Administrator
for payment of debts, or otherwise reserved for the Administrators own use, in
satisfaction for any debts due to the said Administrator, nor (...) Execution
served upon any Negro's or other Slaves so long as there shall be other Goods
of the deceased sufficient to satisfy the just debts of the deceased, b^t
shall be kept upon the bazard of the Estate and employed for the benefit of the
Creditors and Orphans if any be during the first year, at the end of which the
Admi^^strator is to account for the Estate and the profits of such slaves shall
be Asse^ts to the Creditors and dividable between the Wife and Children or
Relations of the said deceased of (...) Creditors the Judge for probat of Wills
upon passing the account by such Administrator shall allow him his reasonable
charges.

2. That no Account be allowed for Dy^t, Clothes, Phyzick or Education to any
Administrator or Guardian to any Orphan against the Estate of the Intestate, or
against the filial part of any Child (...) to any Guardian (...) other persons
entrusted by the County Court, but that the said Orphan shall be maintained and
educated by the interest of their Estate and the increase of their Stocks, so
far forth as their said intrest and increase will extend; But if the Estate be
so small that it will not extend to a free education of such Orphans, shall be
bound Apprentices to some handy craft Trade or other person at the discretion
of the County Courts, until they arrive to the age of twenty one years, except
some Kinsman or Relation or some other charitable persons will maintain them
for the increase of the small Estate they have without any diminution of the
principle, which shall always be delivered to the Orphans at the years
hereafter in this Act limited and appointed, then such Kinsman, Relation, or
other charitable person is thereby obliged to perferme the same, as is by this
Law before enjoined, and to be ascertained by the County Courts.

Provided always that no Orphan shall be put into the hands of any person of
different judgment in Religion to that of the deceased parents of the said
Orphans.

3. That all Cattle Horses and Sheep shall be returned in kind by the Guardians
or other persons entrusted with Orphans Estates, (that is to say) so many
cattle, horses and sheep were of at the time they were delivered to the
Guardians or Trustees of the Orphans.

4. That all Money, Plate Rings and Jewels be preserved and not used by the
Guardeans or Trustees and delivered in kind to the Orphans when they come to
age, and that all household stuff and lumber be appraised in money and not
otherwise, and the value thereof paid to the Orphans as aforesaid, either in
money sterling according to the apprisement or in tobacco at the then price
current, and in case any difference shall arise what shall be the price current
at the day of payment in the Bond taken limited, the Judges of the County
Court where the Orphans Estate does lie shall then (...) what shall be the
price current.

5. That every Male Orphan shall be of full age to receive his Estate from his
Guardian at the age of twenty one years and not before, but in case any person
by his last Will and Testament does appoint any person to be his executor or
executrix that is full seaventeen years of age, that person so appointed shall
be adjudged to be of sufficient age to be Administrator Executor or Executrix,
and if such Executor or Executrix be under the age of seaventeen years, the
administration shall then be committed to such other persons as the (...) for
probat of Wills and grant* Administrations shall approve of du^ante (...), and
so to the profit, use and behoof of the Infant Executor or Executrix and not
otherwise nor in any other manner. And forasmuch as the right to administration
of the Goods of persons intestate may fall upon persons under the age of
seaventeen years, it is hereby declared that as they are within like reason so
they are within like law with Infant Execu^^^^.

6. That every Female Orphan shall be accounted of full age to receive her
Estate at the age of sixteen years or day of marriage which shall (...) happen.

That all Negro's and other Slaves after the transmitting the Estate to the
County Court as aforesaid, shall be praised to the Guardian or Trustees and be
preserved by them, and be employed to the said Guardians or Trustees use and
benefit, and the like number of Slaves, and of the like ability of body be
returned to the said Orphans out of their increase if any be, at their full age
by this Law limited, and if any of the said Slaves be grown aged or otherwise
impotent, or be (...), and that the increase, will not make the original Stock
good, as to the number and ability of body, that then they shall be again
appraised by the said County Courts, and the Guardians or Trustees shall pay to
the Orphans so much money or tobacco as the County Court shall adjudge the
Orphans Stocks of Negro's then to be of less value then they were at the time
of their first appraisment and delivery of their said Slaves to the said
Guardian or Trustees, but in case no guardian or other person will upon these
terms accept (...) those slaves, then it shall and may be lawful for the said
several and respective County Courts to put the said slaves out upon other
terms to any other person so that the said original stock of slaves be not sold
no^ any of their increase, but in the best manner preserved for the Orphans
till they come to their several ages by this Act limited and appointed to the
intent they may have their first stock made good to them in number value and
ability of body if it may be:

8. That all Servants for years be likewise returned in kind to the Orphans at
their full age, that is to say, the same number at the same age and sex and by
like number of years to serve, and of the same ability of body as near as can
be guest as the Servant were when received by the guardian or trustee.

9. Whereas every Administrator in Inventary inserteth what debts are sperate
and what debts are desperate, the Judge for probat of Wills shall transmit
those desperate debts with the division of the overplus of the estate unto the
several and respective (...) of the County Courts where the Estate shall ly, to
the end the said (...) may inquire whether he said Administrator has by fraud
or otherwise neglected to reco^er the same, or has received and never
accounted for the same, and (...) all with the residue of the said Estate
commit the said desperate debts to the care of the guardians or other trustees
by them employed and shall yearly (...) every year call the said Guardians to
account for the same, and duly (...) what of the said debts they have received
or might have received, and if the said guardian or (...) fail to give in his
account yearly, or by fraud or covin neglect or forbear to recover the same,
the said guardian or trustee shall stand and be accountable for every such debt
by them received and not accounted or neglected^r (...) to be recovered. (...).
That the Justices of the County Courts take able and sufficient Security for
Orphans Estates, and inquire yearly of the security, and if there be just cause
that they require new and better security, and^ upon refusal to give new and
better security to remove the Orphans Estates into their hands. And further,

That the (...) of the County Courts shall yearly in June Court inquire by a
Jury of good and lawful Men to be sumoned out of the several Hundreds of the
County not under the number of twelve, who upon their oaths shall inquire the
form of which oath is hereby expressed, viz. Whether the Orphans be kept,
maintained and educated according to their estates, and whether apprentices
yearly are taught their ^rade or rigorously used and turned to common labor at
the Ax and (...) instead of learning their Trades, and if they find that
Orphans are not maintained and educated according to their Estates, or
Apprentices neglected to be taught their Trades upon pretense that the last
year is enough to learn their trade, that they remove them to other guardians
and masters respectively, and in case the Jury find that any Apprentice is not
taught his trade but put to other labor as aforesaid, the County Court shall
condemn the Master of such Apprentice to make the Apprentice such satisfaction
as in justice his years of labor at other work shall deserve, and five hundred
pounds of tobacco to be paid to the said Orphan.

11. That the Justices of the County Courts cause the conditions of the Bond^
they take of guardians or trustees of Orphans estates be exactly drawn to the
Act, and Recorded in the County Court and the Indentures for Apprentices
likewise, that it may duly appear to the Judges whether Guardians (...) and
Masters do right and justice to Apprentices, and to the Country, that the
Justices (...) right between them, and to that and that they cause the Clark of
then Court to present the Jury with a (...) of the Orphans and Apprentices of
their County (...) June Court

12. That no more be allowed to Guardians or Trustees for collecting debts due
to Orphans than ten per cent' the usual allowanced to Administrators and
Factors by the Merchants.

13. And further, in regard by the Judges or Commissary General for proving of
Wills and granting Administrations Commission their is a saving to all persons
of their right of appeal from the sentence of the said Judge to the chief
Governor of this Province for the time being.

Be it Enacted, that all and every person and persons appealing from the
sentence of the said Judge, shall within fifteen days at the furthest after
such sentence given enter his appear before the said Governor, and within
fifteen days more petition the Governor of this Province for the time being to
examine the sentence of the said Judge, or appoint such other person or persons
as ^e shall think fit to hear and (...) the same, whose sentence shall be
final, without other appeal, repeal or review* And for that diverse Bonds have
been taken by the several and respective County Courts of this Province in the
name of the worshipful Commissioners of the County Court or in some such other
terms amounting thereunto, and for the (...) of the several and respective
Orphans in the several and respective Countys of this Province with condition
to pay to the said Commissioners or Justices of the (...) the respective sums
of tobacco or money in the respective conditions contained (...) pursuance of
this Act, when in truth the said Comissioners of the County Court are no (...)
politic no^ capable of suing the said Bonds to and so the use of any Orphan
within this Province.

Be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that all Bonds so as before taken,
to and for the use of any Orphans in this Province in pursuance of this Act,
shall be sued and recovered in the names of the Orphans to whose use such Bonds
wet taken, either in the County or Provincial Court at the election and choice
of (...) said Orphans, any Statute or usuage to the contrary hereof in any wise
notwithstanding. And for the case and benefit of the good people that hereafter
shall have occasion to resort to the said Judge in testamentary causes for the
probat of Wills and granting Administrations,

Be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that the Commissary General of this
Province, Chancellor or other Person that shall from time to time be appointed
as Judge in testamentary causes for granting administrations, shall from time
to time and at all times during his continuance in such office, constitute
ordain and appoint some able and sufficient person of good repute and a
freeholder in every respective County within this Province to take the probat
of any last will or testament of any person or persons either noncupative or in
writing, even tho the same be concerning titles of Land, and likewise the
granting of any administration of persons dying intestate in the respective
Countys where each person or persons so appointed shall reside and inhabit,
which said person in each respective County of this Province so appointed as
aforesaid, shall and may take the proof of any will whatsoever as aforesaid, of
any person as aforesaid within the County as aforesaid and grant Letters
testamentary upon the same, and likewise grant any administrations to any
person or persons whatsoever that right has to the administration of any person
deceased within the County where he dwells as aforesaid: But if any contest
or dispute shall arise between any persons concerning the right to
Administrations or Executorship, the same shall be divided by the Chancellor,
Commissary General or Judge in testamentary causes, and not by such person
appointed in each County as aforesaid, neither shall such person grant
administration or take the probat of such will till such time as such dispute
and difference shall be decided and determined by the proper Judge thereof and
certificate from such Judge of the same, and such person so appointed as
aforesaid, shall and is hereby allowed as a see for granting such Letters of
Administration as aforesaid, swearing the Administrators and Appraisors as for
the probat of any will, and swearing the Executor or Executrix and Letters
testamentary the (...) one hundred and (...) pounds o^ tobacco, to be paid by
such person or persons requiting administration or letters (...) as aforesaid,
unless the Estate be so small as the Invent^ry of such (...) not amount to two
thousand pounds of tobacco as aforesaid (...) shall be paid to such person so
appointed for such Letters of Administration or (...) Testamentary as aforesaid
the firm of fifty pounds of tobacco and no (...) then in every such case the
Commissary General shall have no fees.

Be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that all Guardians of Orphans that
shall have any real (...) lands with the Orphan or Orphans to whom the same
belongs committed (...) them, (...) then such whom the Testator in his life
time by his last Will and Testament has otherwise ordered and disposed of,
within one month after the taking upon him or her the guardianship of such
Orphan or Orphans shall with one Commissioner of the said County where the land
(...) and two other persons of good repute and well skilled in building and
Plantation affairs (...) of them being of kin, indebted or otherwise interested
in either Orphan or Guardian enter into the said Land and Plantation to such
orphan or orphans belonging, and view the dwelling houses and out houses,
lands, orchards and fences that are upon the said Plantation, and then and
there the said two persons so qualified as aforesaid, shall take their corporal
oaths upon Holy Evangelists by the said Commissioner to be administered, that
according to the best of their skill and judgment they will make a just
estimate of the annual value of the said lands and plantation, and what
dwelling houses, out houses and orchards are upon the same, and what repair
they are in, and in what part of the said land they judge the said Guardian may
be further permitted to clear upon the said Plantation, as well to raise the
yearly rent so valued as aforesaid, at also toward his yearly charge in
keeping the said dwelling houses, out houses, orchards and fences in repair and
so by him to be l^st, always having a regard to leave a proportion^able part
both for quality and quantity of the uncleared Land, for the benefit and
advantage of the Orphan^ or Heir when at age to possess the said Land or
Plantation, as also the Orphans maintenance out of the same, where the profits
of personal estates be not sufficient to maintain him or them, and the same ^o
certify under their hands and seals arrested by the Commissioner so
administering the oath as aforesaid, in the County Court next ensuing after such
view so had and made as aforesaid, and there to remain upon Record (...) the
said Orphan or Heir come to age, which certificate so entered and remaining upon
Record as aforesaid shall be sufficient Evidence in Law for the said Orphan or
Orphans to recover double damages in an Action of (...) by them to be brought
when at age for any wast, sale or destruction committed or (...) in any of the
premises, other then what the persons have certify'd and thought necessary,
with due respect had to all circumstances and matters aforesaid.

And Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that the Commissioners
of each County Court within this Province by virtue of this Act shall have full
power from time to time, and at all times hereafter upon presentment of the
Orphan Jury, or other information given to them of any such sale, wast or
destruction made, done or committed upon any Orphans real Estate by any such
Guardian, by legal Warrant to cause the said Guardian to appear before them in
the County Court, and (...) upon examination thereof the said information be
sufficiently provid, that the said Guardian to answer the damages of such wast
by him committed contrary to the ^aw, when Orphans come to age that then the
said Commissioners do require the said Guardian to give sufficient Security to
make satisfaction to the said Orphan or Orphans when at age as aforesaid, and
upon refusal thereof, as the sa^^ Orphan or Orphans if at age, to choose his
her or their Guardians shall elect, and if not, then such other as the
Commissioners shall think meet being willing to take the same, who shall enjoy
the said Land or Plantation, committing no wast and performing all such matters
and things at his entry thereupon as is by this Act required until the said
Orphan comes to age, and the said person so chosen, or by the Justices put in
possession as aforesaid, shall in the name and to the use of such Orphan bring
his Action of Wast against the former Guardian for the damages by him
committed, and the Comissioners of each respective County are hereby obliged to
give the ^ame in charge every June Court to the said Orphan Jury, under the
penalty of five hundred pounds of tobacco each Justice, one half thereof to his
Majesty toward the Support of Government, and the other half to him or them
that shall Sue for the same, to be recovered in the Provincial Court by Bill
(...) or Information, wherein no Essoyn Protection or wager of Law to be
allowed.

And Be it Enacted by the Authority aforeresaid, that the several and
respective Deputy Commissary's which are and shall be in ^ach several and
respective Countys within this Province shall and are hereby sufficiently (...)
and empowered to pass audite and allow all such accounts as shall come before
them relating to dead Men's Estate wherein they have granted Letters of
administration or Letters testamentary not exceeding fifty pounds sterling, and
to transmit the same to the Commissary General, for which (...) such accounts
the said deputy Commissary is (...) allowed as a see the sum of (...) pounds of
tobacco and no more, and if such deputy Comissary as aforesaid shall exact,
demand or receive of any person whatsoever more (...) is by this Law for
executing such his Office is allowed him, ^e shall be ^^ble to such pains and
penal^ys as are included (...) a certain Act for limitting (...) within this
Province, but in case it shall so hap^en that any person or persons having any
inetrest or claim in such Estates shall make any objections to the (...) or
interest of any article or articles contained in the said a^ (...) deputy
Commissarys are forthwith to mark such articles and transmit the accounts with
all papers thereunto belonging unto the Commissary General before (...) partys
concerned are to appear and defend their interest.

And Be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that it shall be at the election
of (...) its as aforesaid, to take and receive the same in full satisfaction of
all claims and rights to both personal and real Estate, and be thereby (...)
for ever from all claims to the same, or to refuse such Legacys and Devices as
aforesaid, and take their third part of the personal and real Estate as Widows
whose Husbands die intestate in this Province. And whereas many Orphans have
greatly suffered by the second marriage of such Widows, who ^aving their
Estates (...) possession by will or Right of administration, either by the one
or both of them the said Estates have been wasted and imbezled, and if the
Woman die, the said Husband refuses to render an account of such Estate,
alleging that he is neither Executor no^ Administrator of his Wife, no^ of
her former Husband, whereas at common Law a Woman Covert Executrix can do no
act to prejudice her Husband, all such acts during the same be void without his
(...), he not preventing such wast when in his power ought to answer for the
same.

Be it therefore Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, etc. that every such
permitting and suffering such wast by such second Husband during the cove^ture,
such Husband shall account for the same, and be liable to be sued for the said
Estate due to such Orphan by such Orphan if at age, or if under age by his
Guardian, as well as the Security, or together with his Wife if living, and if
the Security be insolvent then by himself, and also for all wast committed by
his Wife before marriage if sued during coverture; And whereas Orphans of
persons dying intestate by the good provision of this Law in committing them to
the care of the County Court to inspect the good condition of their Securitys
and good usuage as aforesaid, are by experience found to be in better condition
in respect of both than the Orphans of Testators, whose Executors hitherto
rarely given any Security, and that the Security they have given many times
proved insolvent.

Be it therefore Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that the Judge for probat
of Wills shall hereafter take good and sufficient Security of all Executors and
Administrators to the use of any Orphan or Orphans in any Will mentioned (and
not solely to their own use) for the true performance of such last will and
testament according to the Law and Intent of the Testator, and the Justices of
the several County Courts shall at the same time that they by the Jury inquire
of the good usuage and good condition of the Security, or other Orphans shall
also inquire of these, and if they find the Securitys like to be insolvent or
the Orphans ill used, to transmit the same to the Judge for probat of wills for
the time being to be relieved according to Law and the Testators intent. And
for the more speedy administration of Justice to Orphans, Legatees and others
in his Majestys Court for probat of wills and granting administrations which
has hitherto by the tedious methods used in Chancery before the Judges
Sentence in the said Court can take effect, tho methods of England being at
present not practicable here.

Be it therefore Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that every person or
persons that shall not after Sentence given in the said Court against him or
them within fifteen days after such sentence enter his Appeal with the said
Judge from such sentence, and within 15 days more procure an examination
thereof by a Court of Delegates, not in the mean time comply with the Sentence
of the said Judge, (...) being sent to them under the hand and seal of the said
Judge, not give in Security to perform the same and oath made of the refusal
thereof, it shall and may be lawful for the said Judge to issue forth of the
said Office under his hand and seal an attachment against the bodies of such
persons so refusing, and him or them to imprisonment until he or they satisfy
and comply with the said sentence or give in good security to do the same, this
Law not to (...) the said Judge to proceed again (...) persons (...) complying
with sentences given before the making of this Act according to the former
usuage and custom to compel them to the same; And whereas Orphans and Creditors
are many times injured by the low appraisments and undervaluing of the Estates
of the deceased, therefore

Be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that when any Executor or
Administrator does appraise the Estate of the deceased he shall give notice of
such his appraisment, and call together two of the next of kin to the said
deceased and two of the Creditors of the said deceased if any then be, who
shall be present at the said appraisment with the sworn appraisers, and shall
certify to the Commissary or his deputy under their hands that they were
present at the appraisment and do approve thereof, and if any Executor or
Administrator return any Inventary without such certificate as aforesaid, the
said Judge or his deputy in each respective County of this Province shall not
accept or receive the same into his or their Office.

An Act for enrolling of Conveyance, and securing the Estate of Purchasers.
FOR the better establishing a way and method for conveying of Manno^s, Lands,
Tenements and Heridatamets for the future, and for the avoiding abuses and
deceits by Mortgages

BE IT ENACTED by the Kings most Excellent Majesty by and with the Advice and
Consent of this present General Assembly and the Authoity of the same, that
from and after the publication hereof no Manners, Lands, Tenements or
Heridataments whatsoever within this Province shall pass, alter or change from
one to another whereby the Estate of Inheritance, or Freehold or any Estate for
above seven years shall be made to take effect in any person or persons, or
any use (...) except the Deed or Conveyance by which the same shall be intended
to pass, alter or change the same be made by writing, indented and sealed, and
the fame to be acknowledged in the Provincial Court or before two Justices
thereof, (...) the County Court, or before two Justices of the same where such
Manors, Lands, Tenements or Heriditaments do he, and such Deed or Conveyance
to be intailed in the Provincial or County Court where the same does ly, such
inrollment (...) made within twelve months after the date of such writing
indented as aforesaid, and for the caption of such inrollment there shall be
paid to the partys taking the same twelve pence sterling and no more, and the
Clark shall well and sufficiently ^^roll such Deed or Conveyance in a good
sufficient Book in Folio, to remain in the (...) of the Clark of the same Court
for the time being amongst ^he Records of the same Court, and that the same
Clark shall on the back of every such Deed in a full legible hand make an
indorsment of such inrollment, and also of the (...) of the Book (...) which
the same shall be enrolled, and shall unto such (...) his hand.

Provided always,, and be it hereby Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that
when the grantor or grantors, bargainor or bargainors of such lands, tenements
or hermitaments (...) remote from either the Provincial Court or County Court,
where the land (...), it shall and may be lawful for such grantor or bargainor
to acknowledge the same in the County where such bargainer lives, and a
certificate of such acknowledgment under the hand of the County Clark and under
the Seal of the same County, (...) acknowledgment shall be taken, deemed
reputed and be as good and (...) as if the same had been acknowledged either in
the Provincial or County (...) where such land (...) and be a sufficient
Warrant for such County Clark where the land (...) to (...) the fame, and if
any such grantor or bargainor of any such lands or tenements as aforesaid shall
happen to be out of this Province and within any his Majesty's Dominions at the
time of the ensealing such writing or writings indented, so as the same cannot
be acknowledged in (...) and form (...) is before (...), within the time for
that purpose (...) before limited, that in every such (...) such lands or
tenements as aforesaid shall be acknowledged by Letter of (...) well and
sufficiently proved, either in the Provincial or County Court where such lands
or tenements (...), or before (...) Justices of the Provincial or County Court
as aforesaid for acknowledgment and (...) as aforesaid, any thing herein before
(...) notwithstanding.

And Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that every such writing
(...) to be acknowledged and (...) as aforesaid shall have relation as to the
passing and conveying of the (...) and the Estate and Estates thereby passed or
intended to be passed and conveyed by and (...) the day of the inrollment of
the same and not from the day of the date thereof, and shall a^ all (...) and
taker (...) and beneficially for the benefit and (...) of the grantee or
grantees, and more (...) for the barring of the granter (...) therein to be
named, and according to such intents as the words thereof shall appear to have
been the true intent of the partys hereunto, although the (...) be not so, firmly
drawn as is used in England, where the advice of Council learned in the law,
may easily be had.

Provided always, that if any ^^me Cover^ be named a party grantor in any, such
writing ^ndented, the same shall not be of force to deb^t her or her heirs,
except upon nor acknowledgment of the same, and the person or persons taking
such (...) acknowledgment shall examine her privately out of the hearing of her
husband whether she ^^th make her acknowledgment of the same willingly and
freely, and without being induced there (...) ^^reats of or used by her husband
or fear of his displeasure, and the person or persons so examining her shall
(...) or certificate of the said caption of the said acknowledgment certify her
examination and acknowledgment thereupon, and that such certificate be likewise
(...) upon Record, in which case and by such ^^me Covert shall be (...) and not
otherwise, any thing herein before contained to the contrary notwithstanding.

An Act relating to Servants and Slaves.
WHEREAS there have been several Acts provided against servants runaways which
have hereto proved (...), in regard they do not sufficiently provide
encouragement for such person or persons inhabitants of this Province as shall
(...) such runaways or servants by this Act deemed runaways, therefore for the
better discovery seizing and apprehending such runaways,

BE IT ENACTED by the Kings most Excellent Majesty by and with the Advice and
Consent of this present General Assembly and the Authority of the same, that
from and after the publication hereof no servant or servants whatsoever within
this Province whether by Indenture or according to the custom of the country or
hired for wages, shall travel by land or water ten miles from the house of his
her or their Master Mistress or Dame (...) under their hands, or (...) the hand
of his or their Overseer if any be under the penalty of being taken lot a
runaway, and to suffer such penaltys as are hereafter provided against runaways.

And it is hereby further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that any such
servant or servants as aforesaid unlawfully absenting him her or them from his
her (...) their said Master, Mistress. Dame or Overseer shall serve ten days
for every (...) days absence, to be judged when such Master, Mistress or Dame
shall bring their said servant before the Justices of the Provincial or County
Court where the owner ma^ter or dame or overseer of (...) servant shall live
during the siding of the Court, be it before or after the expiration of such
(...) first time of service by Indenture or otherwise.

And Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that any person or
persons whatsoever that shall wittingly and willingly d^^ain any such servant
or servants unlawfully absenting him her or themselves as aforesaid, shall be
fined 5^^ pounds of tobacco for every night or four and twenty hours that such
person or persons shall give entertainment to such servant or servants
unlawfully absenting him her or themselves as aforesaid, the one half to his
Majesty for the support (...) Government, and the other hal^ to the informer or
him or them that shall (...) same, to be recovered in any County Court of this
Province by Action of (...), bill plaint or information, wherein no essoyn
protection or wager of Law to (...) allowed.

And for the better discovery of runaways, it is hereby Enacted by the
Authority aforesaid, that any person or persons whatsoever within this Province
traveling out of the County where he she or they shall live or reside without a
pass under the Seal of the said County, for which they are to pay ten pounds of
tobacco or one shilling in money, such person or persons if apprended not being
sufficiently known, or able to give a good account of themselves, to be left to
the (...) and judgment of such Magistrate or Magistrates before whom such
person or persons as aforesaid shall be brought to judge thereof, and if before
such Magistrate (...) be deemed and taken as a runaway, and shall suffer such
fines and penaltys as is hereby provided against runaways.

And for the ^etter encouragement of all persons to seize and take up such
runaways, it is Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that all and every person
or persons as aforesaid, seizing (...) taking up such runaways traveling
without^ (...) as aforesaid, not being able to give a sufficient account of
themselves as aforesaid shall have and receive two hundred pounds of tobacco to
be paid by the owner of such runaway so apprehended and taken up if a Servant,
and if a Freeman and refusing to pay the same, then to make satisfaction by
servitude or otherwise as the Justices of the Provincial or County Courts where
such person shall be so apprended and taken up shall think fit, and further,
for the better discovery and encouragement of our Neighbor Indians to seize,
apprehend or take up any runaway servants, and bring them before some
Magistrate, shall for a reward have a matchcoat paid him or them or the value
thereof which said reward to be repaid and satisfied by the county where such
person shall be apprended, and such runaway to reimburse the said County by
servitude or otherwise as the Justices of the Provincial or county court shall
think fit.

And Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that at what time (...)
any of the said persons runaway shall be seized by any person or persons (...)
this Province, such person or persons so apprehending or seizing the same sha^^
bring (...) to be brought before the next Magistrate or Justice (...) hereby
empowered to take into (...) or otherwise (...) or them to secure and dispose
as he shall (...) person or persons so seized and apprehended shall give
sufficient security (...) the premises the next Court that shall first ensue
in the (...) County, (...) is also to secure such person or persons till he or
they can make (...) party that shall so apprehend or seize such runaway or
other person as by this Act is required, except such person shall make
satisfaction as aforesaid before such Court call happen, and that notice may be
conveniently given to the master, mistress, ^ame or overseer of runaways taken
up as aforesaid, the Justi^^s of the (...) or the Commissioners of County shall
forthwith cause a noat of the runaways name so seized or apprehended as
aforesaid, and also cause a noat to be set up at the (...) adjacent County
Courts, and at the Provincial Court and Secretarys Office, that all persons may
view the same, and see where such their Servants are and in whose custody.

And furthermore, for the better ascertaining what each servant according to
the custom of the Country shall have at the expiration of their servitude, Be
it Enacted by the Authority Advice and Consent aforesaid, that every Man
Servant shall at such time of expiration of his servitude aforesaid, have
allowed and given him (...) as what, a good cloth suit either of ^ersy or broad
cloth, a shift of white (...), one pair of new french fall shoes and stockings,
two hoes and one (...), and one (...) of twenty shillings price not above four
foot by the barrel, nor less than three and a (...); all Woman Servants at the
expiration of their servitude as aforesaid shall have allowed and given her the
like provision of clothes and three (...) indian corn, and to the intent the
many great mischiefs and incoveniency (...) and ^^^rewing to diverse good people
of this Province by transporting or carrying (...) conveying away or causing to
be transported carried or conveyed away out of this Province any inhabitant
within this Province whether Master or Freeman not thereunto lawfully ^icenced,
or an Apprentice hired Servant or slave may for the future he prevented,

Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that every person or persons
that shall transport, carry or convey away or cause to be transported carried
or conveyed away ou^ of his Province any inhabitant of this Province that is or
shall be indebted or engaged (...), and not having a sufficient license or pass
according to the Law of this Province in such case made and provided, shall be
liable to pay al^ such debts, engagements of damages as the said person or
persons (...) transported, carried or conveyed away should be liable to satisfy
to any person to whom the same shall be respectively due in this Province,
unless the same be otherwise satisfied in some convenient time, or that (...)
time be cause or procure such person or persons so carried and conveyed away to
return again into this Province, whereby he may be liable unto Justice here,
and any person or persons whatsoever that shall from henceforth entice,
transport or privately carry away out of this Province any apprentice, hired or
other servant or slave belonging to any inhabitant in this Province shall for
every such offense forfeit and pay to the imployer or owner o^ such apprentice
hired or other servant or slave trebble damages and cost, to be adjudged by the
Justices of each respective County Court, or the Justices of the Provincial
Court for the time of such apprentices hired or other servants or slaves
unlawfully transported or carried away as aforesaid.

And whereas many great inconveniencys happened and accrewed unto many Masters,
Mistresse^ or Dames within this Province by the wickedness and infidelity of
servants pu^loyning their said Master Mistress or Dames Goods, and then by
bar^^ring, ^elling and conveying away the same unto Seamen and others whereby
Masters and Mistresses of Familys are or have been very much damnified and
abused for prevention whereof for the future Be it further Enacted by the
Authority aforesaid, that no person whatsoever shall trade, barter, commerce or
any ways deal with any servant whether hired or indented, or slave belonging or
appertaining to any inhabitants within this Province without leave or license
first had and obtained from such servants master, mistress, dame or overseer
for his so doing under the penalty of two thousand pounds of tobacco, the one
half thereof to his Majesty for support of government, the other half to the
master, mistress or true owner of such goods so purloyned, bartered or conveyed
away, when proved by sufficient w^^ness or (...) of the party, to be recovered
in any Court of (...) of debt, bill plaint or information, wherein no essoyn
protect, (...) to be allowed.

And Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, etc (...) traded or
bartered as aforesaid shall exceed the sum of one thousand (...) tobacco, that
then the party or partys whose goods shall be imbezle (...) way as aforesaid,
shall have his action at law for the damage sustain (...) person or persons so
offending, dealing and bartering for the same, any (...) Act to the contrary
hereof in any wi^e notwithstanding. And in case (...) or persons so offending
shall not be able to satisfy the same, thou such person or persons shall be
bound over by some one Justice of the Peace and put in security either to
appear at the Provincial or County Court whereupon conviction by confession or
sufficient witness the offender shall be punished by whipping an the (...) back
with thirty s^^^pes.

And for tho ascertaining and limitting of servants fines of servitude, Be it
Enacted by and with the Advice and Consent aforeresaid, that whosoever shall
transport any servant into this Province without Indentures, such servant being
above the age of 22 years shall be obliged to serve the full space and term of
5 years, if betweenn 18 and 22 without Indentures 6 years, if between 15 and 18
without Indentures (...) years, if under 15 and without Indentures shall serve
till he or the^^ arrive a^ the full age of 22 years.

And Be it further Enacted by the Advice Consent and Authority aforesaid, that
all Servants transported out of Virginia into this Province shall complete
their time of servitude here which they ought to have served in Virginia and no
more.

And be it further enacted, that every master, mistress or dame, assignee or
trustee whatsoever owning or keeping any such servant as aforesaid, whether by
virtue of transportation purchase or otherwise, shall within six months after
the receiving such servant into their custody within this Province, except he
she or they claim but five years ^ervice of such servants, bring the said
servants into the respective County Courts where they do inhabit, and every of
the said Courts are hereby authorized to judge and determine of the age of such
servants so bought and cause the same to be entered upon Record, and every owner
as aforesaid, neglecting or refusing to bring such servant or servants before
the Court as aforesaid, shall not only stand to the determication of the Court,
but also forfeit the sum of one thousand pounds of tobacco to the King for the
support of government for depriving the Court of their opportunity of viewing
the partys, and if any Master or Servant aforesaid be grieved with the
determination of the Court, he shall within the time determined for their
service produce a certificate authentic of such servants age, and shall have
remedy to the ages aforesaid mentioned.

And forasmuch as disputes have formerly arose at what time servants time of
servitude whether by Indenture or otherwise should commence, for the better
explanation whereof for the future, Be it enacted by the authority aforesaid,
that all Servants transported into this Province whether by Indenture or
otherwise, ^he time of service of such Servant so bound or adjudged as
aforesaid shall commence ^^om the first anchoring of the Vessel within this
Province, any law usuage or custom to the contrary notwithstanding.

And be it enacted also by the Advice Consent and Authority aforesaid, that no
Indenture made by any Servant during the time of service due by former
Indenture or by determination according to the tenor of this Act shall any ways
oblige any Servant for longer time than by his first Indenture or determination
of the Court shall be limited and appointed, provided that this Act nor any
thing therein contained shall not give or be construed to give any benefi^t to
any Negro or Slave whatsoever.

And be it further enacted by ^he authority aforesaid, that for all such
runaway Servants or Slaves that shall be apprehended and taken up in the
Province of Pensilvania or Colony of Virginia, and from thence brought into
this Province and delivered to a Magistrate of the County into which they shall
be brought, the person for so doing shall have paid and allowed him by the
master or owner of such runaway four hundred pounds of tobacco and cask, or
forty shillings in money, upon his producing a certificate from the said
Justice or Sherrif of the delivery of such runaway, except servants or runaways
bro^ght from Accomack into Somerset (...) two hundred pounds of tobacco (...)
of Virginia next the River Potomack, for which said (...) or (...) shall make
satisfaction when free, by service or otherwise (...) for one as the Court
shall adjudge; But if such person so (...) and delivered as aforesaid be a
Freeman and refuse to pay (...) of tobacco or money, then and in such case the
Magistrate before (...) brought shall forthwith commit the said person so
refusing to (...) sufficient security or make full satisfaction by service or
otherwise, (...) it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that if any
master mistress (...) owner of any servant whatsoever, or overseer by the order
and consent of (...) master mistress or owner shall deny and nor provide
sufficient meat drink (...) and clothing, or shall unreasonably burden them
beyond their strength with labor, or debar them of their necessa^y rest and
sleep, the same being sufficiently proved before the Justices of the County
Court the said Justices have hereby (...) power and authority for their first
and second offense to leavy such fine upon (...) offender as to them shall seem
meet, not exceeding one thousand pounds of tobacco, to the use of his Majesty
his Heirs and Successors for the support of Government, and for the third
offense to let such Servant so wronged at liberty and (...) their servitude.

And be it also further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that all Ngro's and
(...) Slaves already imported or hereafter to be imported into this Province,
and also all Chidren now born, or hereafter to be born of such Negro's or
Slaves shall be Slaves during their natural lives.

And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that any white woman
either tree or a servant that shall suffer her self to be begot with child by a
Negro or other Slave, or f^ee Negro, such woman so begot with child as
aforesaid, if fre^ shall become a Servant for and during the term of seven
years, if a servant she shall finish (...) of servitude together with the
damage that shall accrue to such persons to whom she is a servant by occasion
of any child or children begotten as aforesaid in the time of her servitude,
and after such satisfaction made shall again become a servant for and during
the term of 7 years aforesaid, and if such begetter of any such child as
aforesaid be a free Negro he shall become a servant for and during the term of
seven years aforesaid, to be adjudged by the Justices of the County Court
where such (...) committed, according to this Law in the clause made and
provided against such servants as have bastards, and the issues or children of
any such unnatural and inordinate (...) shall be servants until they arrive at
the age of 31 years (...) and any while man that shall beget any negro woman
with child whether freewoman or servant shall undergo the same penaltys as
white women, all which times of servitude by this Act imposed on any the
persons issue or children of such inordinate copulations shall be taken care of
by the Justices of each respective County within this Province, and such
servitude to be disposed of or employed as the Justices of such County shall
think fit, the produce whereof shall be appropriated toward the (...) of the
poor.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that every servant woman
having a (...) and (...) sufficiently to prove the party charged to be the
(...) the mother of such child shall only be liable to satisfy the (...) by
servitude or otherwise as the Court before whom such (...) see convenient,
provided that where the mother of any such child as aforesaid do prove her
charge by sufficient testimony of witnesses, (...) of the party charged, or
pregnant circumstances agreeing with her declaration in her (...) of her pains
or throws of travel, and her oath takes by some magistrate before the time of
her delivery of every such bastard child (...) her deliv'ry, then the party
charged if a servant to satisfy half the said damage, if a Freeman then the
whole damage by servitude or otherwise as the Court before whom such (...) is
brought as aforesaid shall think fit, and if any such mother as aforesaid be
able to prove by such testimony or confession of the party charged, that be
being a single person and a Freeman did before the begetting of such child
promise her marriage, that then he shall be at his choice either to perform his
promise to her or recompense her abuse according as the Court before whom such
matter is brought shall adjudge.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, etc. that after the end
of this (...) Session of Assembly that it shall and may be (...) and County
Courts of this Province to hear and (...) masters and servants by way of
petition to give Judgment (...) upon the same, and that upon any Apeal or Writ
of Error (...) from any County Court of this Province to the Provincial (...)
Court to his Excellency the Governor and Council, (...) shall be reversed for
want of Judicial Process, or that the same was (...), or any matter of form
either in the entry or giving of Judgment (...) appears by Record that the
party Defendant was legally summoned (...) unheard.

And Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that Servants (...) into
this Province,, or any Servant that binds himself for years within this (...)
or any bound out by the County Courts of this Province, that if any matter
(...) arises either in relation to their indentures, contracts or wages, or any
(...) mat^er of difference between the said Masters and Servants the same shall
be (...) heard and determined by petition as aforesaid, any Law Statute of
Usuage to (...) contrary notwithstanding.

An Act for imposing a Fine upon Edward Dorsey, convicting him of a debt (...)
three hundred thirty three pounds six shillings and eight pence to (...) King,
and imposing a Fine on the Sherrif of Caecil and Talbot Counties.

An Act for the ordering and regulating the Militia of this Province for the
better defense and security thereof.
BE IT ENACTED by he Kings most Excellent Majesty by and with the Advice and
Consent of this present General Assembly and the Authority of the same, that
from and after the end of this Sessions of Assembly the Militia of this
Province shall be mustered, trained and exercised according to these
instructions and directions following.

1 st. That every Colonel, Major or Captain of ^oot already commissionated o^
hereafter to be commissionated by his Excellency the Governor of this Province
for the time being, shall have power to enlist such and so many inhabiting
within this Province not hereafter excepted in their several and respective
divisions between 16 and 60 years of age as they shall think fit, by as equal
propositions of the said Inhabitants as possibly they can to be of the Militia
or Trainbands of this Province, which said persons so enlisted, they shall
muster, exercise and train in and at such places, and at such certain times as
to them shall seem meet, or the Service Safty or Defense of this Province shall
require, or as his Excellency the Governor of this Province for the time being
shall see cause to order.

2 dly. That every such Colonel, Major or Captain shall give notice or ^ummons
upon every training or mustering to every person so enlisted as aforesaid
within his respective division or limit at the head of his company, or at the
house of the party by an officer of his company or warrant under his hand to
appear at such time and place as he shall appoint for such training or
mustering, and that if any Man after such notice given and summons as aforesaid
shall neglect to appear at the place and time appointed as aforesaid, or that
shall refuse when he has so appeared to be enlisted into the militia and
trainbands aforesaid, or next that being so enliste^ shall not from time to
time as he shall be summoned or warned as aforesaid to appear and bring with
him one good serviceable Gunn fixed with six shoots of powder, shall for every
such offense if a Freeman forfeit and pay the sum of one hundred pounds of
tobacco, and if a Servant let or hindered by his Master, Mistress (...)
Overseer, then such master, mistress or overseer to forfeit and pay the like
sum of one hundred pounds of tobacco for every such servant so let or
hindered as aforesaid, for the use of the Foot Company to purchase Drums and
Colors and (...) n^cessarys for the Company as the Commanders thereof shall
direct. (...) that this clause be not to countenance any Officer to press Arms
or (...)

(...) for regulating the (...).
(...) or Service than training, but that upon all (...) of the County Magazine
or Store, all which (...) and determined by (...) Colonel, Major (...) as
aforesaid, and account thereof kept in writing (...) which said Colonel, Major
or Captain of such company (...) and empowered to award Execution against the
(...) persons so refusing, neglecting or failing as aforesaid, and (...) all
such Executions the respective Clark and Sherrif of each (...) within this
Province shall issue out and serve Execution (...) or Reward.

And for settling the Horse Forces that a Captain of Horse in each (...) for
making up of his Troop elect and enlist his number of Men (...) of the said
County, according to such instructions as be shall from (...) to time receive
from the Governor of this Province for the time being.

Provided always that such Troopers shall ride their own Horses, and that no
(...) person shall be a Trooper without (...) be owner of a good serviceable
Horse which (...), and that such Troopers in consideration of their great pay
hereafter to be allowed be bound and obliged to and themselves with (...) able
and (...) Furniture for their Horses, and likewise to find themselves with
Swords, (...) and Ammunition, and if any Troopers shall neglect (...) refuse
upon notice given them as aforesaid (to the foot) to appear at musters at the
time and place appointed as aforesaid by each respective Captain of Horse (...)
and equipped as aforesaid, shall forfeit and pay the sum of one hundred (...)
to be (...) as aforesaid to the use of the Troop for (...) Colors and (...)
the Commander shall think (...), and (...) such Troopers or and in
consideration aforesaid, at all such (...) as the^^ are out a ranging shall
(...) own provisions, but when in actual Service (...) found (...) this
Province to be paid by the public, and (...) happen that (...) should be
killed in the service, then the said Trooper to be (...) by the public and not
otherwise.

4 thly. That all (...) Orders, Delegates, Magistrates and Constables shall in
the^e proper person (...) exempted from being compelled (...) and train either
in horse or foot during such time as they officiate or (...) aforesaid provided
that ^his clause shall not extend to such persons (...) have or shall hereafter
accept of Commissions for military service (...) of this Province for the time
being, so as to discharge such persons (...) respective charges mentioned in
such their several and respective Commission, neither shall this clause or any
part thereof be construed or (...) any Delegates, Magistrates or Constables as
aforesaid to (...) to muster or training either to horse or foot when and as
often (...) to them shall be given as aforesaid, some other person or persons
in his or their ^^ead or places so equipped and provided as aforesaid, upon
forfeiture as aforesaid.

And Be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that all Negro's and Slaves
whatsoever shall be exempted the duty of training or any other military service.

5 thly. That the pay for the Officers and Soldiers of the Foot and Horse
aforesaid, but not other then is hereafter mentioned, and for no longer time
then such Officers and Soldiers shall be in actual service viz.

To every Colonel of Foot (...) pounds of tobacco per month, to a Major of Foot
(...) per mo: to a Captain of foot (...) per mo: to a Lieutenant of foot (...)
per mo: to an Ensign (...) per mo: to a Sergeant 400 per mo: to a Corporal 400
per mo. to a Drummer 400 per mo: to every private Soldier ^00 per month.

To every Major General chief Commander in the Field 2000 per month, and that
every Colonel of Horse have 2300 per mo. a Major of horse have 150^ per mo: a
Captain of horse to be allowed 1300 per mo: a Lievt' of horse to be allowed
^^00 per mo: to a Cornet 900 per mo: to a Quartermaster, ^00 per mo: to a (...)
per mo: to a Trumpeter ^00 per mo: to every private Trooper ^00 per mo^th And
that all these rates and allowances for such Officers and (...) aforesaid (...)
be allowed and paid and no more, and that the months (...) mentioned be
accounted, computed and reckoned according to Calender and (...).

6 thly. (...) that wh^^soever it shall appear to the chief Governor (...)
(...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...)
(...) (...) (...) (...)


