Province of the Massachusetts Bay in New England. seal His Excel^^^^^ The Earl
of BELLOMONTS SPEECH TO THE Honorable the COUNCIL, and House of
Representatives, Assembled in General Court, upon Prorogation, at Boston, on
Wednesday the 13 th. of March 1699.
Gentlemen,
I Could very willingly have dispensed with meeting you at this time, not only
because the Season of the Year makes it uneasy to many of you, who live in
remote parts of the Country, to give your attendance here, but also because the
day of the Anniversary (...) Assembly is so near.

But the present Exigence of Affairs is such, That the Council and I have
thought it absolutely necessary, we should meet and consult about it in General
Assembly.

The Indians in this and the Neighboring Colonies, are said to have Combined
with the Eastern Indians, intending to make a general Insurrection and
Rebellion; and if we may Credit the Advices we have from some hands, the time
for Execution of this their ill Design is near at hand: and so near, that it
will be in vain to try to avert the blow by Treaty or the promise of any
advantages to them; but we must rather think of Suppressing them by force of
Arms. In order to which you will do well to consider of a way to make such
Levies of Soldiers as shall be sufficient to defend the Country, and being
Levied to Discipline and make them Expert in the Exercise and Use of their Arms.

It were not amiss (...) if a way were found out to oblige the Forces to March
out of the Province as often as the Kings Service requires it; it is our duty
to assist our Neighbors and Fellow Subjects: And it has always been reckoned a
point of Policy, and Prudence, to keep danger as much at a distance as it is
possible.

It were well too, if a Law were made to punish Mutiny, and Desertion, in time
of actual War, without which the Soldiers you Raise, will not be tractable to
the Command of their Officers, and so will not answer your end in Raising them.

You will do well to make provision of a sufficient quantity of Arms and
Ammunition, and that with all the Expedition that may be, That the Country may
be furnished with both for their Defense.

Gentlemen of the House of Representatives.

I desire you will Inquire into the present State of the Public Treasure of
the Province; that if we must be Engaged in a War with the Indians, there may
be no want of Money to Defray the necessary Charge of it. It belongs to you to
consider what that Charge will be, and to provide Funds accordingly.

BY Order of the House of Representatives, I do Appoint Bartholomew Green, and
John Allen, to Print His Excellency's Speech. James Conve^^^, Speaker.


