An Act passed the 12th of September, 1693, for settling a Ministry and raising
a Maintenance for them in the City of New York, County of Richmond, Westchester
and Queens County.
WHereas Profaneness and Liscentiousness has of late overspread this
Province for want of a settled Ministry throughout the same.

To the end the same may be removed and the Ordinances of God daily
administered, Be it Enacted by the Governor and Council, and Representatives
convened in General Assembly, and by the Authority of the same That in each of
the respective Cities and Counties hearafter mentioned and expressed, there
shall be called, inducted and established a good sufficient Protestant
Minister, to officiate and have they care of Souls, within one year next and
after the publication hereof, That is to say, In the City of New York One, in
the County of Richmond one, in the County of Westchester two, one to have the
care of Westchester, Eastchester, ^ea^ches and the Manor of Pellham the other
to have the care Rye, Manerenock, and Bedford; in Queens County two, one to
have the care of Jamaica, and the adjacent Towns and Farms, the other to have
the care of Hemsted, and the next adjacent Towns and Farms.

And for their respective Encouragement, Be it further Enacted by the Authority
aforesaid, That there shall be annually and once in every Year in every of the
respective Cities and Counties aforesaid, assessed, levied, collected and paid
for the maintenance of each of their respective Ministers the respective sums
herafter mentioned, that is to say, For the City and County of New York, One
Hundred Pounds; for the two Precincts of Westchester, one hundred Pounds, to
each fifty Pound, to be paid in Country Produce at Money price. And for the two
Preaincts of Queens County one hundred and twenty Pounds, to each sixty Pound,
in Country Produce at Money price.

And for the more orderly raising the respective Maintenances for the Ministers
aforesaid, Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the
respective Justices of every City and County aforesaid, or any two, of them,
shall every year issue out their Warrants to the Constables, to summon the
Freeholders of every City, County and Precinct aforesaid, together on the 2d
Tuesday in January, for the choosing of (...) Vestry-men and two Church Wardens,
and the said Justices and Vestry-men or major part of them, are hereby
empowered, within ten days after the said day, or any day after, as to them
shall seem convenient, to lay a reasonable Tax on the said respective Cities,
County, Parish or Precinct, for the maintenance of the Minister and Poor of
their respective places. And if they shall neglect to issue their Warrants, so
as the Election be not made that day, they shall respectively forfit five Pound
current Money of this Province. And in case the said Freeholders duly
summoned, as aforesaid, shall not appear, or appearing do not choose the said
ten Vestry-men and two Churchwardens, that then in their default, the said
Justices shall within ten days after the said sacond Tuesday, or in any day
after, as to them shall seem convenient, lay the said reasonable Tax on the
said respective places, for the respective Maintenances aforesaid. And if the
said Justices and Vestry-men shall neglect their Duty herein, they shall
respectively forfit five Pound current Money aforesaid.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That such of the
Justices and Vestry-men that shall not be present at the time appointed, to
make the said Tax, and thereof be convicted, by a Certificate under the hands
of such as do appear, and have no sufficient Excuse for the same, shall
respectively forfit five Pound current Money aforesaid. And a Roll of the said
Tax, so made, shall be delivered into the hands of the respective Constables of
the said Cities, Counties, Parishes and Precincts, with a Warrant signed by any
two lustices of the Peace, impowering him or them to levy the said Tax, and
upon refusal, to distrain, and sell by Public Outcry, and pay the same into
the hands of the Churchwardens, retaining to himself 12 d per Pound, for
levying thereof. And if any Person shall refuse to pay what his is so assessed,
and the said Constables do strain for the same, all his Charges shall be Paid
him, with such further allowance for his pains, as the said Justices, or any of
them shall judge reasonable. And if the said Justice or Justices shall neglect
to issue the said Warrant, he or they respectively shall forfeit five Pound
current Money aforesaid. And if the said Constables, or any of them fall of
their Duty herein, they shall respectively forfeit five Pound current Money
aforesaid. And the Churchwardens so chosen shall undertake the said Office,
and receive and keep a good Account of the Money or Goods levied by virtue of
this Act, and the same issue by order from the said Justices and Vestry-men of
the respective Cities, Counties, Precincts and Parishes aforesaid, for the
purposes and intents aforesaid, and not other wise. And the Churchwardens
shall, as often as thereunto required, yield an Account unto the Justices and
Vestry-men of all their Receipts and Disbursements. And in case the
Churchwardens or any of them, shall neglect their Duty herein, they shall
respectively forfeit five Pound current Money aforesaid, for every refusal.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the said Church,
aWrdens in their respective Precincts aforesaid, shall by Warrant, as
aforesaid, pay unto the respective Ministers the Maintenance aforesaid by four
equal and quarterly Payments, under the Penalty and Forfeiture of five Pound
current Money aforesaid, for each neglect, refusal or default; The one half of
all which Forfeitures shall be disposed of to the use of the Poor in each
respective Precinct where the same does arise, and the other half to him or
them that shall prosecute the same.

Always provided, and Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That
all and every of the respective Ministers that shall be settled into the
respective Cities, Counties and Precincts aforesaid, shall be called to
officiate in their respective Precincts, by the respective Vestry-men and
Church Wardens aforesaid. And always provided, That all former agreements made
with Ministers throughout this Province, shall continue and remain in their
full force and virtue, any thing contained herein to the contrary hereof in any
ways notwithstanding.

To the Honorable House of Representatives convened in General Assembly, for
Their Majesty's Province of New York, The Petit on of the Church Wardens and
Vestry-men of the City of New York, to your Honors, humbly shows,
THat whereas there is an Act of General Assembly for the settling a Ministry
and raising a Maintenance for them in the City of New York, County of Richmond,
Westchester and Queens County, wherein is incerted, in the Body of said Act, as
follows, viz Be it Enacted by the Governor and Council, and Representatives
convened in General Assembly, and by the Authority of the same, That each of
the respective Cities and Counties hereafter mentioned and expressed, there
shall be called, inducted, and established, a good sufficient Protestant
Minister, to officiate and have the care of Souls, within one Year next and
after the Publication hereof, etc. Now so it is, may it please your Honors,
your Petitioners desire to know, with humble submission to your Honors, the
true Meaning and Explanation of said Act, Whether the Vestry have not Power to
call and induct one good Protestant Minister, that is to say, a Protestant
Dissenter from the Church of England, and whether the Act is not binding upon
all Persons to pay the said Maintenance, as is declared in the said Act?

Churchwardens. Johannes Kip, J. V. Cortlandt,



Die Veneris 8 h. A. M. April 12. 1695.
A Petition of the Churchwardens and Vestry-Men for the City of New York, Read.

Upon the Consideration of the Petition abovesaid, it is the Opinion of this
House, That the Vestry-Men and Churchwardens have Power to call a Dissenting
Protestant Minister, and that he is to be paid and maintained according as the
Act directs.

Henry Pierson, Speaker.


