Province of the Massachusetts Bay in New England. seal By His EXCELLENCY,
Richard, Earl of Bellomont, Captain General and GOVERNOR in Chief in and over
the said Province of the Massachusetts Bay, etc. A Proclamation.
WHEREAS the Great and General Court or Assembly of his Majesty's Province of
the Massachusetts Bay aforesaid, begun and held at Boston upon Wednesday the
Thirty-first of May 1699. is continued by Prorogation unto Wednesday the
Twenty-fourth of April instant.

And there being nothing in prospect necessary for his Majesty's Service, to
require the meeting of said Court at the time appointed according to the said
Prorogation; the business of Husbandry being also urgent at this season, and
the time near at hand for an Anniversary choice of Representatives for a Great
and General Court to be Convened held and kept, upon the last Wednesday of May,
as in and by his Majesty's Royal Charter is directed.

I have therefore thought fit, by and with the Advice and Consent of his
Majesty's Council, to Dissolve the present Great and General Court or Assembly,
continued upon Prorogation unto the Twenty-fourth of April instant: And the
said Great and General Court or Assembly is hereby Dissolved accordingly. Of
which all persons concerned are to take notice, and accordingly to conform
themselves.

Given at the Council Chamber in Boston, the Sixteenth day of April, in the
Twelfth year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord WILLIAM the Third, by the Grace
of GOD of England, Scotland, France and Ireland KING, Defender of the Faith
etc. Annoque Domini. 1700.

BELLOMONT. By Order of His Excellency and Council. Isaac Addington Secr.

GOD Save the King.
BOSTON, Printed by Bartholomew Green, and John Allen, Printers to His
Excellency the GOVERNOR and COUNCIL. 1700.


