Province of the Massachusetts Bay in New England. seal By His EXCELLENCY,
Richard, Earl of Bellomont, Captain General and GOVERNOR in Chief of the said
Province, etc. A Proclamation for a general FAST.
WHEREAS the Holy and Righteous GOD, is awfully threatening to interrupt and
take away the present Peace, and Tranquillity of this Province, by fresh
Molestations, and troubles feared to arise from the Heathen; which with diverse
other Solemn Considerations, of the apparent just Provocations found in the
midst thereof: And the sore and bitter persecutions wherewith the People of God
in France, and in some other parts of Europe, are grievously harrassed and
oppressed, for the profession of Christ, and His Truth, do call upon us to deep
Humiliation, with Humble Confessions, and Supplications unto God.

I Do therefore by and with the Advice and Consent of His Majesty's Council,
and at the desire of the Assembly now Sitting, Order and Appoint, That a
General FAST be kept throughout this Province, upon Thursday the Twenty-Fifth
of April next. And that therein Humble Confessions, with Earnest and Fervent
Supplications be Offered up unto Almighty GOD, by all Ministers and People
within the same, in their Respective Congregations, and Assemblies: That God
would be graciously pleased to blast and defeat the Evil designs, and purposes
of all that hate Zion; Bless all Counsels and Means that have been or shall be
taken and used, for averting and preventing of the present threatened Danger:
That Peace may be continued and Confirmed: That the Gospel may obtain great
Success: That the Husbandry, and other Affayrs of this Province may be Smiled
upon in the Ensuing year: That our Gracious Lord the KING may be Preserved, and
Blessed with long Life, to be a Glorious Instrument of further Advancing the
Prosperity, and Reformation of the Kingdoms, and Dominions under His Rule and
Government: That the Kingdom of our Blessed Lord and Savior JESUS CHRIST, may
be Enlarged throughout the Earth; and a Glorious Salvation and Deliverance,
Speedily arise to His poor Distressed and Persecuted Church. And all Servile
Labor on said Day is hereby forbidden.

Given at the Council Chamger in Boston the Twentieth Day of March, 1699. In
the Twelfth Year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord, WILLIAM the Third, by the
Grace of GOD, of England, Scotland, France and Ireland KING, Defender of the
Faith, etc. BELLOMONT. By Order of His Excellency and Council. Isaac Addington
Secr.

GOD Save the King.

