Province of the Massachusetts Bay in New England. seal By the HONORABLE, The
Lieut. Governor, And Commander in Chief. A PROCLAMATION.
WHEREAS the Indians within the Eastern parts of this his Majesty's Province,
for some time past in open Rebellion, have lately made their Submission, a new
recognized their Obedience and Subjection to the Crown of England, and engaged
to live peaceably and quietly with his Majesty's Subjects, the English; which
probably will invite diverse of the former Inhabitants and Proprietors of Lands
there, speedily to return. And forasmuch as the regular Settlement of the said
Country is of great import, for the better securing of His Majesty's Interests:
And the future peace and tranquillity of his Majesty's Subjects not a little
depending on a due regulating of Trade with the said Indians, which the
Government have resolved to keep entirely under their own immediate direction
and management, that no abuse or injustice may be done the Indians therein.

I do therefore, with the Advice and Consent of the Council, hereby strictly
forbid all and every of his Majesty's Subjects to Build and Settle in the parts
of this Province, to the Eastward of the Town of Wells, without first applying
themselves unto, and having approbation and directions of the Governor and
Council for the same; As also to have any Trade, Dealings or Commerce with the
Indians in the said Eastern parts, or to truck, barter, buy or sell, to or with
them or any of them (other than such persons as are or shall be employed by the
Government for that affair) as they will answer their contempt at their utmost
peril.

Given at the Council Chamber in Boston the Ninth day of February. In the Tenth
year of His Majesty's Reign. Annoque Domini. School.

William Stoughton.

GOD Save the King.
BOSTON, Printed by Bartholomew Green, and John Allen, Printers to the
Governor and Council. School.


