Province of the Massachusetts Bay ss. seal By the HONORABLE, THE Lieutenant
Governor, and Commander in Chief. A Proclamation. For Preventing and Punishing
Immorality and Profaneness.
WHEREAS His Sacred Majesty in and by His Royal Proclamation of the Twenty
fourth of February last, has published His most pious Resolution to
discountenance and punish all Vice, Immorality and Profaneness, and to
encourage and reward Virtue in all persons, from the highest to the lowest
degree; Thereby setting a most rare and excellent Example to be viewed and
followed by all His Subjects. Therefore being moved thereunto by the Assembly,
and by, and with the Advice and Consent of the Council. I do direct and
Command, all Judges, Justices of Peace, Grand-jurors, Constables, Tything-men,
and all other Officers and Persons, in their respective Capacities, to do all
that in them lies to detect discover, and bring forth all persons transgressing
and offending against the wholesome Laws and Statutes made and provided for the
Suppressing and punishing of Excessive Drinking, Blasphemy, profane Swearing
and Cursing, Lewdness, profanation of the Lords Day, and other dissolute
Immortal and disorderly practices; and to take effectual care, that the Laws
made against such, be Vigorously put in Execution; as they tender the Honor of
Almighty GOD, and the welfare, prosperity and quiet of themselves and their
Neighborhood: And that by the piety and virtue of their own Lives and
Conversations, they do set good Examples, to incite others to a desirable
Imitation thereof. Ordering that this Proclamation be Read in all Courts of
Justice within this Province, at the opening thereof, immediately before the
charge be given to the Grand Jury.

Given under my Hand at Boston, the 16th. Day of June, School. In the Tenth Year
of His Majesty's Reign. William Stoughton.

GOD Save the King.
BOSTON in New England, Printed by Bartholomew Green, and John Allen. Printers
to the GOVERNOR and COUNCIL. School.


