To the Reader.
wise man to lay hold of her sore and not let (...) he here. sorely repent it.
But who is the man? says Sol^^^^. (...). 8. (...) how rarely is the Wise man to
^e found. For the Wise man, says ^he, (...) Time and Judgment. That is to say
he is able to discern When things are to be done, and therefore its rare (...)
such a Wise man; in the (...) to Heaven it is hard to save our (...). Not one
of a thousand but le^s (...). The improving of this therefore (...) a man's
greatest Wisdom, Deuteronomy. 3^. 20. O that they were Wise, that they under stood
this, that they would consider their latter End. The Wise man's heart is said to
be in his right hand. That is, (...) Wisdom of his Heart teaches (...) Manage
his Affairs judiciously, and (...) season. That man, who though (...) be never
so wise and Prudent in (...) Worldly things, yet if (...) Wisdom to know the
Season (...) termed (...) will so appear (...) to all Eternity (...) will it
not (think you) cause (...) greatest Torment and Vexation ^^ginable to that
man, who when he (...) to Die, shall be compelled to say, O never was I wise,
who was wise for every thing, but to save my Soul? Laying hold of the present
Opportunity in that which facilitates every action and employment, making a
(...) a come off smoothly and with (...). The gracious God, if we embrace an
Opportunity, offers to help us, and work with us. O the goodness of a
merciful God, that though he (...) us so light and ^asie a task, yet offers to
work with us too! That Burden is more light and easy, when two persons assist
in the carrying of it, (...) it would be upon the back of (...). When the Boat
has the advantage both of Wind and Tide, to carry (...) forward, it goes easily
and pleasantly on. This is the case of that Christian, who seasonably embraces
the Offers of Grace and Mercy: He has the Assistance of the Holy Spirit, for
the (...) his (...). To (...) hold of the present Opportunity, makes every
Action (...) beautiful: It makes all (...) with a lovely (...) Grace, Ec^l. 3
11. (...) thing beautiful in its (...) know that Fruit gathered in season is
the pleasantest Fruit, and (...) a word spoken in (...) (...) a word up on
wheels. When the season of (...) Grace is (...) ende^vo^^ (...) unpleasant to
God, as well (...) for every (...) and neglect; (...) we are (...) Accountable
(...) we Commit but (...) the time we do it in, E^^l. II^ (...) O young (...)
in thy youth (...) thy (...) thee ^n (...) thy youth, and walk in (...) and in
the (...) eyes, (...) know thou that for all (...) will bring thee to Judgment.
Where you (...) he shall (...) his (...) very Christian would lay this
seriously to heart, and contemplate thus with himself. O Wretch that I am! How
many Holy Sabbaths have I profaned! And how many Oaths have I Sworn! How many
hundred times have I neglected Prayer, to call upon God! How many times have I
derided Godliness! How many Lies have I told! And if for every idle word you
must give an Account, certainly for every Sermon, Sabbath and Ordinance, under
which you have been idle, you shall not escape without a Reckoning.

Moreover, the neglecting of Opportunity, is the greatest Destroyer in the
World. It Is not so much being Bad, as the delaying to be Good, that destroys
the most. It is not flat Denials, but foolish Delayings that ruin^ Christians,
Ec^les. 8. 6. Because to every purpose there is Time and Judgment; therefore
the misery of man is great upon him. Few deny, but most delay to be saved.

swallowing a Grape stone, or the cutting of a Corn, have brought some persons
to their Grave; we may stumble into it at a Stone in the Street, or a T^^e from
a House may knock us down into it: the strongest Man may be conquered by a
Fever in three or four days, or an Apoplexy may dispatch him in so many hours
or Minutes: none can tell where when, or by what Instruments he shall pass out
of this Life: which, if we consider, and also, that as the Tree falls, so it
lies; there is no rectifying the Errors o^ our Life after our Death, but-we
shall for ever continue in the state we die in; we must needs be very careful
that Death come not on us unprepared. Solomon bid us, Whatsoever our hand
finds to do, to do it with our might; for there is no Work, not Device, nor
Knowledge, nor Wisdom in the Grave whither we go. Now it this Argument be
pressing, as it is, that we ought therefore to lay hold of all opportunities
for our Souls while (...), because we can do nothing after we are dead; it may
add to our Seriousness to think, that it is uncertain whether a few days may
not put an end to our Life, and so to our working. Twill be sad for the
expiring Soul to say, Had I thought Death had been so near, I would have given
more heed to Gods call to Delaying Sinners, that I might have been prepared for
it. And yet his the common Case of the greatest part of mankind to set their
last Day, at too great a distance from them.

To what has been said of the shortness of Life, I might add the suddenness of
Christ's coming to Judgment; Yet a little while, and he that shall come, will
come, and will not (...). Now since the Apostles time, it is (...) sixteen
hundred Years, and therefore, at this day we may well reckon of a little while;
indeed it is true, With God (as the Apostles expresses it) a thousand years are
but as (...) day; and therefore, though it be (...) little while with God till
our Lord (...) Coming, yet according to man's computation of time, it may be
long according to that of our Savior, Shall not God avenge his own Elect? Though
he bear with them long, I tell you, that he will avenge them speedily; but
howsoever the term of ( little while) may be Interpreted, we have certain
tokens that his Coming cannot be far off: St. Paul would not have the
Thessalonians be troubled as if the Day of Christ were at hand, and the reason
way it could not be so, he tells them, was, because that day should not come,
except there came a Falling away first, and that Man of Sin were revealed, the
Son of Perdition whom Christ should (...) with the brightness of his Coming.
Now I think there is no Christian doubts, but the (...) and Preph^^e Spirit,
that is now in the World, speaks him to be revealed, even that Spirit that
rules in the Children of Disobedience.

It were Presumption to limit a time, seeing of that day and hour knows no man,
so as to determine positively and precisely when it shall be; but it were Fool
hardiness, to be over confident, that it may not be even in our days;
whenever it is, it will certainly come unexpected of the greatest part of the
World, even as a Thief in the night: Our Saviors Parable of the Ten Virgins
may well instruct us what influence this day should have upon us; for when at
midnight the Bridegroom came, ^he wise slumbred as well as the foolish, but
their Lamps were burning, being furnished with Oil, and therefore they went in
with the Bridegroom to the Marriage; whereas the foolish whose Lamps were gone
out, and their Oil spent, had the door shut upon them; from whence he draws
this Exhortation, Watch therefore, for you know neither the day nor the hour
wherein the Son of Man comes. They that shall be then alive, are like to have
no notice of it, nor shall they have any time to do any thing toward their own
salvation, for they shall be changed in a moment, i^ the twinkling of an Eye,
at the last Trump. Alas for the fruitless Wishes the delaying Sinner shall then
make, that he had wrought while it was day; for now he sees an Everlasting
Night approaching, wherein he cannot work, but is to receive the Reward of his
Sloth. Many times was he called upon by the Watchman to awake out of sleep, but
he was still for a little more slumber; and now that the last Trumpet gives the
Alarm, he is ro^z'd indeed out of his sleep; but before he can bethink himself
what to do, being filled with horror and despair, he is called upon to give an
Account what he has done: the surprise amazeth, and (...) him even besides
himself, so that he ^^lls to the Mountains to hide him, as if ^ey had Ears to
hear, or Hearts to pity him; and the Stones less rocky than his (...) Heart,
that would never relent at the most earnest beseechings of God by the Ministers
of his Word, and their calls to delaying sinners Alas! now the Sinner is to
much diverted and taken up with other Lovers, that the Loves of a Savior are
not constraining, nor his Mercies winning; but then his Greatness will
affright, his Terrors take hold, and his Justice seize the Sinner.

To prevent this state of the ungodly and impenitent, is the end of the ensuing
Sermons, which have the unhappiness to want the Authors own polishing, for
which cause it is but Justice, that what Mistakes are found in them, may not be
laid at the Authors door, (...) being altogether ignorant of their Publishing,
yet were they taken (as I am informed) by the (...) (...) a ready Writer, and
one much acquainted with the Author Preaching; and (...) this just Testimony
cannot be denies them, the Spirit and Lineaments of that worthy Person, whose
Name they beat in the title is sound upon them. A person whole name needs not
Encomiums, having so many Immortal Tombs in the Hearts of many of his Hearers
upon whom his Ministry has made such Impressions, as doubtless will abide with
them for ever and carry the blessed Effects into the other World

Reader, I shall not detain thee longer in the Porch, but only make these (...)
Requests to thee; That thou would read this small Call over seriously, and
with deliberation; and when thou have done seriously examine thy own Heart, and
see if these things concern not thee: And that if you have any in your Family
that need an awakening Call, that you would read either this or some other
(...) Book to them; That you make a (...) Care and Conscience of reading the
^oly Scriptures; of Prayer both -- Publi^^ (...) Private; of hearing the Word,
and (...) other Ordinances commanded by God (...) the holy Scriptures. But
above all, neglect not to get a saving Interest in Christ, concluding with this
Scripture, Ezekiel. 33 11. Say unto them, as I live, says the Lord God, I have no
pleasure in the Death of the Wicked; but that the Wicked turn from his way and
Live. Turn ye, turn ye from your evil way; for why will ye (...), O House of
Israel?

Advertisement.
THere is now in the Press, and will shortly be Published, A Treatise
concerning the Lords Supper: With three Dialogues for the more full Information
of the Weak, in the Nature and Use of this Sacrament. By the same Author.

THere will speedily be Published, A Book Entitled, The Fountain Opened: Or,
The great (...) Privilege of having Christ exhibited to Sinful Men. Wherein
also is proved that there shall be a National Calling of the JEWS. From Zech.
13. 1. In that day there shall be a Fountain Opened to the House of David, and
to the Inhabitants of Jerusalem, for sin, and for uncleanness. By the Reverend
Mr. Samuel Willard, (...) of a Church in Boston, in (...).

A CALL TO Delaying Si^^^^^.
PSALM CXIX^V I made haste, and delayed (...) Commandments.
TO show you the (...) these words with those that go before, I shall ^ay
before you these six things worthy of our Imitation, which will bring us with
(...) unto the Text.

1. You have the wise choice that David made of God to be his Portion. Verse
57. Thou art my Portion, O Lord. Some choose the world for their portion, some
choose their pleasures for their portion; but alas these are but beggarly
portions: Well, says David, let others make choice of what they will, I Will
choose the blessed God, for my portion: I know that God will be (...) portion, a
durable portion, a (...) and satisfying portion unto me. (...) makes his appeal
unto God, (...) Lord, thou art my Portion

(...) David's fixed Resolution (...) choice, what he was resolution (...) ^^ve
said that I will keep thy (...) same Verse.

(...) David's supplication, his (...) to God, that he might be (...) to
perform his Resolution, v. 58. (...) ^reated thy favor with my whole heart,
(...) merciful unto me according to thy word, therefore now, upon my knees, I
beg thy Grace, that I may perform thy Word. He had resolved that he would keep
the Word of God, and therefore he prays the God would help him to keep his Word.

4. You have David's serious Reflection upon his ways and upon his Walkings,
Ver. 59. I thought on my ways. (...) few scarce do so much as seriously (...)
on their ways, what they are doing, and whither they are a going? You think of
the world, and you think of your Sins, so as to gratify (...) Lust* but when
do you seriously think of your way, in order to your turning to God.

5. You have David's resolution after he had thought upon his ways; I will keep
thy word: I did wander, but I will not go on in my sin any longer; I thought on
my ways, and turned my feet unto thy testimony.

6. You have David's putting (...) what before he did resolution (...) the
Text, I made haste, and (...) keep thy Commandments.

Some men do not so much as resolve; some resolve, but do not pray; some do
pray, but they do not consider, before and after prayer, whither they have
walked in the ways of God or no; some do consider, but they do not turn; some
do purpose to turn, but they do delay But, here is a Copy for you all to writ
alter! I delayed not to keep, etc. And so we are come to the Text: The words
are plain and easy. The Doctrine that I would speak unto from them is (...)
(...) what the Blessed and Eternal God Commands us to do, is to be done with
all possible Speed, with all haste, without delay.

O that you could say as David did, I have made haste, and have not delayed to
keep thy Commandments! Sirs, there is no room for delaying and trifling in the
matters of your God, and in the concerns of your Souls. Sirs, if any thing in
the World requires haste, this does: I will (...) four or five Instances, and I
(...) every one may take it as a (...) write after.

(...) is, the instance of Abraham, Genesis 1^. from the second verse to the
eighth. There came three men to Abraham, that is, three Angels in the Shape of
men, one of which was an increased Angel, the Blessed Son of God. They came to
Abraham, and Abraham made haste to give Entertainment unto them, verse (...)
When he saw them, (...) meet them, verse 6 Abraham hastened into the (...) of
Sarah, and said, Make ready quickly. Sirs, (...) Jesus Christ that is Preached
unto you, that is offered unto you in the (...). ^word where is the man that
runs to meet with the Blessed Christ! Oh, who is it that speaks unto him, and
says, Make ready, O my Soul, make ready quickly, and give the best room in thy
heart for this Christ that now stands knocking at the door of thy heart.

2. I would allude to the Practice of the Israelites, that night they went out
of Egypt, Exodus 12. 11, 12. Ye shall eat it in haste, it is in the Lords
Passover. This is a Figure of poor Sinners being delivered by Christ out of
worse than Egyptian Bondage Have thou lived in thy Bondage state so long, and
God Command thee to come out, and will thou not make haste? Exodus 12 33 The
Egyptians urge^ the People to send them out of the Land in haste; for say they
We be all dead men; so say I, Sirs, make haste and get out of your Bondage
state, or else you will be so many dead men: Mark my words, you will be so many
damned souls, Luke 2. from the 8 to the 17 Ver. There when they heard of
Christ, that a Savior was born, that a Redeemer was come into the world, say
they, where is he? and when they were told, they made haste, and came and found
our Savior; and Mary his Mother in a Manger, Verse 16.

3. The 3d. is that of Zacheus, who when our Savior was passing by, ran up and
climbed upon the Tree to see him; our Savior looked up to him and said,
Zacheus make have and come down, for this day I must abide at thy house; and
what did Zacheus do? Did he linger, and say, hereafter it will be time enough?
No; he made have and came down, and received him joyfully.

4. A 4 th Instance is Mary, who, when she heard that Jesus was nigh, John. 11.
^6, 29. as soon as she heard that Christ was come, and that he called for her,
a^ose quickly and came to him: But alas, the poor Ministers of Christ, they
come one day after another to you, saying, Sirs the Master is come, the Savior
of Souls is come; he alone that can Redeem you from Hell, is come and he calls
for you: but one delays, and another loyters: A third, a twentieth, a
hundredth, they make nothing of all this but delay.

Upon this Subject shall be shown some Reasons; then the Application; but the
whole shall be to urge you to make speed and haste, to come to Christ: (...)
shall give you five or six Reasons why, (...) should make all possible speed.

The things that God does command (...) you to do, and set about, (...)
possible speed, that they should (...) on in haste without delay (...) Hearers,
do you think the great (...) God, speaks to you about toys and (...) Surely you
think that they are no be when you linger and loyter, one Sabb^^ after another,
one Month after another from Year to Year; you put off the (...) that God
commands you to do, wh^^ there is nothing in this World that does so much
concern you to do quickly, and with haste, and with speed. Let me entreat you,
and beseech you, for Gods sake, seriously to weigh what are the Commands of the
glorious (...) on you; then tell me if they do (...) qui^e all possible speed:
Here (...) things under this Head.

1. The dreadful God commands (...) Sinner, to repent of thy Sin, and (...)
thee Thou art damned if thou do not. And will thou still delay and loyter,
and linger, and not make have? Beloved Hearers, you will find it true, That
(...) except ye Repent, and that soon too, your Souls will be Damned. Now
consider, Sinner must thy Soul be for ever Damned and (...) Tormented in the
Lake of burning Brim (...) and that for ever, except thou (...) and will thou
yet delay! Wilt (...) make haste to Repent, and that (...)! Ah Sirs, is here
room for dally^^ (...) put off this work of Repentance, commanded you by God?
to put it off (...) other year still, and the other Month (...), when the
Blessed God assures thee, (...) if thou die without Repentance, thou art lost
for ever. Shall not the Gate of Heaven be shut against thy Soul when thou
die, except thou repent whilst thou live; yet will thou linger? Turn and
see what Christ says, Luke 13. 3. Except ye repent, ye shall all likewise
perish. (...) think that Christ speaks (...); for he says again, verse 5. (...)
(...) repent, ye shall surely perish

(...) thou art Commanded by God to (...) thy peace with him. This Work (...)
upon thy hand, and is yet undone by many of you, and will you still delay? will
you not make haste, when it is to make your Peace with God? Oh do it quickly,
with all possible Speed: For if thou do not make thy Peace with God quickly,
God and thy Soul will be Enemies for ever. Thou wast born an Enemy to God, and
if thou do (...) to make thy Peace with God, (...) die an enemy to God. O
(...) you did believe there words, as you (...) shortly find them true, you
would (...) no longer; but would now make (...) to make your Peace with God.
Poor (...)! how can thou sleep, and eat, and drink in Peace, whilst thy Peace
is no yet made with thy God! What do thou think thou poor delaying trifler?
Can thou make thy Party good with God? can thou resist Almighty Power? Was
there ever a man since the Creation that did harden his Heart against God and
prosper? And do thou think that thou can do more, than all the men since
the World was Created could ever do? Come, I will give thee, a Character; If
thou can stand forth, and buckle on thy Armor; R^use up thy self, and play
the Man: if God Afflict thee, do not flinch, do not crouch unto him, and take
thy Bed. If God Afflict thee with the Gout, Stone, or Colic or if thou be
sick at the Heart, do not cry out. What, a stout hearted sinner cry out, when
God does but lay his finger upon thee! When God shall Commission thee to the
Grave, say, Lord, (...) (...) And make thy words good (...) can. When God
shall Sentence (...) Hell, say, Lord, I will not be (...); and make thy words
good if (...) can: When God gives Devils a commission to drag thee to Hell,
say to (...), and Devils, that thou will not go. (...), poor Sinner! will thou
thus stand it but against this God, that can turn thee into Hell, and into
torments; and will you yet delay, and not make haste to make your peace with
God! Rather take advice of Christ, Luke. 14. 31. 32. What King goes to make
War against another King, and fitteth not down first and consulteth, whether
with ten thousand, he is able to meet him that comes against him with twenty
thousand? Ah, so do you, Sirs! Consider, whether you are able to stand with
Almighty strength! And if you are not, send up your Prayers to Heaven; and
desire that God would be at peace with you.

3. This work lies upon thy hand, to get the pardon of thy Sins: To get off the
Guilt that lies upon thy Soul. And this requires haste; quickly, Sirs, or not
at all. Art thou not a Sinner? Have not thou multitude of sins? And are not thy
sins (...)? Art thou not guilty of many sins of Omission? have thou been always
(...) to pray? Would to God thou had. (...) you always been wont to walk
(...) God? I wish you had. O what (...) you omitted to do that God has Command
(...) you? Are not you guilty of many (...) Commission; that God did charge
thee up (...) pain of death not to do? Say yea, or (...) if thou say no, thy
very Tongue (...) prove thee a liar. O then make haste (...) Christ! besides
art not thou guilty of great and heinous sins? Have, not thou sinned against
Knowledge and Conscience? Against Law and Gospel? Have not thou sinned against
the Mercy and Patience of God? How many Oaths have thou sworn? How many times
have thou been drunk? How many Sabbaths mispe^t? How many Sermons slighted?
Sinner, tell me, can thou hear the punishment, that God will inflict upon
thee for these sins, except thou will speedily return to God? O Si^s, I wonder
at my heart! I wonder how you can sleep all night and not dream of He^^! How
sleep to securely, and not dream of being (...), when you he down with the
guilt of so many sins upon your Souls, and not (...), not one forgiven! I
wonder ^ow thou can Drink and Sport, and be (...) so many merry Bouts, when
thy (...) not yet forgiven thee!

The Eternal God Commands thee, (...) pain of Damnation, to hasten (...)
Christ, to come away unto Christ, and (...) him upon the Gospel Terms: (...)
does not this require haste? Is here ^oom, Sirs, for delaying! For God's lake,
Sirs, consider, you are damned if you do not believe on Christ; Yet will you
delay and stand trifling with the Eternal God, whether you shall believe or
not! 1 John 3 23. And this is his Commandment, that we should Believe on the
Name of the Son of God. O, why do you not haste, and not delay to do this
Command of God. See how strictly God charges this upon your Souls, that i^ you
believe not, you must be damned; Ma^k 16. 16. Is here any room for trifling? Is
here any time to delay, whilst thou art in danger of Damnation, as long as thou
do not believe! The Wrath of God abides on thee, whilst thou do not
believe in Jesus Christ, John. 3. 36. But he that believes not, the Wrath of
God abides on him. And is this a ease to be delaying in! Sinner what though thou
have Riches, if thou ha^ (...) not Christ? What though thou have made haste to
get an Estate? What is (...) without Christ? What is this with Sanctifying
Grace? What if thou (...) all the Pleasures that the World can (...) ford? if
thou have all that heart can (...) i^ thou have not Christ, thou art miserable.
Sinner, remember, it is not rich (...) but Christ that must save and keep the
(...) out of Hell! Without Christ no Peace. Without Christ no Pardon! Without
Christ no Escaping the Damnation o^ Hell! Without Christ no entering into
Heaven! And will thou yet delay!

5. Thou have Death and Judgment (...) prepare for, and dees not this require
haste? Will thou yet dally, and delay and not with all possible speed endeavors
to be found in careful preparation so Death and Judgment! Tell me, Sirs, at you
prepared to Die, if Death should seize you his ensuing Night? Are you prepared
to Die? How many of you you were no (...) upon sick beds, conscience would tell
you, As yet you are no prepared to Die! No; What, and yet sit still! O what
ails thee, Sinner! when do thou not see that thou art so near another world!
Art thou prepared to ^ave this world, yet did never Repent (...) sins? Art
thou prepared to Die, (...) go down to thy Grave, yet never (...). It heartily
beg her Christ and grace? (...) thou prepared to die whilst thou (...) in the
Gall of Bitterness, and Bond of equity? Whilst a stranger to God and Christ,
and Grace, thou art not fit to die. What and will thou yet sit still, as if
past all danger? Or else can thou put away the streak of death by force? O
that you would see what reason* there is ^o make haste, and not to delay, 2
Pet. ^. 12. Looking for and hastening to the coming of the day of the Lord
Mark, you should be hastening for the coming of ^he day of the Lord. Do you
hasten for he coming of this day? Will you sit till and not make your peace
with God? The day o^ Reckoning is coming and all things will be set straight
betwixt God and your Souls; and will you delay, and not make haste?

6. And Hasty. Thou art yet uncertain whether thou shall be damned or saved:
and does not this require all possible need? Does not his (...) for all the
haste (...) thou can make to get an assurance of the Love of God, and of
Salvation after death? How soon you may be upon a death bed, you cannot tell.
Now, suppose thou wast a dying, think, O, I (...) bid farewell to all my
Friends! I must t^ my leave of my Husband, and Wife, of Children, Friends, and
Neighbors: I must a (...) but whether I go next, I cannot tell! Th(...) are
but two Places to receive Souls after dear (...) Heaven and Hell; but which of
these my Son, must be in, I do not know. No! not know, sinner! and sit still
and yet delay: when the blessed God has Commanded thee to all diligence to make
thy Calling and Election sure? Is this thy diligence, not so much as to go
about it one year after another? Is this thy diligence that thou usest? Put
this Question to thy Soul, What will become of it when thou leavest this World?
For Gods sake arise make haste, Sinner, make haste, least thou be shut out of
this kindgdom, which thou take no care to make sure of.

That is the first Reason or General Head, why the Command of God should be set
about with all speed without delay.

II. Make haste Sirs, make haste, delay no longer; for all the time that is
before you is little enough for you to do what God Commands you. He that begins
his obedience to God's Commands soonest, (...) at least in his youth, will have
time (...) enough to do what God Commands: (...) that are in years, if you had
begun (...) work as soon as you began to understand things, you would have
found work enough to have done, if so be you (...) a thousand years to live in
this World, but being you have but a little time to live, must not this little
time be little enough for you to do the work that God set you in the world to
do? Have you one Day to spare, or one Hour to spare? O how many of this world
do spend their time so as if they had time too much and work too little! When,
God knows, your time is of the least.

There are these Live things more under this second Head, which will include
you to make haste. To delay not one hour longer. O could! but prevail, but with
one sinner resolvedly to go home, and to say, I will delay no longer: I will
make haste to keep the Commandments of my God! Consider there one,

1. Thou have a great Work to do, and therefore should not lose one Minute of
time for the doing of it. Thou have many strong Lust to overcome: Many a
Temptation to resist, Many Duties to perform: Thou have the knowledge of God
and Christ to get, and of thy own heart, the knowledge of thy State now, and of
th(...) state hereafter: Many a Prayer to make Many an hour to be spent in
searching of thy Heart, and trying of thy State. And is not all the time that
thou half before thee if thou begin to day, little enough to do this great
Work, that God lays upon thee to do?

2. The Work enjoined by God it is difficult Work, and hard Work too. The more
difficult your Work is, if you be wise, the more time you will take for the
doing of it. Is not to set thy heart and thy love upon God, to love him above
all, and to please him before all? is not think you, this hard and difficult
Work, when the heart of a sinner naturally loves any thing better than God? To
have thy will to bow to Christ, and submit to Christ, and accept of Christ,
when it is rebellious and stubborn? Is not this hard Work, to change thy heart
to break thy hard and stony heart? To reform thy Life, is not this hard and
difficult Work? And all commanded by God. If this Work be not hard, why is it
not done? If it be hard why do you not go about it? Consider then that it is
difficult work that you have to do.

3. The work that you have to do, in order to another World, it is necessary
work: It is work that must be done, or thy Soul will be undone, and that for
ever. And will thou yet delay, and will thou yet stand dallying, and putting it
off, whether thou had best do it or not! If the work were indifferent,
whether to be done, or left undone, I could not blame you for making no more
haste; but this is not the Case; this is more necessery than Food, when thou
art an hungry, more necessary than Physic, when thou art sick. Beloved people,
you must be holy, or you must never see God, but to your Eternal Terror; you
must turn from sin, or burn in Hell! you must repent, or you cannot be saved;
so great a Necessity there is for the doing of the work, that God Commands you
to do: Is it an indifferent thing, whether thou escape the Damnation of Hell,
or no! If not, behold holiness is the way to Heaven! Faith in Christ is the way
to Heaven! This must be done, or thy Soul must not saved, Sirs, if there be any
business in this World, that lies upon our hands that is necessary to be done,
this is it.

4. This Work that God Commands you to do, it is a Soul work: And I am sure
that soul work should not be delayed: Soul-work should be done with all
possible speed O that you would resolve and say, It is my Soul that must be
Dammed or Saved; therefore I will make haste! It is my Soul that must go to
Heaven or Hell therefore I will make haste to look after the Salvation of my
Soul. Thou have but one Soul, one only soul: Will thou make haste to feed thy
Body, when hungry? Will thou make haste to quench thy Thirst, when dry? And to
send for a Physician, when in danger of Death, and to cry out to those about
thee, O stay not, make haste, bring him away quickly and yet in the mean while
never think of thy soul? Is thy Body better then thy Soul? Is not thy Soul far
the Better? Will thou take care to feed and cloth the Body, and delay the
getting an Interest in Christ to save thy Soul? Why so careful for a dying
body, that within a little while shall be nothing but a lump of lifeless dust?
I do not you know that e're long men shall carry your bodies on their shoulders
to the grave, and lay them in the dust, to have them rotten? What! will you
take such care to make provision for a corruptible Body, and yet neglect your
Souls! What mean you, Sirs! What mean you! What ails men, that they dally thus
with themselves? Are they besides their Wits!

5. And lastly, if you think nothing that has been said is worth regarding, yet
I pray consider the work that God Commands you to mind in this World, it is a
Work for Eternity! And will thou put it off for another year, Month, or Week!
Do you think, Sirs, that a short Life upon Earth is not time little enough to
prepare for an eternal life, for an endless eternity! is a few years too much
to be spent with all diligence, that thou may be ready for an everlasting
State, to which thou art a hastening. Beloved Hearers, you and I are all before
God this day, but how soon, we may be in a unalterable estate is unknown to us;
you are now in Time, to morrow you may be in Eternity: you may be in an
everlasting state What, and yet make no more haste! Death is at your backs,
Heaven and Hell before you, what! and yet delay! What! At the brink of an
Everlasting State, and make no more haste to do what God has Commanded thee!
Remember man, remember, it is Heaven that must be lost or won for ever! It is
Eternal Joy, that thou must have, or go without whenever you shall leave this
World! It is Everlasting Torments or Everlasting Blessedness that you must
enter into, when you leave this World: Yet will you not make haste to do that
Work, that God Commands you to do! Arise Sinner in the Name of God, Awake, be
up and doing, as thou love thy Soul: Make haste, Sinner, make haste, begin to
day, before to morrow: Begin this hour, before the next, to do the Work that
God Commands thee; for all the time that is before thee, is little enough to do
it in.

1. This Work, Sirs, that God Commands you to do, must be now done, or never.
What, and yet sit still, and yet daily! It must be now, or never. Sirs, it you
will Repent, you must how Repent, or never to any purpose; if you will make
your Peace with God, it (...) be done now or never! God has set in this World
to make preparation for another. God has set us in this Life, that we may make
ready for another. We are in this world upon trial, and according as we behave
our selves and mind our work, or let it alone, so it must be with us for ever.
This World is the place, this Life the time, when work for Heaven must be done
or never be done. Whatsoever thy hand finds to do, do it with thy might; for
there is no work, nor device, nor knowledge, nor wisdom in the grave, whither
thou go, Eccles 9 10. O that every Trifler in the matters of his God, and of
his Soul, would write that verse upon his Chamber Door; in which you may mind
these three thing, viz.

First it is plainly said, that thou art going to thy Grave; thou art upon thy
Journey to thy Grave: Thou art upon thy way to the dust. Whether thou art
sleeping or waking, thou art going to thy Grave. Whether working or playing
thou art going to thy Grave. Whether drinking or sporting, thou art going to
thy Grave. In this Journey thou never stand still? The Child is going (...)
its Grave as soon as it is born.

2. In the Grave there is no work to be done; no Preaching there, nor no Means
nor helps there. Of which more hereafter.

3. Therefore it follows, that what now thou have to do, it should be done with
all thy might, and with all haste and possible speed. What thou have in thy
hand to do, do it with all thy might, for there is no work to do in the Grave
to which thou art a going. Jesus Christ did work the more because his Time was
but short, I must work the work of him that sent me, whilst it is day; for the
night comes wherein no man can work. Behold your day is passing away! The
Night is coming on! O do your work whilst the day lasts, for when the night
comes no man can work. You must Repent savingly now, or never! You must
Believe on Christ now, or never! You must be made holy and become the Children
of God now, or never! O, methinks, these words, Now or Never. should Alarm the
most drousie Sinner! But to set home this, that what God commands must be done
Now, or Never, I shall lay before you these Seven things.

1. After Death there shall be no offers of Mercy, nor tenders of Pardon to all
Eternity, therefore now, or never You must now do what God Commands, or not at
all. Now God he calls and Christ he calls, and the Spirit he calls, and
Ministers they call, That thou would leave thy Sin: But if thou stop thine
ears and harden thy heart till death, after death none of these shall call to
thee for evermore! God did never send to Damned Souls; What say you now, will
you accept of Mercy now, will you have a Savior now, and hearken to God now?
No, God never took this course as yet, and God will never do it.

2. After Death there i^ no Repentance nor Believing; therefore this must be
done now, or never. When Death has shut thine Eyes, and separated thy Soul
from thy Body, if thou die an Unbeliever, thou never afterward shall have
Faith. If thou die Impenitent, thou never afterward shall Repent. Possibly
Damned Souls may Repent in Hell that they did not Repent upon Earth; but
Repentance in Hell, is but the aggravation of their Misery, it being fruitless
Repentance. What think you wi^^ they that would never be good whilst they
lived, be good in Hell! It is true, there are many sins that men commit on
Earth, that they shall not commit in Hell: The Drunkard there shall be no more
Drunk: The Gamester there shall have no more jolly bouts; therefore Now, or
Never.

3. The Soul after Death enters into an everlasting State, where there shall be
no alteration for ever; therefore what you do for your Souls, must be done Now,
or Never. The Soul, when gone into another World, where is first takes its
Lodgings, it will be for ever. There once damned, and for ever damned! Once in
Hell, and for ever there; therefore it must be Now, or Never. If a man in an
Unconverted (...) should dye to day, and tidings be brought to you to morrow,
What is become of his Soul? The tidings would be, such a one is Dead, and
Damned too. Yea see the Soul enters into an Everlasting state. Luke 16. 22, 23.
There Lazarus he died, and his Soul went unto unalterable Joys: The rich Man he
died, and his Soul went unto unchangeable Torments. When a man dies, he goes to
his place: Every Soul has a place he must go to when he leave the body, Acts 1.
25. Judas he died and went unto his own place. Hell is the Unbelievers own
place.

4. When a Man dies, Wrath and Justice take their turns, and whilst a Man
lives, Mercy and Patience do take their turns; Beloved Hearers, the Attributes
of God, as I may so speak, take their turns now Mercy and Patience take their
turns. Mercy takes its turn, and says, Sinner, thou art undone: Here is a
Christ for thee. Thou art miserable, come to me, and I will help thee. This is
Mercy ^s turn, but the Soul does not yet regard therefore Patience takes its
turn, and says till the next Lord's Day; it may be, the sinner will be wise
then; it not, (...) stays another it may be, the sinner (...) bethink himself
then, and it may be, Patience waits from one Year, to another; from one ten
years to another ten years; Yes, the sinner does not hearken nor regard. Then,
when the Soul separated from (...) Body, Wrath and Justice take (...) says
Mercy, her (...) this than Christ even as long as he (...), yet I (...) And
says (...), Lord, where the Sinner keps his eyes (...) waited upon him, even
now to his last gasp; therefore now we Mercy and Patience deliver him up to the
hands of Wrath and Justice; take him. We Mercy and Patience has done with this
man's Soul for ever.

5. Stay a little longer in thy sins, till Death has closed thy Eyes; then thy
Cries and Calls, and Importunities for Mercy shall never be heard; God will then
become a God not to be entreated. Now, if you beg for Mercy, you may have it.
If you beg and cry, and call for Pardon to God, upon the conditions of the
Gospel, you may have it, but refuse a little longer, then if thou cryest to all
Eternity thy Cries shall never be heard, nor regarded: See this, Mat. 25. 1. 2,
^, etc Lord, Lord, ^^en to us. No, says Christ, not I Luke 13 25, 26. See there
(...) strong cries that Men shall make, and (...) vain Luke 16 26. What strong
Requests did the Rich Men put up in Hell, (...) all still denied. Should lest
thou beg ^hen for the least Mercy, as much as one (...) Water, it could not be
had.

6. What God Commands, it must he (...) never, because when once (...) and
gone, it ten never be (...), The last Lords Day will never come again, Sinner,
the time that thou should have Prayed, but did not, will never come again.
All that thou can give, will not buy back one hour ^gain. And when thou art
Dead and gone out of this World, God will never trust thee with one day more,
for to do that which thou did not do while in this World. God will not say to
a Damned Soul in Hell, here was a fooling and 2 delaying Sinner, that did delay
to come to God, while upon Earth, that made no haste to come to Christ, whilst
Christ might have been had. God will not (...), Come, go thy way again: I will
release thee for a while; go and sit under the same Minister again, I will try
thee the other Life. O Sirs! this will never be! therefore, Now, or Never, Job.
7. 6. My days are swifter than a Weavers Shuttel, and are spent without hope.
The eye of him that sees me, shall see me no more, etc. Sirs, it is not long
that you shall dwell in your Houses. and lodge in your Beds: Death will quickly
come and hale you out, and take you out of this world, and you must never come
again, Jeb 14. 7. 14. There is hope of a Tree: if it be out down, that is will
sprout again but man dies and wastes away, yea man gives up the Ghost, and
where is he! verse. 12 So man lies down, and rises not again, till the world
varish away. If a man dye shall be live a rain? i. e. shall (...) live upon
Earth again? Shall he come and sit under the means of Grace again (...) No. Heb
9 27 It is appointed for all men once to dye. Mark, a man shall dye but once a
natural death: the Soul is but once to be separated from the Body, It is
appointed for all men once to dye. O Lord, how well should that work be done
that must be done but once! Must you die but once! O then how carefully should
that work be done!

7. After death is the time of receiving your wages of Reward; therefore your
work must be now done or Never. It thy work be done, thou go away to Heaven,
if not done thou go away down to Hell. Immediately after Death, the Reward
is given, or the Punishment is imflicted. When the Servant of the laboring man
is to be reckened with at night, it his work is not done, can he expected
Reward? Can thou look for Heaven when thou have not believed not repented,
(...) closed with Jesus Christ, upon Gospel terms? So when the day of Judgment
comes presently after death, thou have upon sowed, and can thou expect to
reap Eternal Life? Or shall that be thy Sowing time, that should have been thy
Reaping time? Sirs, this is now your Sowing time, your Praying time, and your
Repenting time; therefore, do it now without delay, for this must be done now
or never. Consider Sirs, you must make have, there is no room for delay, for
what God commands you to do, it must be done now or never.

IV. Therefore, God does Command you without delay, to yield Obedience to his
Commands. The time is set and Commanded by God, as well as the work a (...)
duty it self. God does not only tell you what to do, but he tells you when you
are to do it. The same God, Sinner, that commands thee to repent, commands thee
to repent to day. The same God that commands thee to Believe and accept of his
Son, commands thee to do it now at this very instant, The same God that
commands thee to leave thy sin, and turn to him, commands thee to do it now,
without delay. Where does God give liberty to any man, to put off his
Repentance till to morrow? Show me the place if thou can? Much less, till
thou art a Man: Much less, till thou are old; yet this is in the thoughts and
hearts too of too many. Do not repent as yet, this is the voice of the Devil,
and not of God Let Holiness alone for the present, this is the Language of
thine Enemy, and of thy cursed corrupted Heart; it is not the voice of God.
Where does God allow to spend this day in a natural State? In what Chapter, or
what Verse is it, that God gives thee space to slight Christ for one hour, and
to neglect God and thy Soul for one hour? Show me the place if thou can; then
let God alone, and Christ alone, so long as thou have leave from God so to do;
no, but this thou can not: Will the Blessed and Holy God give you time to
rebel against him? For one day will he give you leave so to do? No; but I can
show thee, Sinner one place after another, where God Commands thy speedy
Return, (...) 12 1. Remember thy Creator in the days of thy youth. Remember
him, what to do; to Obey his Commandments, to Fear him: Remember him, to love
him; Remember him, to make a speedy and voluntary Resignation of your Souls
unto him. Observe in that Verse it is not only said, Remember thy Creator in
the days of thy youth. So you young Ones perhaps may say, you do, and yet stay
longer, yet a year or two; but mark, there is one word more, Remember Now thy
Creator in the days of thy youth, 2 Cor. 6. 2. Now is the appointed time: Now
is the day of Salvation. Sirs, there is not one of you all can say to morrow is
the day of Salvation, or the next week, or the next Year shall be the day of
Salvation, Mat. 6. 33. Seek ye first the Kingdom of God and the Righteousness
thereof. How contrary is the Commandment of God to the Practice of men? First
for an Estate, then for Holiness, as I was told, was a saying of one that I was
lately with, that lies under horrible Distress of Soul that was eagerly bent to
get an Estate, quickly; and after he had done he cried, God for give me, Heb 3.
7, 8. Wherefore as the Holy Ghost says, To dry of ye will hear his Voice,
harden not your hearts, as in the Provocation, in the day of Temptation in the
Wilderness, Heb 4 7. Again, he limiteth a certain day, saving, today if you
will hear his Voice, harden not your hearts. Now seriously ponder this, then
tell me. If there be any room so your delays.

5. The last reason is this, There is no room for your Deliberation in this
cause, whether you will obey the Commands of God or no, and consequently there
can be no room for delay; there is no time to be spent, whether you should keep
Gods Command or no. There are some things that do not come under men's
deliberation, to spend any time to deliberate whether we are to do them or no.

As for Instance, which of you do deliberate whether you shall Eat or Drink or
no: No man would, but for quantity or quality, you may deliberate, but whether
Eat or Drink at all, you must not deliberate. So the Ultimate End of man comes
not under man's deliberation. No man deliberates whether he shall be happy or
no. Now such is your obedience to the Commandments of God. 'Doing that which he
Commands you to do, will your spend time to deliberate whether the blessed God
should be beloved or no: Will you spend time to deliberate whether the blessed
Savior shall be believed on or no? No, there is no room or deliberation in
this Case: No man will have the face to dare to call these things (...)
question. Now is there no room for deliberation; yet is there room for your
delay: So much for the Reasons; now for the Application of this Doctrine. And
it is but one main Use that I intend upon this Subject, that is a Use of
Exhortation.

Must the Commandments, of God be kept without delays With all earnest haste
and possible Speed, Oh then Beloved Hearers* Be exhorted in the fear of God,
without delay, to set about the Work that God commands you to do. Come Sirs,
begin this day before to morrow. O come for Gods sake be persuaded to begin
this Work, this very hour before the next. Sinner, leave thy sins, just now,
for the Eternal God commands thee so to do; forsake thy Wickedness just now,
for the Blessed and Glorious God does give it thee in charge so to do. Turn to
God, Believe in Christ, just now without delay. O that I could but persuade
thee, to look about thee, to be up and doing. If any thing in this World,
require haste this does. For your Souls sake arise, and be up and doing. If the
Devil tempt thee to delay, do not hearken unto him (...) but say, The Eternal
God Command me now to Repent and turn to Christ, and the safety of my Soul work
requires that I should do it unto all possible speed. If thy (...) Companions
suggest unto thee, it is time enough yet, reply and say, O it is not so, the
Eternal God requires me presently to leave my Sins. It thy own corrupt and
slothful heart should say the same, O it is not so, the Eternal God requires me
to make haste, and the safety of my Soul requires me so too. O you Young Men,
come away, you may not live till you are old: you Young Children, that
understand what I say, make haste, for you may die while you are young. You old
gray headed Sinner, make haste and do not delay, for your time is almost spent
already.

To force this Exhortation, I shall urge it with ten several Arguments.

1. The Danger and the Miserable State that thy Soul is in, whilst thou art
unconverted, requires thee to make haste. Thy Estate is wretched, thy Condition
deplorable O why dest thou make no more haste to get but of this Condition?
Dangers seen and apprehended, do usually (...) up to hasten: Tell me, Sinner,
if a Bear were at thy heels, or a Dyon at thy back, what haste would thou
make to get away from them, that thou may not be torn in pieces? If thou wast
in a wild and desolate Wilderness, that is full of Pits and Serpents, and wild
Beasts, and night were coming on thee, what haste would thou make to get out?
If thou were in thy Bed, and at midnight a voice should be heard Arise, awake
your house is on a flame, would not thou make haste, and not say, There is no
need of haste, and turn and sleep, and take the other nap in thy Bed: Behold,
thy danger is a thousand times more, whilst in thy sin, all me is not thy Soul
better than thy body? Is not thy Soul better than thy goods? and would thou
rise in haste to save thy body and thy goods, and wilt not thou make haste to
save thy soul, and that from Hell flame: too! Or will thou turn thy self like a
sluggard upon the bed of carnal Security, and say, Let me alone, disturb me
not, there is no such haste, Genesis 19. 15. 16, 1^, and (...) verses. The (...)
was, that Sodom was to be burnt. which Fire, and the People that were in (...)
only God would have mercy upon (...) and some with him; therefore the angel
came to hasten him, o get away, because of his danger. This apply, Sinner, thou
art in a natural State, in danger of a worse Fire than that of Sodom, and God
Commends thee to make haste left thou be consumed: Still thou lingrest and
Joyterest. God sends to us again, saying, Sinner, escape for thy Life, for thy
Soul, look not behind thee, after the World, and alter thy Sins, and Lusts,
Haste, it is for thy life David, when he was in danger of being seized upon by
Soul, made great haste to get our of that danger, (...) his Friend, had given
him a sign, by the shooting of an Arrow and world spoken to the Lad that should
Such the Arrow, that he should know, whether it was good or evil that was
appointed for him, a Sam 20 38, Ah! so say (...) thee Sinner, make Praise, make
spend, and every not, thy case is dangerous. (...), when he was in danger, the
(...) invaded the Land, he got away in haste. When David was coming against
Nabals, house, (...) made haste to pacify and turn away (...) anger. But alas,
what was the danger of Let unto thy danger! Or the danger of David, of, Soul,
or of Nab^ls house to the danger thou are in.

First of all, whilst thou delayest to (...) the Commandments of God. God
himself is thy Enemy. There is Enmity betwixt God and thy Soul. Know then,
whilst thou art trifling, God is angry with thee. The Eternal God is provoked
by thy Rebellion against his Law. And is this a State to be delayed in! If a
Great Man was thy Enemy, what haste would thou make to be reconciled to him?
If a Man upon whom is thy dependence and livelihood, should become thy enemy, O
how would thou find to get his favor again! Would not the thoughts of his
displeasure awaken thee out of thy sleep! Psalm. 7. 11 God is angry with the
Wicked every day. Mark, God is daily Angry with thee, whilst a Wicked man;
Whilst thou breakest Gods Commandments. And is this a condition to be continued
in, when God is daily angry with thee? God is angry with the Wicked every day
in the week, every day in the year. Verse 12. If he turn not, he will whet his
sword, he has b^nt his bow, and made is ready: He (...) also prepared for him
the instruments of Death Behold, the angry God has taken his Bow in his hand,
yea, he has strung, and bent his Boy and he has taken his Arrow out of the
Quiver, and put it to the String, and drawn to the top; and Sinner, if (...) be
the Mark that God aims at, if thou art the Butt, he will shoot his (...) in
fury, that so it shall strike to the very heart, and who shall heal that wound!
Tell me now, is this a State (...) be continued in? O it is, because that (...)
do not know what God's Anger is! Could thou speak with Devils, if they
would be plain with thee, they could tell thee what God's Anger is. If thou
could speak with Damned Soul they could tell thee, what God. Anger is O did
you know and consider, what God's anger is you would say, O this is not a State
for me to abide in a da^ longer.

Take these Six (...) of this Enemy of thine.

First of all, this Angry (...) Omnipotent: God; and came thou must Almighty
Power? Behold, (...) the Mountains to smoth, and the Earth, and Devils to
Tremble. This, Sinner, is he that is Angry with thee every day.

Secondly, this God is Omniscient, and thou can not deceive him as to make
him Believe, thou art his friend, then indeed then art no.

Thirdly, This God (...) is Angry with thee every day, is an Omnipresent God:
And then in thy distress, whither can thou hasten from him? Consider* Sirs,
you that will not hasten to him, whiter can you hasten from him? You that will
not hasten to him, to a Holy Submission, and a voluntary resignation of your
selves to God, whither will thou hasten from him.

Fourthly, He is a Righteous God that is Angry with thee every day. Thou can
not bribe him with thy Gifts Thy Silver and thy Gold he will (...)

Fifthly, He is Eternal too, and will never die. Behold this God that is Angry
every day with thee, shall never (...). If a man were thy Enemy, thou may
die, or else he may die, so thou may be delivered from his Anger. But this is
not the case between God and thy (...). God ever lives to take vengeance on
thee He lives to all Eternity, to punish thee (...) Eternity. To punish thee
for (...) (...) against him, And whom thou die, this does not deliver thee
from the Angry God; no, but (...) thou die then thou faliest more especially
into his hands.

Sixthly, and lastly, This God that is Angry with thee every day, whilst thou,
delayest, is an unchangeable God. He will never change to be a Friend to thee,
except thou do change, to become an obedient Subject unto him, and yield
obedience to his Commands.

Whilst thou do delay to keep the Commandments of God, thou art very near kin
to the Devil. The Devil is thy father all this while, and thou art his servant
and his child. And to you that say you defy the Devil and all his works, why
do you yet delay to come off from his service and work? What think you, Sirs,
is this Relation to the Devil so, honorable, and is his work so delightful,
and will his wages be so desirable that you are so loath to leave him and turn
to God? That this is (...) that there is this relation and (...) of kin betwixt
the Devil and a wicked (...) see Act. 13. 10. says the (...) there (...) wicked
man, Thou Enemy of all Righteous of thou child of the Devil. Ah, Sirs! may you
that are (...) of the Devil, be made the Children (...) God, and will we not
make (...) have this done? What if God should say to thee at last, Thou likest
thy, Relation well, thou would have the Devil for thy Father; now thou art
departed, get thee down to thy Father the Devil, thou shall have a whole
Eternity with him.

3. All the while thou do delay, thou art under all the Curses of the Book of
God; all the Punishments and Threatenings in Scripture thou art liable to, and
God may without delay inflict them all upon thee, who do delay to come to
him, Gal. 3 10. Cursed is he that coutinueth not in all things that are written
in the Book of the Law to do them. Thou have not continued to do so much as one
thing written in the Law. O then if God shall Curse thee, who shall Bless thee?
Sinner, did thou never read this Book; or if thou have perused this Book,
have not thou beheld the Threatenings of God against graceless men, and ungodly
men, and Delaying Sinners? Or, do thou despise those sayings, and not make
haste to get out of that condition in which thou art exposed to Gods Wrath.

4. Whilst thou delay est to keep the Commandments of God, thou art under the
Sentence of the Gospel too. Ah Sirs, if the Gospel condemns you, whither will
you appeal! I do not say, that yet this Sentence is a final Sentence; no, till
thy Unbelief is final this Sentence is not final. Ah Sinner, come, Believe
quickly, or else thy Unbelief will be a final Unbelief; then this Sentence of
the Gospel, will be a final Sentence too The Gospel has its Threatenings as well
as the Law, I, and more severe ones too. You that are ready to say, That we are
too sharp in our Preaching nothing but Hell, and Damnation: Alas Sirs, I speak
no more than I find in the Gospel it self; and that Christ has spoken himself.
Do you think Sirs, that we are too sharp, and too tar^ in our Sermons: alas,
you cast the Reproach upon God that tells us what we tell you. We do no more
but tell you what this God says, and what you must expect: and where you must
shortly be, if you do not make haste and come away to Christ, Mark 16 16. He
that Believes not shall be condemned. This is Christ himself that shall Judge
you shortly that tells you so, Joh. 3 36 He that Believes not on the Son of
God, the wrath of God (...) him Heb. 2 3 How shall we (...) if we neglect so
great Salvation! Mat. 18 3 Verily, verily I say unto you, except ye be
converted, ye cannot enter into the Kingdom of God, Luk 13 Except ye Repent ye
shall all like wise perish Heb. 24 Without Holiness no man shall see the Lord.
Now what say you Si^s, do we speak more than God speaks? Or have we said more
than God himself has said? If thou can not bear this Doctrine, tell me; why
wast not thou one of Gods Counselors, and why did not thou advise, and
direct thy Maker, to make better Laws, and better terms for Sinners, than in
the Gospel he has done? Should thy Maker ask thee, upon what terms and
Conditions thou would be Saved? thou must take his terms, or thou must not be
Saved at all, John 3. 18. He (...) believes not, is condemned already. Mark
that Sentence, He that does not believe. Ah poor Sinner, art thou a Condemned
Man, yet wilt not thou make haste, and with thou (...) still? And wilt not thou
come and beg th^^ thou may be Pardoned?

5. All this while that thou do delay, all thy sins stand uncrossed in the
Book of God; and is this a safe condition to be continued in? How many Oaths,
Sinner have thou sworn! How many Holy Sabbaths have thou Profaned! How many
times have thou decided Godliness? How many hundred times have thou neglected
Prayer? To Call upon God: And how many Lies have thou told, and not one of them
Forgiven! Poor delaying Trifler? Do not thou know, that thou most be Pardoned
or Condemned? and Pardoned (...) can not be, while unsanctified and (...) O
what will thou do (...) this World, and standost in (...) God shows (...) the
(...) thy Sins (...)

6. While (...) God (...) Stocks under the plain (...) of the Word? But (...)
those things are true, as thou will (...) know and find them to be, Oh, why
do thou delay still and make (...) more haste out of that condition in whom
thou art exposed to so much (...) (...) wood Damnation, what a (...) it make in
my cars! If the Word be so dreadful, what is the Thing i^ self! Yet this is thy
longer, while thou delavest to keep the Commandments of thy God, What art thou
in danger of? In danger of a place of (...) Darkness: In danger of a bottomless
Pi^: In danger of a place of Torment: In danger of a burning fiery Furnace: In
danger of a place of continual Torment with Fire, and with Brimstone. Sinner,
wh^^ thou (...) down, thou art in danger of Hell, and how know not, whether
thou shall awake before thou art in Hell. Sinner, consider how dangerous thou
sleep when thee great to Bed, who dare assure thee, that thou (...) not be
in Hell before the Sun (...) again? While thou do delay, and sit down at thy
(...) see that hour yet in all thy life, in which thou could say, now I am
past danger of being damned. Now I have a Promise of God, that my Soul shall
not be cast into Hell. Sirs, what do you mean! Beloved People, what do you
think on! How do you sit here as not concerted! How can you eat and drink, and
sleep as if you were not in danger of Hell! Can thou bear the Wrath of God,
the Torments of the Damned! Can thou endure it Sinner? If thou can then let
Christ alone still! But alas, to led the Torments of Hell will be another thing
than to speak of them. O Sirs, hearken to this Counsel, from one that earnestly
desires the salvation of your Souls.

I come now to the Second Particular.

II. To urge you to make haste, Consider, what haste most do make in the wo^ld
to sin against God, to break the Commandments of their God; so have thou done
too, is has been thy practice. O what haste have thou made to Sin! How fall do
many men Swear! How often are many men Drunk! How fast haste do many make to
their wicked (...)! How fall does the Whoremonger halt to his Harlot! Shall
others make haste to Hell, and wilt not thou make haste to Heaven! Shall others
make such haste to provoke God, and wilt not thou make haste to Please thy God!
Here we cannot make you to be slow: Here we would fain have you to stop, to
stay, but you will not do it: If we fetch Agruments from God, from the Wrath of
God, from the Justice of God, to stop your course in sin, yet you will go on.
If we fetch Arguments from the Promises of God, from the Threatenings of God,
both (...) for all this, the Sinner will make haste on in his Sin, though we tell
you, that Sin is the way to Hell, the undoing of your Souls; yet, for all this,
you will make haste to Hell; Why Sinner, art thou afraid that thou can not
get to Hell soon enough, or sure enough! Behind, you that make haste to Sin, I
Call and Cry his day, Why such haste, Sinner; why poor Sinner, why such haste?
Why do thou hasten so fast to run on in that course that will certainly bring
thee to that place of Torment? Stop thy course, stay Sinner, turn back, the
place that thou art hastening to, is not a pleasant place; the Torments that
thou art hastening to, are insufferable torments; turn back again then to God,
and instead of making haste to Sin, make haste to God. Believe me, Sinner,
believe me, if that thou come to hell forty years hence, thou will find that
thou art there soon enough. Why then should thou make such haste? O the
blindness of Men's hearts, that make more haste to Damn their Souls, than to
Save them; that make more haste to hell, than to heaven; that make more haste
to Devils, than to God! That Sinners make haste to sin, you have Proof enough
in your, own observation, besides the Scripture! Prove 1. 16. Their feet run to
Evil, they, make haste to shed blood, Prove. 7. 23. The sinner makes haste as a
bird that (...) from the snare. Mark 6. 25. Horodias Daughter made haste to
bring a Charger to have John Baptists head.

III. To press you to make haste Consider, what haste most in the world do make
to be Rich upon Earth; as i^ God sent Men upon Earth to mind nothing so much as
the Riches of this World. Do you not see men make haste to get the World, as if
they could not be happy without it? As if they were undone if they were not
Rich! Why do these Men make haste for Riches, and wilt not thou make haste sot
Grace? Tell me, is not Grace better than Riches, and God, better than Gold? And
are not the joys and happiness of the unseen World, a great deal better than
the outward enjoyments of this present World. Take Solomon's Counsel, Prove. 3.
14, 15. Wisdom (meaning Christ) is better than Rubies, and all that the heart
can wish or desire, are not to be compared to him, Phil 3. 7. 1. There Paul
counted all things but dross, and no better than dung, in comparison of Jesus
Christ. Ah Sinner, when Death shall come, and thou lie on a Bed of Sickness, if
thy Conscience be then awakened, or if not, then at the furthest, when thou
shall lie in Flames, thou shall cry out of thy folly, and say, O wretched
Sinner that I was, that made such haste to get the World, but no more haste to
get the Favor of my God, that made such haste to get Silver and Gold, but,
made no^ more have to get the Favor of God, and an Interest in Christ.

IV. Yet consider, when Man was fallen into misery, and was a lost Creature the
blessed God made haste to help him out. When Man had Rebelled, Mercy made haste
to Pardon: When Man had lost his way to Heaven, the God of Heaven did make
haste, and come himself, and Preach the way of Salvation unto him. O wonderful!
That God should make haste to Man, and Man will not make haste to God* That God
should make haste to come and help Man, and yet Man will not make haste to
accept of this help! What would have become of Mankind, if God had delayed, if
Mercy had delayed! but Mercy was upon the wing, Mercy fled away apace toward
fallen Man: The very same day that Man did sin, God did make haste, that very
day, to come and Preach a Savior unto him: Read Genesis 3. 7, 8. and 15. Verses,
There you read of Adam's Sin, how he had Sinned, and it is said, In the cool of
the day, God came making (...), to find out lost Adam, saying, Adam, where art
thou? The God of Heaven ca^^^ to look after the Sinner! As if he should say. Is
this the man that I made in my own Image, and is become liable to my Wrath,
subject to my Curse, and to the Torments of Hell for ever! O my bowels yearn, I
must make haste to convince him of his sin: and then to Preach a Savior unto
him, Genesis 43. Joseph made ha^te, for his bowels yearned toward his brethren,
and he sought where to weep, and he entered into his Chamber and wept there. So
does Gods bowels yearn toward poor Sinners.

V. To press you to make haste, the time is coming, when thou will be in that
case, that thou will cry and call to God to come and help thee. What do thou
think, Sinner, will sickness never come? Shall thou never be pained in thy
Bowels? Shall thy time of Dying never come? Yes, it will, it will, and it is a
hastening. When thou art full of pain with Gent or Stone, if thou can not rest
upon thy Bed, O what will thy sayings sinner, then be! O that God would make
haste and ease me, and give me some relief! O this sickness I cannot endure!
This will be thy request e're long, and will it not be the breaking of thy
heart, if God should say to thee in thy distress, as now thou say to God in
thy prosperity; God says, make haste to come to me; yes, thou say in thy
heart, after one year I will, or after t^n Years, then I will? then what if
thou, when under such pain should cry to God, Help Lord! God should say,
After one year, or ten years, then I will, but till then, thou must lie in thy
Distress: Psalm. 40. 13. Be pleased O Lord, to deliver me, O Lord make haste to
help me* Verse 17. Thou art my Help and my Deliverer, make no tarrying O my
God. Thou would not have God to tarry then one Day longer, not one Hour
longer; thou would begin and end thy Prayer in thy Distress, with this
Request, Make haste O God to help me, as the Psalmist does in Psalm 71. 12. O
God be (...) from me, O God make haste for my help: even a very Pharaoh will
cry for help, when Judgments are upon him.

VI. All the Provisions and Preparations that the Blessed Glorious God has made
to welcome Sinners, when they come to him, do all cry aloud to you, to make all
earnest haste. The Eternal God has made a great Preparation for thee: this
Blessed God invites thee: Sinner make haste and come to me, thou will be Damned
if thou do not; O sinner, make haste, and come quickly unto me; thou will
perish for ever if thou do not come quickly unto me; I have a Pardon for
thee, come to me, I have a Heaven for thee, come to me, I have prepared a
Kingdom and a Crown for thee, and lo thou shall dwell with me for ever; though
thou have Rebelled, I will Pardon thee if thou will come to me; though thou
have deserved Hell, I will give thee Heaven, if thou will come to me: Behold,
this Blessed God made haste to send his Son, and Jesus Christ made haste to
come and dye, the Spirit makes haste to come and move upon thy Consciences and
the Ministers of Christ make haste to come and offer Christ to thee, now shall
God make haste, and Jesus Christ make haste, and the Spirit make haste, and
Ministers make haste, and wilt not them make haste?

VII. My Seventh Argument shall be, to Consider your time that you have to come
to God.

First of all, The time that thou have allowed thee to come to God in, it is
but short, and but a little time, a few more Years or Months, Weeks or Days,
and thy Life will be ended. O Sinner, consider where thou stand! Upon the
brink of Eternity, upon the Borders of another World; thou art near, exceeding
near to Heaven or Hell, and yet will thou make no more haste?

2. This little time that thou have, it is hastening away quickly. O how swift
does yonder Sun in the Firmament move! Sirs do you not see how one Day and one
Night ^ouls away after another, and one Week, one Sabbath goes away after
another, and thy time is a hastening, whether thou art a Drinking, or a
Sporting? Sinner, except thou can stop the Suns going of its Race, stay in
thy Sins no longer.

3. This hastening time it is very uncertain too, when it shall end, when an end
shall be put unto it; Sinner, can thou tell, that thou shall live till to
Morrow; let the man stand forth, that can say, I am sure I shall live till to
Morrow; which is the man amongst you all that can say, This hour I am sure of
the next, and this Lord's Day, that can say, I am sure of another? Who knows,
but thou art keeping thy last Sabbath, and hearing thy last Sermon? Who knows,
but thou art making the last appearance in a public Congregation? Boast not
thy self of to Morrow, for thou ^nowest not what a Day may bring forth. Ah
Sinner, thou will be found to be the Tool of all Fools, that do not know how
(...) thou may depart this World, yet to (...) and delayest, and will not
make haste to come to God.

4. Thy time that is past, will never come again; if thou would (...)
thousands for Yesterday, it cannot be Recalled: Or for last Lord's day, it
cannot be Recalled again: Consider your time, then judge if it be not high
(...) for you to make haste, and to delay no longer.

VIII. Yet I pray you consider all the time you no delay, you are abusing the
Mercy of God, and busing of the Patience of God; Is this a thing to delay in?
Does the Eternal God may yet does not Damn thee, and call thee down to Hell,
which he may do every Hour at his Pleasure? And does he tarry and not Punish
thee? And do thou tarry and wilt not come and submit to him? This God is
entreating of thee to accept of Mercy, and is loath that thou should Perish,
or lose thy poor Soul. Now is offering of the Rich Blessings, Purchased so
dear, as by the blood of his own Son; and while thou do neglect, What do
thou but say in thy heart (...) care not for God, nor for his Christ neither?
Ah Sinner, remember the time is coming, the hour is hastening, that thou would
give Ten Thousand Worlds if thou had them, for that Grace which now thou
despisest, Romans 7. despisest thou the goodness of God, not considering that the
Patience and Long suffering of God should lead thee to repentance!

IX. Thy Delaying has in it a great deal of bold, and blind Presumption. Thou
do presume, Sinner, of such things that thou have not any grounds to make
reckoning of. There are three or (...) things that a trifling Sinner, a (...)
Sinner Presumes of.

(...) Thou do presume that thou shall live danger yet; thou do presume, that
thou have more time to spene in this World; thou do suppose that thou may
have another Year yet, another Month (...) another Weeks still; Tell me it this
be not in thy Heart? Thou art worse than a mad man indeed, that wilt not make
haste and come to Christ? but this is a bold presumption; thou talkest of
another Year, when thou may not have another Hour.

2 Thou do presume, that thou can Repent when thou will, and turn to God
when thou will; thou do presume that thy own will is of thy own strength; but
Sinner, either thou can Repent when thou will, or thou can not, if thou
can and do not, behold thou art inexcusable; but if thou can not Repent
now, do thou think thou can better Repent hereafter, when thou have
hardened thy Heart yet more in Sin?

3 In thy Delaying, thou do presume, that the Spirit of God will help thee
hereafter, as well as now, for if this were not in thy hopes, if thou did not
suppose this, if thou were not bereaved of thy Understanding, Would not thou
Repent now, while the Spirit of God moves upon thy heart? How do thou know,
but hereafter the Spirit of God may let thee alone, and give thee up to the
hardness of thy own Heart? God may say to thee, as to Ephraim, Hosea 4 17,
Ephraim is joined to Idols, let him alone. Ah Sinner, if God says once, Let him
alone, then all the Sermons in the world will do no good (...) If God would say
to the delaying Sinner, My Spirit let him alone, and mine Ordinance let him
alone, and my Ministers let him alone; That tho you have the voice of the
Gospel in your Ears, yet God will let thy heart alone.

X. And the last Argument to persuade you to make haste, is this, it may be you
may be loath to hear it; I wish, Sinner, that by the yielding to all the rest,
thou would give me Reason to for bear to speak it; but if all that has been
said, will not move thee to make haste, then know that thy Damnation is
hastening, the time of thy lying in Torment is hastening, the hour of thy being
thrown down to Devils, and lying in Chains of Darkness, is hastening. Sinner,
tho thou slumberest, yet thy Damnation does not slumber, 2 Pet. 2 3. Whose
judgment now of a long time lingereth not, and there Damnation lingereth not.
Thou lingerest and loyterest, ay, but thy Damnation does not slumber, Deuteronomy. 32.
35. Consider of that place, To me says God, belongs Vengeance and Recompense;
their scot shall slide in due time, for the day of their Calamity is at hand,
and the things that shall (...) upon thee makes haste. Mark, the Day of thy
Calamity is at hand, and the thing the Wrath of God that shall come upon thee
makes haste; the Justice of God that shall overtake thee, makes haste. O then,
if thou would make haste to escape, those dreadful things that are hastening,
do you make haste and delay not to keep the Commandments of your God.

Thus I have given you many Arguments and Motives; and if I thought that you
had made haste and come away to Christ, I would change my Text and go upon
another Subject, but I could after all, that thou art lingering; I would
therefore yet try to put thee on, and would direct this Exhortation to five
sorts of People.

First of all, I would persuade such of you as are Young, that you would make
haste and not delay, even you that are Children, little Children, the youngest
amongst you that understand what the sense is of any of these things. O do you
make haste you young Men in your Youth, make haste and do not delay.

II. I would direct this Exhortation to such of you as are old, old Sinners,
for Gods sake make haste, you that are threescore years old and more, make
haste.

III. To such of you as are Strong (...) Healthful of Body.

IV. To you that are Sickly and Crazie Persons, often Sick and seldom Well, for
God's sake make haste.

V. To such of you as have been Sick, and now are Well, as have been upon beds
of Sickness near to Death, but God has set thee upon thy Legs again. O make
haste, and do not delay to keep the Commandments of God.

First then, You that are young, you that are yet in your Childhood, you young
Children, you Young men and Maids; O do you make haste, and do not delay to
keep the Commandments of God. I would rather press this Counsel upon you,
because you chiefly lie under the temptations of delay; for you Children have
very naughty hearts, (...) loath to be good, and come to God; you are apt to
think, that you have time enough yet: that you may take your Pleasure and mind
your sports now, and think of God hereafter, and think of Heaven and Hell
hereafter. But I have Ten Questions to propose to you, you Young ones, and by
that time. I have come through these, I hope you will see that there is no
Reason for you to delay, though you are young.

I. Tell me. Are you so young that you may not d^e? are you so young that you
may not be sick? Are you Young Men exempted from Death and the Grave? Have you
not observed, that as young as you, and younger too, have gone down to the
Grave? Have you not seen little Infants carried to the Grave? Have not you seen
Infants laid in the Dust? Have you not seen many (...) that there is but little
different betwixt the Birth and the Grave? If you doubt of this go into some
Churchyard, and see if you may not find there Graves of all sizes; an Infant
was buried here, another young one was buried there, who was not so tall as I;
Very well, if you are not so young, but you may die, are you so young then,
that you may not make your peace with God?

II Are you so young that you may not be damned? Has God any where told you in
his Word, that no Young Ones shall go to Hell, those that die in their Youth?
Tell me, were not you born in Sin? And are you not by Nature Children of Wrath?
And by reason of that sin in which you were (...), are you not liable to the
wrath of God, to the Damnad (...) of Hell, and to the Torments of the Damned?
Besides, Have not you Young Men many Sins of your own committing, actual Sins?
How soon did thou learn to Lie? How soon did you learn to take God's Holy
Name in vain? How soon did you play upon the Lords Day, and so mispend your
precious time? By all these you have deserved Death and Hell too? and if you
are not so young, but you may be Damned, is there any room (...) to delay, and
not to do what God commands you to do?

III. I pray tell me, is it sit that you should give the first of your time to
the Devil, rather than unto God; for you first to serve the Devil, then next to
serve God, to give your Youth unto him that would devour and destroy your
Souls, rather than to God, that would five your Souls, and make them happy?
Should you give to (...) the first of your time, that deserves none at all? And
Sirs, I tell you, that you deserve to be Damned, if you give one hour. Think of
it, What would the World think of you if you deal with your Parents as you deal
with the Eternal God? if you should say, Father I will rebel against you, whole
I am Young, I will vex and grieve you, whilst Young, but I will be Dutiful to
you when I am Old; Will you in effect say worse to God? And say, We will do
what the Devil says to us now, and we will do what God commands us hereafter.
Tell me, Who was it that gave (...) your Being? Who was in that formed you in
your Mothers Womb? Who was it that brought you forth? Who (...) it that
preserved you, whilst you hung upon your Mothers Breast? Who is it that kept
you from Death and Hell to this day, that night have cast you into utter
darkness, as soon as you beheld the light of the Sun? Has the Devil done for
you as God has done or can you expect he shall or will? (...) all these
together, then (...) it ^e fitting that you should serve the Devil a (...).

IV. Tell me, you (...) are young, Can you be good too thou? O^ can you have
your God too soon? O^ can you mind your Souls too soon? O^ can you ((...) you)
he mindful to (...) ^he Damnation of Hell (...)? Can you be (...) soon sure of
Heaven? Tell me, Wound it do thee any harm to know in thy Youth that thy Soul
shall be saved? Would it do thee any harm to believe in Christ, to love God
above all, and to understand, whenever thou shall die, that thy Soul should be
received to Heaven? Remember his, that there have been many who have been
troubled that did repent too (...) but there was never one in this World that
ever repented that be repented too soon. Thousands, and Ten Thousands have
(...) they have staid off from Christ to long.

V. Is not Youth, and Young in Years, the usual time for God to Convert Sinners
to his Son? especially, those whom he plantech under the Gospel in the time of
their Youth. O you that are set under preaching, if you are not converted
whilst you are young, it is a thousand to one, if ever you are Converted Pray
Sirs, consider, Is it usual for God to Convert Old Sinners? I know, God
sometimes may call at the Eleventh Hour, but it is but here and there one, now
and then one * and commonly they are such as did not sit under the means of
Grace when they were Young; if you delay whilst Young, you may let slip the
very season of Conversion, then your Souls cannot be brought over to God by all
the Preaching in the World. Do we not amongst our selves observe, that for one
Old Person, one Old Sinner, that is made sensible of sin, and of his lost
estate, though never so vile, that does desire the Prayers of a Congregation
for them, have we not Twenty, yea Forty that are younger, that desire your
Praises for them?

VI. Will it not be easier, for you to repent now, than it will be hereafter,
when by long continuance in sin, you have hardened you clears, and seared your
Consciences and have been accustomed to do wickedly? Certainly, now, whilst
Conscience is tender, and the Heart more tender, it will be easier for you to
let go your sin now, and to have your Wickedness now, than it will be ^orty
years hence; for the longer you continue in no, the stronger is Sin upon you,
and the stronger your Sin is, the (...) your Heart is, and the harder wast he
your Repentance, (...) (...) speaks, Can the Ethiopian change his skin, or the
Leopard his spots? Then may ye that are accustomed to do Evil, learn to do well.

VII. Shall you not prevent a multitude of sins, if you make haste in your
Younger Years to come to God? whereas if you go on in your Sins, what a
Multitude of sins, how many Thousand sins will you add more and more to the
sins that you have already committed? if you (...) still, how many Prayers will
you neglect? And how many Sabbaths profane? And how many lies tell, and make no
Conscience? And how many Oaths may some of you swear? Whereas, now it you would
come to God in your (...), if you would now Believe and Repent, and come to
God, O what a number of Sins may you prevent the (...) of! And is not this
(...)? You have sinned (...) already, the Youngest amongst you have (...)
enough already, you need (...) go (...) and (...) more and more (...) they are
not to be (...) already.

VIII. Consider Will not this be (...) pleasing us to (...) it, (...) hasten in
(...). Youth to come ^o God? (...) is the (...); O Christ loves Young Ones
indeed, when they will be good, Mark 10. 23, 24. This was a Young man that had
but some common good in him; and it is said. That Christ looked upon him and
loved him, Jerem 2 2 Says God to Israel, I remember the kindness of thy Youth,
the love of thy Espousal, Ah, God takes it kindly, and Christ takes it kindly,
when you do believe on Christ, and leave your sins be times. O will not you do
that which God and Christ will take kindly at your hands! then make haste
whilst you are young, and do not stay till you are old. O it is pleasing unto
God to see young ones come and Pray, and Believe, to see young ones following
after Christ, Eccles. 12 1. Remember thy Creator in the days of thy Youth. Now
tell me, Young men, is it not better for you to be pleasing to this blessed God
whilst you are young, than to be provoking of him till you are Old? is it not
more pleasing to have his Love and Smiles, than to have his Anger and Frowns?

IX. If you make haste whilst you are young, shall you not have the more time
to serve you God, and glorify your Maker? And is not this the End for which
thou west born? Is not this the End for which you were made, that you may
glorify him that gave your being unto you? And tell me. Can you begin this
Work too soon? Or, can you do this one thing too much? O young men think, will
God save you when you die, and will not you serve him whilst you live? Will God
glorify you hereafter in Heaven, and will not you glorify God whilst you are
here upon the Earth? Tell me, Do you think you can honor God in a little time,
and in Old Age too; as you may in a great deal, beginning from your youth, to
your Elder years? I tell you, that Multitudes of good People upon their Death
Beds when they have been going to Heaven, They have been full of Grief upon
this account, That they served God so law, and loved God so late; that are
going to Heaven to live with God, and have done no more for God when they were
here upon Earth.

X. And Lastly, If you now make haste whilst you are young, shall not you have
the more time to do the great Work in your own Souls that is there to be done?
O what a great deal of Work does lie within us? What a great deal of Work does
lie upon our Hearts to be done! upon our Souls! Is it not more likely that you
should do more in Forty years time, than in Five or Ten, or the latter end of
your days? O how much knowledge is there to be had of God and of Christ, and
the great Mystery of the Gospel! You will have more time to get a greater
measure of the Love of God and of Jesus Christ; you will have more time to get
Assurance of the Love of God and of Eternal Glory; you will have more time to
make your preparation for Death, and the great Account that you have to give
unto God after Death. Now take these ten things along with you, and then see,
if there be any room or reason for you to delay though young, but make all the
haste you can to do that God commands. That is the first Sort.

2. The Sort that I would urge this upon, is, you that are Old. You Old Sinners
(...) the Work that you have to do.

I. Of all, you that are old, O make haste? for your time is almost gone, your
Glass is almost run, your Sun is near to setting; in a course of Nature you
have not much time to live. Behold! look upon your gray Hairs, and they will
tell you, that you are going off the Stage of this World, and are entering into
another World. The Age of man, that the most do reach ordinarily, is Threescore
and Ten, Psalm. 90. 10. The Age of Man is Threescore Years and Ten, O is there
not some in this place that have not outlived the usual time? Are not some of
you Threescore Years and upwards? Are not some of you Seventy Years and more? O
how near, how very near are you to another World! You are almost at your
Journeys end. What and sit still whon you are almost at your Journeys end? Some
of you are old almost to a wonder. When a person begings to be going onwards to
Eighty, People commonly wonder at their Age, What art thou such a one, yet
delaying? Art thou old to a wonder, and Wicked to a Wonder too? O consider, it
is but a little while that you have to stay in this World; make haste
therefore, (...) do not delay.

II. You that are old, make haste; for some of you have not yet begun your
Work: What! and delay still, and be idle still! What do you mean? How many old
ones are there here, that have not spent one hour in Threescore Years, in
hearty serving of God; I do not say you have not spent an hour in Hearing and
in Praying; but some of you possibly have not spent one hour in hearty serving
of God; which you that are in a Natural State and Condition never did. O what
are you, Sirs, that are old, and never convinced of sin to this day, that are
Fifty, Sixty, yea Seventy Years old, and yet strangers to the very first
Principles of Religion! Oh how sad is it to see gray Hairs and Ignorance! I
have seen a Child of Five or Six Years old that has known more of God and of
Christ than many that I have seen of fifty or sixty; and yet these People sit
still? Sirs, are you resolved indeed to go thus to your Grave? Are you resolved
indeed to die and to be Damned too? To see old people to be careless of God,
and careless of their Souls, negligent and slothful, what a shame is it? Age
has forced thee to lean upon thy Staff, but it has not forced thee to lean upon
thy Savior. How may we say of some, wondrous old, and wondrous Wicked;
wondrous Old, and wondrous Ignorant? Have every one of you that are Old, fifty
or sixty Years Old, got Christ into your Hearts? Would to God you had, I wish
you had: Have every one of you repented of sin? O consider, Sirs, What a thing
is this, to live Fifty Years, yet be without God? to loiter Sixty Years, and
never come to God; to live till you come to that state in which Nature is
almost Consumed yet no Faith? May not some of you say, That you have not shed
one Penitent Tear for all your sins, no, not in Fifty Years time; but you that
are in Years, and have begun your Work, yet there is Reason why you should make
haste to do more, and to go forward, and make a greater progress still; Thou
that have loved God and believed on Christ, tell me, Do thou think in thy
very Conscience, that thou have so much Love to God, as thou might have had
in Fifty Years standing? Alas (...) who has? I^ so be, that you have (...) so
much Grace as you should have done in so much time, and as you should have done
by the help of so much means as you have had in so many Years. O make haste and
do not delay! What think you, Sirs, you that are of Years, you that I may call
my Father for Age, what think you, are there not some that are Twenty Years
younger than you, Forty Years younger than you, that love God, and fear God,
and hate Sin more than you do? is not this a ^^gn that you have loytered too
much? O therefore make haste and delay no singer.

III. You that are Ancient, make haste, and delay not; for have not you lost
(...) enough already, but you must (...) Have (...) you served the (...)
enough, and served your ^ust long enough? Have not you forgotten God long
enough, and neglected Christ. Heaven, and your Souls, long enough already, but
you (...) it still and will you proceed and will you do it till you die? What
(...) you (...) Sirs, you old Sweare^s, and you (...) and old Sabbath (...) of
God and (...) you mean, do you mean to (...) your Dying day? Do (...) a little
(...) will do so: Do you (...) give the Devil all your time, and an your
strength? You that have lived Threescore Years, I fear should you live the
other Threescore Years, you would do so still; you that have lived Fifty Years,
I fear, should you live Fifty years longer, you would still be the same.
Sinner, Art thou resolved to go to thy Grave without Christ, without a Heart
changed? It thou do, shall not thou go to Hell too, and to Devils too? What
you do, it must be done quickly, or else it will never be done: for you will
die before it be done. For shame, Sirs, for shame, love God after so long time,
for shame, Sirs for shame, love Jesus Christ, after so long time. Have not you
fear a great Deformity in Si^ after so much time that you have spent in Sin.

IV. You that are old, make haste and do not delay; for if you die Old, and
(...) too, if you die Old and Graceless too, the Patience of God that his
waited upon you (...) our Old Age will aggravate your Sin and your Condemnation
too; I tell you Sirs, that much of you had better to have died in your
Childhood, than to have lived to Old Age; you had better have died as soon as
you had been born, than to have lived so long, and go to Hell at last; you had
better have died when you could not go, by reason of Infancy, than to live till
you could not go, by reason of Age, and die our of Christ at last: if thou
die Old and Wicked, old in thy sin, Hell will be the hotter when thou come
there, though it be the longer till thou come there; will you yet delay? O
you that are Ancient, I pray you make haste, and delay no longer.

V. And lastly, I pray you make haste and delay no longer; for, I pray tell me,
Can you give an account of your misspent time already? You shall certainly be
called to an Account for every Year you have had, for every Month you have
(...) for every Week, Day and Hour that you have had; Time is going and you
must be called to an Account how you have spent your time Can you give an
Account to God of Fifty Years spent in (...), not know (...) God? Can you give
an Account (...) God of Threescore Years spent in a Natural Estate, in which is
nothing of God nor ever did one hearty Duty to God in all this time! O you that
are Young, for you are my hopes! I profess that I have more hope of you, than
of those that are Old and Wicked. I take it to be my great advantage, that I
Preach to so many that are young; think of what has been said to you, and what
has been spoken to you, and when you come home, consider, you have heard Ten
Things, that there is no room for loytering; and you that are Old, if you are
not past feeling, O would to God you were not. This is the Mischief, when
People are young, then they think it is too soon; and when they are old, then
they say, they have been of this Opinion ever since they were born, and change
now they will not. Well, think what you will, change you must, or you must be
Condemned. You would think it much to wait upon a Fellow Creature a Day, or
Week; yet this Blessed God has waited upon you so many Years, O make haste and
come unto God, and do not delay any longer.

III. Then to you that are of a strong and a healthful Constitution, do you
make haste and not delay to do what God commands you, though you are strong and
healthful, yet make haste and do not delay; you have need of this Advice,
because being strong, and in perfect health, you are apt to put away the day of
Death from you, and Repentance too, and Christ too; and the making of your
Peace with God, be cause you are not full of Pain, and God does not often cast
you upon Beds of Sickness, therefore you think there is no need for you to make
haste.

First of all, As strong and as stout as thou think thou art, many have been
cut off in a Weeks time, and less; therefore do thou make haste; as strong as
thou art; when Death comes it will make thee cry out, O I am Sick, I am Sick; I
am Pained, I am Pained! O it will make thee to Tremble: You see often times
that Crazy Persons do out live those that are of a Healthful Constitution;
therefore do not venture your Soul Eternal State upon it because you are strong.

II. Tell me, Who is it that gives thee thy strength? Is it God, or Satan? If
(...) God that gave thee thy strength; What a disingenious sinner art thou to
God, that because God does not fill thy Body with pain, therefore thou will
fill thy Body with Sin? What does God give thee Health for, and give thee
Strength for? Does God make thee strong, that thou may be strong to sin, and
spend thy days in sinning against him.

III. Consider, which is the fittest time for you to Repent, and to make your
Peace with God, now when you are well and strong, or when you shall be sick and
near Death? Alas! How often have I seen people on their sick-Beds unfit to be
discoursed with, that put off their Repentance till the last, till they were
sick; then sickness brought its Burden with it, its Excessive Pain with it
that they had no mind to Discourse of any such Things. That is the Third Sort;
to those that are strong.

IV. My Exhortation also is to such of you as are sickly and of a weak Temper,
that the often sick, and often ill. It is time for (...) to make haste, that
live in daily expectation of another World, that daily look for your last Day,
and when your last Hour will come, and when you shall draw your last Breath.
How often has God shaked thee over the Grave? How often have thou been in that case
upon thy sick bed, that Men could not tell, whether thou should Live or Die?
And now God has restored thee, yet thou art weak still and sick still. Is it
not time for you to make haste? Behold! The Voice of every Sickness is, Sinner,
make haste; The Voice of every Affliction is, Sinner, make haste.

V. And Lastly, My Advice is to such as have been Sick, and now are Recovered;
do you make haste and not delay to do what God has commanded you to do; Will
you sin again as you did before? Will you slight Christ again, as you did
before? and neglect Heaven, and God, and Christ as before? Sinner, Did God give
thee thy Life again, that thou should rebel against thy Maker again? Have
thou forgot how thy Soul was filled with amazement and horror when thou
thoughtest thy (...) was so near to another World? How did thou beg, and cry
and cal^ O that God would restore (...) this once! O that God would give me a
little more time! O if God would recover me I will become a new Man, I will
forsake my sinful Companions, I will neglect Prayer no more, I will profane
Gods Holy Day no more! These were thy Promises; God has restored thee again,
and have thou so soon forgot what thou did Promise unto God, and do thou
delay as much as before? O consider, and for Gods sake lay it to Heart. Did
thou tell a Lie to God, when upon thy sick Bed: and did thou play the
Hypocrite with God, when thou did not know whether thou should live or die?
Therefore, you that have been upon the brink of the Grave, and God bid thee
look into Eternity, and thou saw thou wast not prepared, thou beggest a
little longer time, and God spared thee, therefore now make haste.

Now it may be thought, that I have said enough upon this Subject; but, alas, I
think I have never said enough upon any Subject, till I have gained your Hearts
to do what I have Preached upon; when consider, how slothful many Men (...)
backward to come to God and (...), how backward to Believe to (...) and be
Holy, I think that there is Reason enough to consider (...) what (...) said, to
press you to make haste, and I beseech you to Answer these following Questions,
and let Conscience answer as we go along.

First of all, Tell me, Sinner, Who is it that does wait upon thee, while thou
do delay? Is it not the Blessed, and Glorious, and Eternal God? Is it not he
that the Angels of Glory make all possible speed to do his commands? Is it not
he, Sinner, that might have Damned thee long ago, and cast thee down into
Eternal Torments, and thou might this day have been among Damned Devils?
Do thou do well to make him carry for thee? Is it not he, that Died for thee,
that is infinite in Mercy to save thee, if thou come in; that is Infinite in
Power to Damn thee, if thou refuse? Is it not he, that is infinitely thy
Superior Judge? Now, if it be reason for thee to loyter any longer, do if thou
dare; do I say at thy Peril.

Secondly, Who, or (...) thou, Trifler, that this Blessed (...) should wait
thus upon thee? If (...) consider thee as thou a (...) Creature, or as thou art
(...), why should God so wait upon thee one year after another? As thou art a
Creature, is not thy Body made of dust, and must not thy Body e're long be
turned into dust? What art thou, but the better sort of Clay? Do not thou
carry every day a very Dunghill about thee, and must the Blessed God wait upon
thee? Besides, if we consider thee, as thou art a Sinner; Art not thou a
Hell-deserving Sinner! May not God cast thee this day into Hell if he will, and
into Torments, even this very hour if he will? Can thou be happy without his
Favor, and enter into Heaven without his Son, and be saved without his Mercy?
Therefore delay any longer at thy Peril.

Thirdly, What is it for, that this God thus waits upon thee? Consider I pray
you, What does God give you so much time for, one Week after another, one Month
after another, Year after year? Is it not to make your selves Rich in this
World? O no, it is about a greater Matter that God waits and stays? Is it not
to see if thou will mind thy escaping Eternal Damnation! God gives thee thy
time for this, that thou mavest escape an Eternity of Torments: is it not for
this that God waits, think you?

2. That God stays so long, Is it not that thou may mind the Everlasting
Salvation of thy Soul in Glory, that thou may get a Title to his Kingdom,
that thou may get an Interest in his Son, that thou may hereafter dwell
with him, with his Son, and with his Spirit, with his Angels and Saints, when
thou shall be taken out of this World.

3. Is it not that God stavs, that thou may be Justified, Sanctified, and
Pardoned? O Sinner, i^ God had not stayed for this, he might have Sentenced
thee down to Eternal Torments, many years ago.

4. Is it not that God does stay, that of a Captive to Satan, and to Sin, thou
may be made free?

5. That thou may be cured of thy Soul distemper, and of those sinful
Maladies that are upon thy Soul; Is it not for this, I say for this, that God
waits upon thee.

IV. Tell me, who shall have the worst of it, or who shall be the Sufferer it
thou still delayest and do not make haste to (...), Believe and be Holy? Or
who will be the better it that thou make haste to be Holy and Repent? Whose
will the Profit be, and the Advantage be? If thou do not, Will not the harm
be thy own, and will not the wrong be thy own? Sinner, do thou think that,
God thus waits upon thee, because he cannot be happy without thee? Flatter not
thy self with this; for this God was happy before thou wast, and if thou art
Damned, this God will be infinitely happy and blessed without thee, Job 22 v.
2, 3. Can a Man be profitable to God, as he that is Wise, is profitable to
himself: Is it any Pleasure to the Almighty, that thou art Blessed, or is it
any gain that thou make thy self happy? Job 35 6, 7, 8. If thou sinnest, What
do thou against him? Or if thy transgressions be Multiplied, What do thou
to him! Or if thou art Righteous, What do thou give unto him? Thy
Unrighteousness may prejudice a Man as thou art, and thy Righteousness may
profit him. It is a matter of Admiration, that the Blessed God should so long
wait upon Sinners, or that the foolish Sinner should so long delay to come to
God.

V. Tell me, is it not life (...) death that is the issue of thy ^^^tering or
making here, yet will thou loiter and delay, in respect of Eternal Life and
Eternal Death too? If Men will make haste in any thing it will be where their
Lives are concerned; then they think it is time for them to make haste; there
is no room for loitering then: When thou art sick, how do thou expect that
all about thee should make haste? One makes haste and runs to the Physician,
another makes haste and runs to the Surgeon, another maketh-haste and runs
to the Apothecary. O make haste Sinner, thy Soul is in danger, thy Eternal Soul
is in danger? Do not thou know, Sinner, if thou make haste and come to
Christ, thou shall have a Life, a Life of Grace, and that is the sweetest Life,
the safest Life, the surest Life, the hithest, and the noblest Life, the
durablest and the most lasting Life; (...) Life thou shall have, if thou will
(...) and (...), and at last a Life of (...), to have with God, to (...) with
Christ, to Live with Angels and (...), but on the contrary (...) thou delayest
(...) Damnation will he thy Portion. And yet (...) Do it at thy Pe^il.

VI. Art thou sure Sinner, or do thou know that God will wait upon thee one
Year, or one Month, or one Week more? How do thou know but that this may be
the very last hour or day that God will tarry for thy Repentance? It may be God
will say, I will wait upon thee, Sinner, no more, I will not stay one Sabbath
more, I will not stay the other Sermon, if he refuses me now. I will hearken
to him no more: As he wickedly said a King. 6. 33. Behold this Evil is of the
Lord what should I wait upon the Lord any longer? This God may say, This Sinner
goes one is sin still, in the hardness of his Heart still, in his refusing of
my Sin still, what shall I wait for him any longer?

VII. Tell me, and let Conscience judge and let but Reason speak and give the
Answer, Have not thou spent time enough in Sin already, and yet will thou (...)
no haste to leave thy Sin? Tell me, Sinner, is the Devils Work so good, and his
Wages so desirable, and is the Devil so kind a Master (...) (...) that thou art
so loath to have (...) Service, and to come away* (...) the Service of thy Sin,
to the Service of God? (...) what did the Devil ever (...) or ever give upon
thee thou (...) so (...) his Service (...) ask thee, What is thy Name? How long
since thou wast born? How old art thou? One may say Sixteen, another Twenty,
another Thirty, it may be some Threescore, What, and graceless still! Out of
Christ still! Is not Thirty, Forty, Threescore Years a great while to live in
danger of Hell? You Young Men, when you have served your Seven Years time, you
expect to be made Free, and will you live twice Seven, three times Seven, five
times Seven, in the service of the Devil, and think it not time now to be made
Free? O think, Have I served sin twenty years, forty years, and is it not long
enough of all Reason? Ay, long enough beyond all reason. Ay Sirs, how long will
it be before you turn? God thinks the time long, and Christ thinks the time
long, and the Spirit of God thinks the time long, and Ministers think the time
long, and all your godly Friends, your godly Relations would fain have your
Souls Converted, and Saved, Prove. I. See there how Christ thinks it long till
you come to him. v. 21. 22 Wisdom (that is) Christ (...) out in the chief
places, in the opening of the Gates of the City, How long ye simple and will ye
love your Simplicity, and Fo^ls kate Knowledge? etc. Psa 4. 2. O ye Sons of
Men, How long will ye turn my Glory into shame? Jer. 30. Woe to thee, O
Jerusalem, wilt not thou be made clean, when will it once be? So God says to
thee; Woe to thee thou Drunkard, thou Swearer, thou Unclean Wretch; wilt not
thou be made clean, when will it once be?

VIII. Have not thou committed Sins enough already? Have not thou Drunkenness
enough to answer for already, but thou will go on still, and commit sins still?
Tell me, thou that art a Swearer, have not thou sworn oaths enough already?
Have not thou sworn so many in a Day, so many in an Hour, for so many Years,
and have not thou sworn enough? Yet is it not time for thee to leave thy
Swearing? You that have neglected Prayer in your Closet, and in your Families?
Have you not neglected things that should have been done? Have you not been
guilty of Omission? You that have been Profaners of Sabbaths that go faster to
H^ll on a Sabbath day than all the Week else? Is not a hundred, a thousand
Sabbaths enough for thee to Profane?

IX. Seriously weigh, and then tell me. Is not the deserved Punishment of (...)
Sin, that is due to thee already, great enough, yet will thou make no more
haste? What do thou think, will the, Pains of Hell be easy Pains, and the
Torments of Hell be easy Torments? Do thou think, that the sins that thou
have committed, will not sink thee deep enough into Hell, and low enough? If
not, then go on still. But alas, poor sinner, stay, for if the least sin should
be inflicted upon thy Soul, it will make thee cry out and roar, it will make
thee cry, I am undone, undone, it will make thee gnash thy Teeth, and tear thy
Flesh. Will one Sin do this? What will then all these sins thou have committed?

X. And Lastly, Tell me, have not Multitudes and Thousands been damned already
for delaying: and will thou loyter still? Wilt not thou take all their
Damnation for a warning? How many Thousands are at this very time, Sirs (...)
Preaching and you Hearing, in blackness and (...) of Darkness, that could you
speak with them, you should (...) was (...) wretched delaying that did (...) to
repent, but did not, (...) to go to Christ and to (...) our Sins; but (...) be
to us, Death (...) before that time, and we were damned before that time: Death
(...) (...) drew us out of the World, and Devils came and dragged us down to
Hell before that purposed time of Repentance came; and here we lie in a Lake of
Burning Brimstone, roaring and crying out and are undone. Now, Sirs, Have so
many Thousands been Damned for their delaying, and will you delay still? Do it
at your Peril. Now, if I did think that there was never a loitering Sinner
among you, I would forbear, and go upon some other Subject; but the Lord knows,
I am afraid of you; and I have a godly Jealousy over many of you, therefore I
will try again, so conclude this Text? Has all that has been said from Sabbath
to Sabbath, made you now to resolve to so sake your sins, and give up your
Heart and all to God, and to Jesus Christ; Oh that I had grounds to judge so of
you! But I doubt there is one, and another, and another and many more, that
their hearts are hankering alter sin still, I will try you yet once more; I did
propose Ten Questions to the delaying sinner; if thou have slighted them, yet
hearken sinner again; I will propose (...) to thee more, and will thou (...)
say thou will do as thou (...) have lived?

First of all, Tell me, poor trifling Sinner, tell me, Do thou purpose in thy
Heart, to obey God at all, or do thou not? Do thou intend to do the Duty
that God enjoins thee to do, or do thou not? Say in thy Heart, Ay or No. I am
content to stay till thou weighest the Question; but I think it is a Question
that is so plain, that there is not a Man that dares to have the Face to say,
that he does not purpose to turn to God. Well then, Is it thy purpose to Repent
of sin, and turn to God, or is it not? If it be not so much as thy purpose, the
God of Heaven pity thee, and show mercy to thee before it is too late. For, art
not thou a Wretch indeed, that have not so much as a purpose in thy Heart to
turn to God? If thou saint, Yes, I do purpose to do what God commands; then
tell me, Why do thou purpose? Thou art a Rational Creature, why do thou
purpose to obey God, and forsake thy Sin? Is it because thou judge this to be
thy safest course? Is it because thou think thou must be Damned if thou do
not? (...) because thou think thou can (...) be saved? Is it because that
God com (...) thee? Are these thy (...) hold! All the while that thou do
delay, thou art sinning against thy Conscience and thy Reason: For, thy
Conscience tells thee, it is thy safest way to forsake thy sin, and to look
after Christ. Well, if it be so, that it be best to leave thy sin, and turn to
God, why then do not thou do it? If it be not best, why do thou purpose to
do it?

Secondly, Art thou Purposed to do what God commands, to obey what he enjoins?
What is it that thou stavest for, and do not do it then? Do thou stay,
Sinner, to see if God will make new Laws for thee? Do thou stay to see if God
will chalk thee out a more easy way to Heaven, and Salvation, than he has done
already in his Word? Do thou Stay to see if God will make such Laws as shall
be pleasing to thee, that thou m^^^t keep thy Sins and go to Heaven too?
Flatter not thy self, he will never do it; If thou stayest forty Years longer,
the Laws of God will be the same then, as now, the Commands of God will be the
same then as now. If thou stayed Forty Years longer, thou must Repent at last,
or thou must be damned at last; thou must believe at last, or thou must go to
Hell at last: It is the same way that we are saved now, that Adam was saved by,
and that Noah, Abraham, David, and Moses and the Apostles, and all that are in
Heaven were saved by, that is, the way of Holiness, and the way of Faith in
Christ, Obedience to the Commandments of God, being sanctified, loving God
above all. You must not think to dally with God, as with Men in the Market. In
the Morning you will not buy, nor at Noon, putting it off till Evening,
thinking then that the Prices will all toward the close of the Market. O do no
think that God will come to lower Terms at the end of the World, or toward the
end of thy Life. You may see, that God has prescribed the same all along,
Isaiah 53. 7, 8. Let the wicked forsake his way Pov 28. 13 He that covers his
sins shall not prosper; but be that forsakes his Sins shall find Mercy. See,
there must be a forsaking of Sin, according to the old way of Salvation,
Ezekiel 18 31, Cast away all your Transgressions and turn from your Sins, so
Inquiry shall not be your Ruin. So (...) Christ's time, Matthew 3 8, 9. John 3
16. So in the Apostles time, I Corinth 6. 9, 10, 11. So it is still, and so it
will be to the end of this World.

Thirdly, Consider this too, and let thy Conscience reply whether thou do
well or no. Tell me, while thou do delay, do not thou do worse with the
Blessed God, than thou do with Damned Devils? I say, deal worse with God. Do
you loiter thus when the (...) calls? Do you delay thus, when the Devil Tempts
you; Have not thou the very same day that the Temptation has been laid before
thee, yielded unto it without delay, and hearkened to the voice of the Tempter?
When did thou say to the Devil as thou have said to God a hundred times; and
yet if God has called thee to Repent, thou have said in thy Heart, no^ yet? God
has called thee to Believe, thou have said, not yet, Lord; God has called thee,
^o Believe on Christ, thou have said, not yet Lord; but when did the Devil call
thee, and tempt thee to Sin, and thou said not yet?

Fourthly, Tell me, you that do de (...) do not Repent, yet tell me, (...) you
he served so by yours, by (...) that you have a power to Command? And will you
deal worse with God, than you would have others to deal with you? You Fathers
and Mothers, if you command your Children to do something for you quickly,
would you take it well, if they should say, I will not do it yet this Twelve
Months, yet this Ten Years? If you that are Masters, command a Servant to do
something, and suppose the lawfulness of the thing, would you be contented, i^
he should say I will do it when I please, but not yet? I know your Hearts would
rise, your Passions would be up. Ah Sinner, were not God a patient God, would
he have both this at thy hands? If God were not a patient God, would he have
suffered his Creatures to abuse him thus? Consider with me (...) (...) Thing.

I. (...) Distance betwixt you, and your Children; you, and your Servants, is
not so great, as betwixt God, and you; to not by a thousand degrees? No, it is
not to (...) compared, a God is thy (...), God is infinitely above (...), thou
art not so much above a (...) Wo^m under thy Foot, as God is (...) thee; (...)
not bear the delay thy Children and Servants and yet wi^^ (...) deal thus with
God?

2. Their dependence is not so much upon thee, as thine is upon God; thy
Servants have their Food from thee, but thou have thy Being, thy Life, and all
from God.

3. Consider, That the Work that God commands thee for to do? It is infinitely
better than the Work that thou command thy Children or thy Servants to do.
Suppose thou set thy Servants about the Work of thy Calling, Is this to be
compared with Everlasting Work* If the Work be never to mean that you put your
Servants to, and (...) them do it quickly, if they do not do it, you are Angry;
if thou biddest him but cleanse thy Shoes, if he does not do it, thou art
Angry. Behold, The Blessed God commands thee to look after the cleansing of thy
Soul, and the cleansing of thy Heart, the getting of an Interest in Christ; and
will thou be Angry if thy Servant will not do for thee, and will thou delay
doing for God?

Fifthly, Tell me, delaying Sinner, Tell me, in all Cases that concern thee in
this World. Art not thou for the present time? If thou art sick, would not
thou be presently well? If in Pain, would thou not have present ease? When
thou art Sick, if it be told thee, that thou can not have ease this Twelve
Months, or Three or Four Months, yet would not this be tedious for thee to
consider? Tell me, Art not thou for Riches presently? Would not thou be
quickly Rich? Would not thou have a great deal of the World, thou carest not
how soon? Or if thou wast in danger of Death, or of thy Grave, how soon would
thou he helped, or delivered? And though thou art in Danger of Hell, thou
make no haste to be delivered. Thou blind Fool, thou blind Sinner, Is not God
and Heaven, and Christ better than all the Riches in the World? And is not
(...) more dreadful than the Grave? And art thou so eager after Riches, and not
after Heaven? Do it at thy Peril.

VI. Tell me, By these delays do not thou put the greatest Work that thou
have to do, upon the greatest hazard in the World? What have thou to do in this
World more than to make thy Peace with God, to prepare for Death and Judgment?
What to do in this World more than to get off the guilt of Sin, to get a holy
Heart? And yet to delay! Thou do put all to a Hazard. Methinks your delaying
to do what God commands, it is a putting of things to a venture, it is a
putting your Salvation to a venture, it is a putting of your Damnation to a
venture, it is a putting the Loss of God, and of Christ to a venture. Methinks,
it is as if the Sinner should say, As yet, I will not obey the Commandments of
God, and I will put it to a (...), what the Issue will be; I will (...) as yet,
look after God, and Christ and Heaven, and venture what will become of it.
Alas, poor Sinner! Have not thou any thing else to make a venture (...)?

Seventhly, Whilst thou do thus delay, (...), Do not these Delays prove to
(...) love thy (...) better than God, that thou love thy Last better than
the God of Glory? Thou say, No, I do not: No, Why, then do thou not forsake
thy Sin, if thou do not love it? Why then do not thou let it go, when God
commands? If thou do not leave thy Drunkenness, and thy Uncleanness, and thy
Wickedness, thou shall not enter into Heaven. Why then do not thou let it go?
If thou love Christ indeed, why then do not thou receive Christ into thy
Heart? Will thou pretend that thou love Christ, when thou will not have him
come under the Roof of thy Heart?

Eighthly, Tell me, Are not delays in these Cases, Arguments of great Folly?
And is it not a sign of greatest Wisdom for a Man (in such Cases as these are)
to make the greatest haste? Is not he a Madman, or a Fool, that minds Toys or
Trifles when he is in danger of losing his Life? Sirs, Are not you worse when
you mind the Toys and Pleasures below, when you are in (...) of losing Souls.

There are five Arguments to prove a Wise Man.

1. That he be one that makes choice of the best good.

2. That he be one that takes care of the best part.

3. That he be one that walks in the best way.

4. That he be one that uses the best Means.

5. That he be one that does all these.

In the first place, this is the Wise Man, Behold, God is the best good, thy
Soul is the best part, the way of Holiness is the best way, means appointed by
God to get to Heaven, are the only means. But on the contrary, to neglect these
it is a sign of the greatest Folly? Will thou do it still? Venture on at thy
Peril.

Ninthly, Tell me, Do not the Delays of People greatly discourage the Faithful
Ministers of the Gospel? Does not your delaying weaken our Hands, and
discourage our Hearts, when (...) must Study for you, and pray for you, and
Preach to you, and you cast it again in our Faces? do you think, that we can
Preach with Life, when we see no Fruit of our Works? I profess, were it not for
some of you, you would even tempt me to Preach no more to you, were it not the
Command of God to continue my duty. You see, Isa 49 4 Then I said, I have
labored in vain, and have spent my strength for naught and in vain; When he
could not see the fruit of his Preaching. So Ministers may say, Lord, we have
labored in vain, and have spent our strength for naught, and in vain. Jerem 20
8, 9 For since I spoke, I cried out, I cried Violence and Spoil, because the
Word of the Lord was made a Reproach unto me: Then I said, I will not make
mention of him, nor speak any more in his Name. And by your delaying, when we
come Year after Year, and Preach Month after Month, and see many of you in your
Sins still, and walk in your wicked ways; Do you think that this is not a great
Discouragement unto Ministers? And do you think, that God will not lay this
(...) your Change, to weaken the hands of (...) Servants? Do it at your Peril.

Tenthly, and Lastly, Do not thou think, O delaying Trifler! Do not thou
know, that every thing that thou set thy Heart upon, is hastening from
thee, and every thing thou love is hastening away, and yet, wilt not thou
make haste to get something that thou may need, when all that now thou love
will leave thee? Sinner, Do not thou know, that thy time is a going, thy
Health is a going, and that thy Life is a going; and yet wilt not thou make
haste? Know, I say, know if thou do not hasten unto Christ the sooner,
without delay, thou shall e're long be Damned without delay.

Thus you see, I have given you Ten Questions more; Has this done the Work? Are
you now resolved to go home, and enter into Covenant so be the Lords? Are you
now resolved to forsake your Sins and to let go your Iniquities? I doubt you
are not; some of you will keep your Sins still, and will not come to God.
Possibly, there are Two Things secret in thy Heart, (...) (...) remove these
that bear thee up in thy delay. Possibly thou think, Why Sir, why such
haste? Is not God a merciful God, a long suffering God? Is not God ready to
forgive, and has he not promised so to do? And if I repent hereafter, God will
Pardon me hereafter? Why such haste then? I answer.

1. It is true, Sinner, that God is a merciful God, else Woe would have been thy
Case long ago. It is true, God is a Patient God, a long suffering God, else
thou would not have been hearing of a Sermon now, but have been amongst
Devils and Damned Souls at this time: But what if it be so, and thou miserable?
But I Answer particularly: Tell me,

First, Art thou sure that thou shall see that time, when thou do purpose to
Repent? If so be that the Devil, or thine own Heart would delude thee, now thou
art young, to Repent when thou art a Man, Art thou sure to live till thou
become a man? If not, where (...) thy Soul be then? Is it not then better to
Repent now without delay?

Secondly, Art thou sure to have the same means of Grace then as now?

Thirdly, Art thou sure that the Spirit of God will strive upon thy Heart, and
move upon thy Heart then, as now he does? If thou art not sure, be not
deceived; for though God be patient, yet he may cut in two the Thread of thy
Life, before thou see those days where in thou purposedst to Repent.

Fourthly, I suppose all to be true, that thou may if live longer, and thou
may Repent at last, and God Pardon thy sin at last? What then? Is this thy
Ingenuity, to Sin against God now, because thou hopest that God will be
gracious and Merciful to thee hereafter? I thought, thou had been a more
Ingenious Person: Would thou deal thus with a Friend, with a Man? But you
say, what need such haste? Some Repent at the Eleventh Hour; all do not Repent
while Young. To this I Answer.

II. If some are then brought in, (...) it is not all that do stand out till
then? No, it is but very few; it is a very rare thing to see Persons Converted,
and brought home to Christ at the Eleventh Hour. Sometimes God may do this, and
truly, it is but sometimes. Pray, how many is it that you know, that were
Converted when they were Old, and ^ate under the means of Grace while they were
Young? I suppose you can tell but of very few. It is but now and then, and will thou put it to a Hazard, whether God will make thee such an Example? I could
never find it Recorded in the Scripture, but of one Man, that was Converted at
last, and that was the Thief upon the Cross? I do not say, there was no more,
but no more Recorded, Matthew. 20. 6, 7. You Object, that some came in at the
Eleventh Hour; I pray view that Scripture, that is, Those that came in at the
Eleventh Hour, they were not Called till the Eleventh Hour; Those that were
called the Third Hour, came in the Third Hour; And those that were Called the
Sixth Hour, came in the Sixth (...) and those that were Called the Ninth hour,
came in the Ninth hour; but those that came in at the Eleventh hour, they were
not called at the Third, nor Sixth, nor Ninth, but at the Eleventh hour. Now,
what is this to you, that have been Called an Hundred Times over, that have had
Call after Call, and Invitation after Invitation? For when Men are called at
the Third and Sixth Hours and do not come in, they seldom come in at the
Eleventh Hour. What say you beloved Hearers, shall I, after these Sermons, and
after almost an hundred things spoken (...) you, and all to this purpose to
press you to make haste, and not delay, shall I go away from your Presence and
your Sight, and will you turn your back upon God, and say, Yet a little longer,
yet I must enjoy my Pleasure, yet I must (...) the World: As if you had no room
in your Hearts for God and Christ, or the things above? I would rain prevail;
If I could but prevail with some upon this one Subject, whatsoever I should
Preach upon, I should have the greater hopes to speed upon those Subjects too.
(...) then a little more to move you.

First of all, If thou would make haste and now keep God's Commandments thou
should be Blessed now, thou should be happy now, and will not this make
you to make haste? Tell me, Sirs, Have you a mind to go home Happy, to go home
with the Love of God? Oh! If you would go Home Happy, Men and Women make haste,
delay no longer to keep the Commandments of your God. Christ himself
pronounces you Blessed, if you will but do this, Luke 11. 27, 28. It came to
pass as he spoke these things, a certain Woman of the company lift up her Voice
to him (that is, to Christ) Blessed is the Womb that bare thee, and the Pap
that gave thee Suck. Ah says she, What a Blessed Woman was that, which bore
this Man! But says Christ, Yea, rather blessed are they which hear the Word of
God and keep it; that hear God's Commands, and keep them.

Secondly, This keeping of God' s Commandments, would be an Evidence to (...)
of your Love to God: Would thou know that thou love God? Would thou
know this? Then do what God Commands: Keep his Commandments, Obey his Precepts,
hereby thou may know, that thou love him, John 14. 21. He that has my
Commandments, and keeps them, he it is that loves me, I Joh. 5. 3, 4. This
is the Love of God, that we keep his Commandments. Loving of Christ's Person,
and keeping of Christ's Commandments, they usually go together. In the Second,
Those that love me, and keep my Commandments.

Thirdly, If you will but make haste to keep Gods Commandments, and Believe
when he Commands, and close with Christ when he Commands, God will make haste,
and hear thy Prayer? when thou pourest out thy Prayer to God, O Lord make
haste, and do not tarry; then God will make haste, and hear thy Prayer.
Whatsoever we ask, we receive of him, because we keep his Commandments, by
doing those things that are pleasing in his sight, Prove. 1. 24 28. Because I
have called, and ye have refused. Remember me, Sirs, that if you (...) dying,
and should call to God for Mercy upon a Death Bad, if you should lie a dying,
when your Soul is departing, should call to God to save it, yet he would not
hear your Prayer: If you neglect to keep the Commandments of God, and for God
to neglect to hear the Prayers of a dying Man, What a dreadful case is this?

Fourthly, If you make haste to keep the Commandments of God, he will make
haste actually to keep thee when in Trouble and Temptation. Sirs, if You would
make haste to keep the Commandments of God, God would make haste, and would not
stay beyond that Hour that Deliverance should be for thy good.

Fifthly, If you would make haste to keep God's Commandments, it would be the
readiest way that you could do, to have a Blessing upon your outward
Enjoyments, Lev. 26 throughout.

Lastly, If thou will do this, thou shall be saved when thou die; What do
thou desire more? John 1. Verily, Verily, I say unto you, if any man keep my
Sayings, he shall never see death: That is, he shall never see Eternal Death,
he shall never be damned: But you may say, Sir, you press us to make haste to
keep God's Commandments; so you may, so we have; you make us a Disobedient
Congregation; I wish to God you were not. I say to you, have you kept the
Commandments of God? What (...) then the Passion (...) we see? (...) means
then the Pride that we (...)? What means then all (...) Neglects of Prayer in
your Families, that we know of? What means then your hardness of Heart, your
slighting of Christ? What are the Commandments of God? Is it not that you
should Repent, Acts 17. 20. Now God Commands all Men every where to Repent:
Have thou kept God's Commandments? What! And not shed one Tear for a Thousand
Sins that thou have Committed? Yet do thou say, That thou have kept the
Commandments of God? The Commands of God are, That thou should Believe on
Christ; turn and see, I John 3 (...) And this is his Commandment, that we
should Believe on the Name of his Son Jesus Christ. Now is Christ kept without
door, and have thou kept Gods Commandments? Christ kept out of thy Heart? Yet,
Have you kept the Commandments of God? O that you would do as you say! Make
haste and delay no longer to keep the Commandments of God.

In hopes that you will, I shall lay before you Ten Things, that will be the
Joy of Angels, the Rejoicing of Ministers, and the Content of the Heart of
Jesus Christ.

First of all, It is a Blessed and Joyful sight unto Angels, and to men, to see
an Offering God, and a Receiving Sinner; to see a Tendering God, and a Receiving
Sinner. In the Covenant of Grace, you may see God making Offers unto poor
Souls, making Tenders unto poor Sinners; yea, making great Offers and Tenders
of needful things to the Souls of Men. In the Covenant, God offers thee Grace,
God offers thee Peace, God offer thee his Spirit, God offers thee his Son, God
offers thee his Kingdom, God offers thee Himself: What shall I say? God offers
thee all that thou need, and God offers thee all that thou can desire. Oh,
by this you may see on God's part, an offering and a Tendering God: Ay, but let
us see on the other side also, a Receiving and Accepting Sinner. Methinks,
Sirs, that you should heartily receive what God offers you in the Covenant of
Grace; Methinks you should say, O Lord, do thou offer Grace to me? Ah to me
do thou offer no less than thy Self, and thy Son and Spirit? Do thou offer
to me? O Lord I could never believe that thou would offer any such offers
unto me, except I had sound it in thy Word: O Lord, I will prostrate my self
down at thy foot, thy Spirit I will gladly accept of, and thy Kingdom to be my
Portion; but some will and some will not, Job. 1. 11, 12. Jesus Christ, He came
unto his own (offering himself unto them) but his own received him not, but to
as many as did receive him, to them gave he power to be called the Sons of God,
to as many as believed on his Name.

Secondly, It would be a blessed sight to see an Inviting and Expostulating
God, and a Coming and a Praying, and a Weeping Sinner; thus it might be, when
ever this Covenant is entered into betwix^ God and Man; God he calls, and
invites, saying, Sinner, here is Mercy for thee, thou art in the way to Death
and Destruction, that is not the way to Eternal Happiness, that thou art going
in; turn about Sinner, and I will be thy God, and I will show Mercy to thee.
God does not only Invite, but he Pleads and Expostulates the Case with a poor
Sinner; Why wilt not thou accept of Mercy? Why will thou be so foolish to keep
thy Sins? Turn, O Turn, why will thou die, O sinful Soul! This you find in Isa.
55. 1. Oh, every one that Thir^teth, come ye to ^he Waters; and he that has no
Money, come, yea Buy and Eat; yea come, buy Wine and Milk, without Money, and
without Price. This is Gods Invitation, and his Invitations are large.

Every one of you that has but a (...) to desire, come; every one of you that
has but a longing Soul after Mercy, come* And it is made to those that have no
worth nor worthiness in themselves, though you have no Money nor Moneyworth,
yet come, and you shall have all free; you shall have Christ free, and you
shall have Pardon free, and you shall have Heaven free, without Price: It is
true, Christ did not obtain these things for Men without price, his Blood was
the price to purchase these things; but there is no price for us remains to
pay; we are called to come, and have all free? What shall we have? There is
Wine and Milk; Milk for the needful, and every thing necessary for you. But in
the second Verse, you have a Pleading God: Wherefore do you spend Money for
that which is not Bread, and (...) Labor for that which satisfies not?
Hearken diligently unto me, incline your Ear and come unto me. Hearken, God is
upon his invitation again, Hear, and your Souls shall live? What is all this in
order unto? Now, in the Third Verse, And I will make an Everlasting Covenant
with you, even the sure Mercies of David That is I will be your God, and you
shall be my People; all the Pleadings of God with Sinners, is in order unto
this.

Thus in the Covenant, you see an inviting, pleading God; O that now, in the
Congregation, we could see a coming and a Praying Sinner? Oh say therefore,
whoever thou art that have stood out against Terms of Mercy all thy days and
would have none of this God for thy God, that never came into thy mind ever
since thou wast born, now say, Now Lord I come, Now Lord, since thou art
pleased to call and plead with me, behold, I come according as thou call.

It would be a lovely sight to see Sinners returning to an inviting God; Jer.
3. 22. Return ye backsliding Children, and I will heal your backslidings:
behold we come unto thee, for thou art the Lord our God This is the coming of
returning Sinners; as God has pleaded with the^, so thou must now go and Plead
^ith God. Oh it is a blessed sight to see a poor Sinner pleading with God, that
has been pleading with him; to see a Sinner upon his Knees with Sorrow in his
Soul, and Tears in his Eyes, Lord, I am a poor miserable Wretch, a Hell*
deserving Wretch, and that many years since might have been cast into Eternal
Torments, and this day I might have been amongst deplorable Reprobates; but yet
thou have given me time to seek thy Favor and Mercy: Now Lord, forgive my Sins
and renew my Heart, and Sanctify me throughout; Now Lord, I call unto thee,
that thou would enable me to turn, and enable me to believe.

Thirdly, It would be a sight rejoicing Angel^ and Men, to see a waiting God,
and a hastening Sinner: Indeed we see every day a patient God, and a long
suffering God, we cannot look upon a gray headed Sinner, but we do see a
patient God in the greyness of his Hairs; we cannot see a person grown up, but
this we do see, a patient and a waiting God; but it is but now and then, that
we see a hastening Sinner; I me^ not a Sinner hastening to Hell, and hastening to
Destruction, and hastening on the way of Sin: No, these Sights are too common;
but a Sinner hastening toward God, and toward Jesus Christ, Luke 19. 4. 5.
Jesus Christ passed by, and looked up to Zacheus on the Tree, and bade him to
come down; and it is said, That he made haste and came down, and followed
Christ; God has not only given thee a Call, Sinner, but he has stood waiting
and knocking at the Door of thy Heart; but how long have thou delayed? Thou
have made many a fair Promise, I will Repent, and I will Believe, and take God
for my God; but thou (...) not do it yet; to see any among (...) to be hastening
toward God, while God is waiting upon you: O that would be a joyful sight
indeed! Say now, Lord, Lord, thou shall not wait an hour longer upon me.

Fourthly, it would be a joyful sight to Angels and Men, to see a Promising
God, and a Believing Sinner: If this were done, the Covenant were made betwixt
God and thy Soul; if as God does Promise, so thou do believe the Promises,
then God would be thy God; and then thou should be one of his People in the
Covenant of Grace. You do see God, to be a promising God, I will, said God, be
merciful to all your Unrighteousness, and I will remember your Iniquity or Sins
no more; I will put my Laws in your hearts, and cause you to walk in my ways:
And Multitudes of such Promises there are. Thus it was with Abraham, when God
came to make the Covenant with Abraham, Genesis 17. 1, 2, etc And when Abram was
Ninety Years Old and Nine, the Lord appeared to Abram, and said unto him, I am
the Almighty God, walk before me, and be thou perfect. And I will make my
Covenant between me and thee, and will Multiply thee exceedingly And Abram fell
on his face, and God talked with him, saying, As for me, Behold my Covenant is
with thee, and thou shall be a Father of many Nations: Neither shall thy Name
any more be called Abram, but thy Name shall be called Abraham, for a Father of
many Nations have I made thee; and I will make thee exceeding Fruitful, and I
will make Nations of thee, and Kings shall come out of thee. And I will
Establish my Covenant between thee and me, and thy seed after thee, in their
Generation, for an Everlasting Covenant; to be a God unto thee, and unto thy
seed after thee. And God said unto Abraham, Thou shall keep my Covenant
therefore, thou and thy seed after thee, in their Generation, etc.

You read there of God's coming to Abraham; and says he, I make my Covenant
with thee; and in thy seed shall all the Nations of the Earth be blessed. This
was a Promise made to Abraham when he was Ninety and Nine Years Old; as there
was a Promising God, so there was a Believing Abraham, Romans 4 18, 19, 20. Who
against hope, believed in hope that he might become the Father of many Nations;
according to that which was spoken, So shall thy Seed be. And being not weak in
Faith, he considered not his own Body now Dead, when he was about an Hundred
Years Old; nor yet the deadness of Sarah's Womb. He staggered not as the
Promise of God through unbelief, but was strong in (...), giving glory to God.
When a Soul is enabled by God to make application of the Promises to himself,
and being certain then that he is a Believing Sinner, answering to a Promising
God.

Fifthly, In order to your becoming a Covenant People, and God your Covenant
God, It would be a joyful fight to Men and Angels, to see a Commanding God, and
an obeying Sinner. In the Covenant there are Commands as well as Promises,
therefore they must be performed as a Duty, as well as participated of as a
Privilege, Deuteronomy. 4. 13 He declared unto you his Covenant that he commanded you
to perform. This God comes ^rth with a Commanding Voice, as well as with a
Pleading, Tendering Voice: Now, as there is a Commanding Go, so if there were
amongst you an obeying Sinner, then the Covenant would (...) fulfilled, Romans
11. 8 By Faith Abraham when he was called to (...) into a place which he should
after receive for an Inheritance, obeyed, and he went out, not knowi^ whither
he went. God called him (...) his Friend, and from his Family, and he knew not
whether he was to go; yet he obeyed God. But God has old you (...) (...)
whither you shall go, yet you will not follow him! God has told you, that
Heaven shall be the Place, an Everlasting Kingdom; you shall have Mansions
above in Bliss, and Glory shall be the Place that God will lead you to, yet you
will not obey God.

Sixthly, To see a Threatening God, and a Trembling Sinner; is: very delightful
fight. Not in it self indeed desirable, but in order to your dosing with God
upon Covenant terms; for as God does invite a Sinner to take him for his God,
and does wait upon him, and does Promise him Heaven, if he will? and as God
commands him, (...) take him for his God, so God does t^reaten Man too very
severely, if he will not come up to Covenant (...). How frequent are these in
the Gospel! He that believes (...) is Condemned (...) Except (...) shall
Perish (...) Holiness no man shall see the Lord, (...) it be to be his Eternal
Sorrow.

You may see a Threatening (...) unto those that will not perform is Covenant,
Levi^. 26. 11, 12. And I will set my Tabernacle amongst you, and my Soul shall
not abhor you, and I will walk amongst you, and will be your God, and ye shall
be my People.

Well, but what if Men will not, is there any danger to a Sinner, if he will
not take God for his God? Ay, that there is, verse 14, 15, 16, 17, 18. Of that
Chapter; But if he will not hearken unto me, and will not do all these
Commandments; and if you shall despise my Statutes, or if your Soul abhor my
Judgments, so the ye will not do all my Commandments, (...) that ye break my
Covenant, I also will do this unto you; I will even appoint over you Terror,
Consumption, and burning Agrees, that shall consume the Eyes, and cause sorrow
of Heart, and ye shall (...) your Seen in vain, for your Enemies shall eat it;
and I will set my Face against you, and ye shall be slain before Enemies; they
that hate you shall Reign over you, and ye shall fle^ when none pursues you
(...) and if ye will not for all not hearken unto me then I (...) punish (...)
seven times more for your fins; So God goes on in many Verses; but is there any
likelihood that a Sinner will take God for his God till he does tremble before
this Threatening God; Thy Conscience is seared, thou make nothing to come up
to Covenant terms; but where God Threatens, and the Soul Trembles, then it is a
sign that that Man will be brought into Covenant with God.

Seventhly, It is a Blessed Sight; rejoicing Angels and Men, to see a Bleeding
Christ, and a Weeping Sinner. In (...) Covenant of Grace, you may see the one
Bleeding Christ; for Christ Bled to Confirm the Covenant betwixt God and Man.
He is the Mediator of the Covenant, and the Surety of the Covenant, and the
Blood of Christ, it is the Blood of the Everlasting Covenant; so that on the
one side, you may see, a Bleeding Christ; but where is the Weeping Sinner?
Where is the Broken Hear^ed Sinner? Where is the Contrite, and the Bleeding
Sinner? Could we (...) see (...) (...) the Work were done, God were thy God
then, and and then one of his People Zech 12 10. And I will pour upon the House
of David, and upon the Inhabitants of Jerusalem, the Spirit of Grace and of
Supplication, and they shall look upon me, whom they have pierced, and they
shall mourn for him, as one mourns for his only Son, and shall be in
bitterness for him as one that is in bitterness for his First born. Look O my
Soul, and see how thy Sins have Pierced the Lord Jesus Christ, till his very
Heart blood poured forth. Oh, that he should become a Curse for me! That he
should Die, that I might Live! Oh was there ever such Love, and was there ever
such Grace! Oh could we but see this, a Weeping Sinner answerable to a Bleeding
Christ, and, the March would be made, God would, be thy God, and thou one of
his People.

Eighthly, It would be a Blessed sight, to see a striving Spirit, and a
yielding Sinner; and this it must be, if ever God becomes your God, and you his
People. There must be both of the (...) a Striving Spirit moving upon thy
Heart, that must solicit thee for thy love and be wooing thee for thy consent,
to take God for thy God. This the Spirit of God oftentimes does, thou have felt
him knocking at thy Heart, moving upon thy Soul at a Sermon, saying, Sinner,
open; O Sinner, thy Danger is great, if thou go on in thy Sins. The Spirit
has been so powerful upon thy Heart, that it has brought thee almost to
resolve; but it thou (...) have this God for thy God, thou must yield when the
Spirit strives.

Ninthly, It is a blessed sight to see a Preaching Minister, and a serious and
a hearkening Sinner. This is as the means appointed by God, to bring Sinners
into Covenant with God; therefore Ministers are Ambassadors for God; we stand
in Christ's (...) and in Christ's st^ad, to propose the terms of peace betwixt
God and Man; therefore to see harkening Sinners as (...) had a mind to have God
for their God is a Blessed (...)? See (...) 10 3^ 33 34 Send there (...) (...),
and call hither (...) Sinners is (...) he is ledged in the House of Simon a
Tanner, by the Sea side, who when he comes, shall speak unto the: Immediately
therefore I sent to thee, and thou have well done that (...) are come New
therefore are we all here present before God, to hear all things that are
commanded thee of God. Then Peter opened his mouth, and said, Of a truth I
perceive that God is no respecter of persons. See, People set themselves as in
the sight of God under a Sermon: And, what was it that Peter did Preach? Jesus
Christ the Mediator of the Covenant.

Tenthly, and Lastly, which is the Fruit of all; It is a Blessed sight to see a
Heaven prepared and a Sinner Saved. This is the fruit of the Covenant, in your
taking God for your God, and your becoming his People. This ^ight we shall see,
at the coming of our Lord, a Heaven prepared we shall see; Av, and see Sinners
Saved, see Multitudes go in; This we shall see, as the Fruit of this Covenant,
Matthew. 25. 34. Then shall the King say to them on (...) Come (...) Inherit the
(...) for you (...) the Foundation of the World. Now my Advice to you all is,
That you would take this God to be your God, and give up your selves
unfeignedly to be the People of this God; or woe be to the Sinner, if there be a
God, but none of thine; if there be a Blessed God, but thou have no Interest in
him.

Now therefore for God's sake Sinner, for God's sake, and for thine own Souls
sake, let me beseech thee, and entreat thee, as ever thou will find Mercy at
the hand of God another day, come and take this God for thy God; come Sinner,
come as yet, it is not too late; as yet Mercy may be had; and as yet, Grace may
be round; while the day of mercy lasts, and while the day of thy Life, lasts,
come in this Instant, and ruin not thy Back and say, For all this, I will keep
my Sins still.

Consider this, If thou will not have God for thy God, thou will be Condemned
by the Covenant of Works, and thou will not be condemned by the Covenant of
Grace. Think of this, thou art Condemned by the Covenant of Works; Gal. 3. 10.
For as many as are of the Works of the Law, are under the Curse; for it is
written, Cursed is every one that continues not in all things which are
written in the Book of the Law to do them. Here is thy Doom, Cursed is every
one, Man, Woman, and Child, every one, Bond and Free, Master and Servant,
Husband and Wife; that continues, not in all things written in the Book of the
Law to do them. Have thou done so? Have thou continued in all things? No, not
in one thing. Then you see that you are Condemned by the Covenant of Works;
What is thy Cure then? O the Covenant of Grace must help me: Ay, but thou art
condemned there too, John 3. 18. He that believes on him is not condemned;
(but) Ay, but there is a but come; but he that believes not, is condemned
already. For what? What, Because he has Broken the Covenant of Works? No, the
Law Condemns him for that, for the Breach of God's Commands, and for the
Covenant of Works. What then? because he has not believed in the name of the
only begotten Son of God. The Covenant of Works, that will condemn you for not
performing: and the Covenant of Grace, that will condemn you for not Believing.

O methinks, I am loath to leave you, till I see some or other strict Covenant
with God and say, O I see I must take God for my God, or else, I am lost and
undone, and that for ever; I am accursed by the Covenant of Works, and by the
Covenant of Grace, the o^e for not Obeying, and the other for not Believing. It
is in vain for us to flatter you, you must have this God for your Covenant God,
or else, you will come under the Power of the Second Death: Temporal Death,
were nothing, if Death Eternal did not follow. See what follows Death, Revel 6
8 I looked and behold, a Pale Horse; and his Name that sat on him, was Death,
and Hell followed with him. Ah there it is! There is the Thing that makes Death
Terrible! Indeed, Sinner, Death e're long will get upon his pale Horse, and
will be Riding swiftly toward thee; Ay, but Hell follows after; Were it not
for this, Death were nothing; but Damnation follows after Death; and it will be
the case of every one that will not take God for their God.

Let us a little Consider what is in this Eternal Death, before you take God to
be your God. I hope I shall work upon some of your Hearts.

Consider, therefore, There are Two Things in this Eternal Death, and both of
them exceeding Dreadful.

I. Exclusion from the Blessed God. Ah Sinner, as sure as thou hear my
Voice, will thou be shut out, and excluded from the Blessed God, and Blessed
Christ, and Blessed Angels, and Blessed Saints, if thou do not take God for
thy God, Matthew. 25. 41. Depart from me (...) Cursed; from me, from the Blessed
Jesus Oh! How miserable must that Man be that must be sent packing away from
the Blessed Jesus, This is the Punishment of Loss; but if it were the loss of
thy Pleasures only, and the loss of thy Friends only, this were nothing: Ah,
but what things will thou lose, if thou die before God (...) thy Soul agree?
It will be the loss of a Loving God, the loss of a Blessed Redeemer; This will
be the los^ and thou had better lose Ten Thousand Worlds than this one God.
And if thou art not in Covenant with God, then

1. Thou will lose thy Soul. The loss of a Soul, What shall it profit a Man, if
he gain the whole world, and lose his own Soul? It is not a small matter that
thou maift lose, if God gain not thy consent, but it is a Soul.

Consider, It is thy own Soul, Sinner, that will be lost, if thou will not
consent to take God for thy God. I would not be guilty of the Damnation of
another Man's Soul for all the World. Tell me Sinner, would thou ruin
another Man's Soul? Then, why will thou ruin Thine own? Whose Soul will thou
mind, if not thine own? And whose Soul will thou take care of, if not thy own?

3. If so be, thou do not take God for thy God, thou will lose thy only Soul.
Ah poor Sinner, Have thou but one only Soul that must be Damned or Saved, and
wilt not thou take care for thy own Soul*

Oh take care and see to it, it is thy only Soul. Sirs, God has given to us
every one but one only Soul, lose that, and thou losest all; if that be Damned
all is Damned. Methinks, the thoughts of this should move thee to remember thy
Darling, to remember thy only Soul, that when thou have but one, thou may
secure the happiness of that one. In the Body God gives us many parts by pairs,
Two Eyes, that if we lose one, we may see by the other; Two Ears, Two Hands,
two Feet, that if we lose one, we may have the benefit of the other; but God
has given Men but one only Soul.

4. It will be the loss of thy precious and immortal Soul. Were it the loss of
a mortal Soul that should die, and cease to be, it could not be so much; but
when it shall be the loss of an Immortal Soul, that cannot die, that cannot
cease to be, thi^ makes your Punishment the more, that will not come up to the
terms of the Covenant. That is the first.

II. In the Eternal Death, is the Punishment of Sense. All manner of Pain and
Torments that a just and Angry God can lay upon thee to all Eternity. If you
are willing to take this God upon Covenant terms, he will make you happy; But
if you will not, know to your Faces, this Day. That the Eternal God will Plague
you for ever, will be thy Avenger and Punisher for ever. Consider the Names by
which that Place is called, where all that die without God, must be cast into,
I will name but four or five of them, and those briefly.

1. If thou die without God being thy God thou must to Prison, as sure as
thou stand here; so this Place is called, 1 Pet. 3. 19. There by the Prison
you read of, is meant the Place of Hell, and the Place of the Damned.

2. Every one that Dies before God is his Covenant God, must be cast into a
place of Darkness, into a place of utter Darkness, Matthew 8 12. The Children of
(...) Kingdom shall be cast into utter Darkness.

3 Every Soul that goes out of this World before God be his God, shall be cast
into a Lake of burning Brimstone, Rev 21 8.

4. Every Soul that leaves this World before God be his God in Covenant will be
cast into a Furnace of Fire, Matthew. 13. 42. Where you see Hell is set forth by
a Furnace of Fire.

5. Lastly, It is indeed a Place of Torment, Luke 16. 28. Says the Rich Man
there, O send to my Brethren, and tell them what I endure, that they may not
come to this place of Torment. O have mercy on me, for I am Tormented Day and
Night. Now what is this, for which you must be cast into such Torments? What
for, For refusing of God?

Why art thou so loath, Sinner, why, to take this God for thy God? Why, will he
do thee any heart? Besides, I might have shown how, that Four Things will make
your case exceeding woeful? for fain I would prevail, though it were but with.
One or Two, to come over to God, and that will say, O Sir, I come with all my
heart, to take this God for my God.

First of all, If thou will not, thy Pains will be Universal Pains, all over
(...) Body, and all over thy Soul, no part of thy Body free, no part of thy
Soul free; hereafter in Hell Eyes, and Head, and Heart, and all the Pains of
Hell shall be Universal, every part sinned, and every part shall Suffer.

Secondly, They shall be extreme too, Sinner. If thou will refuse this God to
be thy God, he will inflict upon thee extremity of Pain: Now to have Pain all
over, and to be all over in extremity, what a sad case is this?

Thirdly, Then they must be continual, without intermission; not sometimes in
Pain, and sometimes at ease; No, no, this is not the case of the Damned; no,
there is no intermission, not for an hour, not for one moment in Hell: If so be
you have a pain on your Body for an hour or two, or in the night, and in the
morning you have ease, what a refreshment is that? But for a Person to lie
under the pain of Gout and Stone, and Night and Day cries out, no ease, no
mitigation, not an hours rest all Night long: O consider, what it will be, not
to have an hours rest to all Eternity, not the least intermission!

Fourthly, As it shall have no intermission, so it shall have no cessation. If
it were Pain to continue for a Thousand Years, without an Hours Rest between,
yea a thousand to that, and a thousand to that, it would be happy Tidings; but
those that will not have God for their God, they must have Pain without ease,
and without intermission, and that for ever.

But for one Thing more. Besides all this, Sirs, if you will not have this God
for your God, your Covenant God, you will have something to Torment you in
Hell, that Thousands of others never shall.

Shall I tell you, Beloved Hearers, shall I tell you, you will have something
to Torment you, that Devils shall not have. I say, something lie heavier on you
than upon Devils; something to Torment you, that the Heathens have not to
Torment them: What is that? O it is the gnawings of a never dying Worm, for the
refusing of an offered Christ, of Mercy, while Mercy may be had. When you shall
lie in Hell, it God does not prevent you, what will be the gnawings of thy
Conscience?

Methinks, I hear poor Damned wretches that have sat under the Gospel, accusing
themselves alter this manner; It was for the breach of the Covenant of Works
that I am in this place; but I might have had help in the Covenant of Grace;
God was offered unto me, and Christ was offered unto me, Ministers Pleaded with
me day after day; but said Conscience, this thou would not do, thou said No,
to thy dying day. Had I accepted of Mercy, while Mercy might have been had, I
need not have come into this place of Torment: But alas, woe is me, the Devils
above me, never slighted such Mercy as I have done! Woe is me, the Thousand of
Heathens that are above me, never slighted such Mercy as I have done! A Savior
was never offered to Devils; a Savior was never Preached to the Heathens; But
I like a miserable Wretch now, like a Damned Wretch now, might have had mercy,
but would not* I might have escaped this Place, but would not* Woe is me now I
am lost for ever! Woe is me now, I am Damned for ever! My Praying time is gone
over! I might have had God to have been my God once, but now he will never be
offered to me any more.

Thus look to it, it will be worse with you than with Devils and with Heathens
if you refuse to take God for your God, and you give not up your selves to be
his People.

Mr. (...) Solemn Covenant with God, privately drawn up by himself, and found
in his own Manuscript.
OH! most Dreadful God, for the Passion of thy Son, I beseech thee accept of
thy poor Prodigal, now prostrating himself at thy Door. I have fallen from thee
by mine Iniquities, and am by Nature the Son of Death, and a thousand times
more the Child of Hell by my wicked Practices; but of thine Infinite Grace,
thou have promised Mercy to me in Christ, if I will turn to thee with all my
Heart; therefore upon the Call of the Gospel I am now come in; and throwing
down my Weapons, submit my self to thy Mercy: And because thou requirest, as
the Conditions of my Peace with thee, that I should put away my Idols, and be
at Defiance with all thine Enemies, whom I acknowledge I have wickedly sided
with against thee: I do here from the bottom of my Heart renounce them all,
firmly Covenanting with thee, not to allow my self in any known Sin; but
conscientiously to use all means that I know thou have prescribed for the Death
and utter destruction of all my Corruptions: And whereas I have formerly
inordinately and Idolatrously let out all my Affections upon the World, I do
here resign my Heart to thee that made it, humbly protesting before thy
Glorious Majesty, that this is the firm Resolution of my Heart, and that I do
Unfeignedly desire Grace from thee, That when thou shall call me thereunto, I
may practice this my Resolution, through thy Assistance, to forsake all that is
dear unto me in this World, rather than to turn from thee to the ways of Sin;
and that I may watch against all its Temptations, whether of Prosperity or
Adversity, lest they should withdraw my Heart from thee, beseeching thee also
to help me against the Temptations of Satan, to whose wicked suggestions I
resolve by thy Grace never to yield my self a Servant; and because my own
Righteousness is but as filthy rags, I renounce all confidence therein, and
acknowledge that I am of my self a hopeless, helpless, undone Creature, without
Righteousness or Strength.

And forasmuch as thou have of thy bottomless Mercy offered most graciously to
me, wretched Sinner, to be again through Christ thy God, if I should accept of
thee, I call Heaven and Earth to record this day. That I do here solemnly
avouch thee for the Lord my God, and with all possible veneration, bowing the
Neck of my Soul under the feet of thy Sacred Majesty, I do here take thee the
Lord Jehovah, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, for my Portion and chief Good, and
do give up my self Body and Soul for thy Servant, promising and vowing to serve
thee in Holiness and Righteousness all the days of my Life; and since thou have
appointed the Lord Jesus Christ the only means of coming unto thee, I do here
upon the bended knees of my Soul accept of him as the only new and living way,
by which Sinners may have access to thee, and do here solemnly join my self in
Marriage Covenant to him

O Blessed Jesus. I come to (...), and hard bested, Poor and Wretched,
Miserable, Blind and Naked, a most (...) Wretch a guilty (...) for over to wash
the Feet of the Servants of my Lord, much more to be married to the King of
Glory; but since such is thine unparalled Love, I do here with all my power
accept thee, and do takes thee for my Lord and Husband, for all times and
conditions, to Love, Honor and obey thee before all others, and this to Death;
I embrace thee in all thy Offices, I do renounce my own unworthiness, and do
here own thee to be the Lord my Righteousness; I renounce my own Wisdom, and do
here take thee for my only Guide; I renounce my own Will and take thy Will for
my Law.

And since thou have told me, I must suffer if I will Reign; I do here Covenant
to take my Lot as it falls, with thee, and by thy Grace Assisting to run all
hazards, with thee verily (...) That neither Life nor Death shall (...) thee
and me.

And because thou have been pleased to give me thy Holy Laws, as Rules of my
Life, and the Ways in which I should Walk (...) willingly put my Neck under
thy Yoke, and set my Shoulders to thy Burden, and subscribing to all thy Laws,
as Holy, Just, and Good, I solemnly take them as the Rule of Words; Thoughts
and Actions, promising, That though my Flesh Contradict and Rebel, yet, I will
Endeavor to order and govern my whole Life according to thy Directions, and
will not allow my self in the neglect of any thing that I know to be my Duty.

Only because through the frailty of my Flesh, I am subjected to many Failings,
I am bold humbly to protest that unallowed Miscarriages, contrary to the
settled bent and resolution of my Heart shall not make void this Covenant; for
so thou have said.

Now Almighty Searcher of all H^ thou know that I make this (...) with thee
this day, without any know or ^^servation beseeching thee, that (...) espiest
any flaw or falsehood therein, would discover it to me, and help (...) do it
aright.

forwards (...) upon as my God and Father) that ever thou should find out
such a way for the recovery of undone Sinners, Glory b^ to thee O God the Son,
who have loved me, and washed me from my Sins with thine own blood, and art now
become my Savior and Redeemer; Glory be to thee, O God the Holy Ghost, who by
the singer of thy Almighty Power have turned about my Heart from Sin to God; O
dreadful Jehovah, the Lord Omnipotent, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, Thou art
now become my Covenant Friend; Amen, So be it: And the Covenant which I have
made on Earth, let it be ratified in Heaven.

W. B.

FINIS.

