A Congratulatory Address Of the House of Representatives of His Majesty's
Province of the Massachusetts Bay, in New England, delivered by the Speaker and
whole House, in the Council Chamber in Boston, on Tuesday the 6 th. of June,
Anno Domini. 1699. To His EXCELLENCY, THE Earl of Bellomont.
May it please Your Excellency,
WE His Majesty's most Loyal and dutiful Subjects, the Representatives of the
Province of the Massachusetts Bay in New England, do most humbly crave leave
to present to Your Excellency, our most Sincere and Hearty Congratulations for
Your safe Arrival within this part of Your Government. And at the same time, in
Your Illustrious Presence, to render our acknowledgements to Almighty GOD for
the many instances of His special Providence and Benignity, both to Your
Excellency and this People manifested, from Your designation unto Your
Accession to this Province.

We cannot but admire the manifest footsteps of a Gracious Providence in
determining the Royal Heart of His Sacred Majesty, to choose and appoint Your
Lordship to be Governor in Chief of this Province; and its no less a wonder,
that Your Excellency, a Person of so Noble a Virtue, and standing so near the
fountain of Honor, and fair for greater preferments, should entertain the
thoughts of moving to so remote a Province: We will believe and say, because
Almighty GOD, and our Great KING WILLIAM, Loved this People, Your Excellency is
made their GOVERNOR.

We must next Express our sense of the Divine Goodness to Your Excellency, that
preserved You in a tedious and difficult Voyage upon an Element not the most
friendly to the firmest Constitutions, and in a season not only rarely free
from dangers, but unusually severe and hazzardous; but above all, we are
obliged to remark the propitiousness of Heaven, in securing Your Excellencies
Person and Your Noble Family from the Contagion that has made the Island You
put in at, the Grave of an Unaccountable number of Brave and Generous English
men.

And since that; We have had fresh causes of adoring the Almighties continued
Goodness in the preserving Your Excellency, during Your abode in that Unhappily
divided part of Your Government, which You so lately left: and in blessing Your
Lordship with that Wisdom, and Conduct that is become Conspicuous, by Your
leaving our Neighbors less unhappy, because more Composed than of late they
have been.

We cannot look upon these passages of the Divine Providence toward Your
Excellency, but with the deepest Gratitude and Acknowledgments, because they
are so many Pledges, and create in us such Vigorous hopes, of our abiding
happiness under Your Lordships Influence and Conduct thus reserved to us, by
such and so many Peculiar Instances of the favor and care of Heaven.

Give us leave, SIR, only to assure Your Excellency, That We (and we now
Address Your Excellency as the Representative Body of this Province) in our
several Stations, as we are in right and Gratitude bound, shall express our
Loyalty to His Sacred Majesty in all Dutifulness and Obedience to Your
Excellency, the Image and Character of our Great and most Gracious Sovereign.

And now with the United Devotion of this Province, We humbly Implore the same
Almighty Providence still to continue Your Protector: and may Your Lordships
Health be restored and perfectly Confirmed, Your Government here sure, steady
and lasting, Your happiness continue and Increase, until it be perfected in the
Eternal Kingdom.

In the Name of the House of Representatives. James Converse Speaker.

BOSTON, Printed by Bartholomew Green, and John Allen, Printers to His
Excellency the GOVERNOR and COUNCIL. 1699.


