A CALL TO Backsliding Israel, And may be as a Necessary Word of Caution and
Admonition to the Inhabitants of East and West-Jarsey, Pennsilvania, etc. as a
Remembrancer to them to call to mind their former state, and whence they are
fallen.

With some short Account of my leaving a second time that Party of them called
Quakers, which have Condenmed G. Keith, and all that own him, or his Testimony
for the crucified Jesus, our alone Advocate in Heaven.

By Elias Burling.

Printed and Sold by William Bradford at the Sign of the Bible in New York,
1694.

A Call to Backsliding Israel, and may be as a necessary Word of Caution to
many of the Inhabitants of Burlington, etc.
HEar, O Israel! This short Message and Testimony is to you, who have long made
Profession of the holy Truth, yet have not known or witnessed the pure purging
Power of it, thoroughly to cleanse, wash and sanctify, and to set you free from
sin, and the power and servitude of it, but have taken up a false Rest, and are
sat down at ease in Zion, in a Profession of Truth, with a Name to live,
whilst dead, dead as to Holiness, dead as to the Life, Power of Truth, and
divine Knowledge of the Mystery of Christ, Enemies to the Cross of our Lord
Jesus Christ, that should thoroughly crucify you to the World, and the World to
you, which raises up the Soul into the Life of Holiness; this you are Enemies
unto in your Minds, by reason of wicked Works, so hold the Truth in
Unrighteousness, and are crucifying that afresh to your selves, which should
slay and crucify you to the World and the Evils of it; but what will ye do in
the end thereof? Though now for a Time you may live over and trample upon this
innocent Life, yet in the end it will be too heavy for you, if ye will not bow
and bend to it, and be willing to fall upon it, and be broken by it, it will at
last fall heavy upon you, and will grind you to Powder; and this I have long
seen and foreseen in the Light of the Lord, to be your state, many of you;
therefore hear and fear, all ye Disobedient and Rebellious Ones, who have long
professed me in words, says the Lord, yet in works have denied me, who honor
me not, nor is my Name feared and sanctified in the midst of you, but my holy
Spirit is and has been long grieved by you, for you are a Rebellious House,
says the Lord, therefore I delight not in you, nor are your Offerings pleasant
or acceptable in my sight, as in days and years past, when they were as a sweet
smell unto me, whilst you retained your love and sincerity to my Name and
Truth, and held fast your Integrity, and my holy fear was before you, and
whilst yet kept and abode in it, it kept and preserved you out of many of the
Evils of the World, which you are since again run unto, and into this must you
come again, even to your first Love, and to Repent, and do your first Works, if
ever ye come into my favor again, and be owned and received of me, and that I
again receive an Offering at your hands, with Acceptance.

Hear therefore, O Israel! what the Lord by his Spirit may signify unto you,
Though very long has the Lord born with a People in this day, even as he bore
long with Israel of Old, forty Years was he grieved and tempted with that
Generation, who after that, He by a mighty hand, and an out stretched Arm had
saved them out of the Land of Egypt, and had led them through the Red Sea, and
brought them safe upon the Banks of Deliverance, where they sang his Praise,
yet he afterward destroyed them that believed not; which things are written
for our Admonition, that we grieve not the Lord in repelling against his good
Spirit, as they did, of which we had need to take heed, least we also come to
fall in this Wilderness, through the same Example of Unbelief; for the Lord
has born long with a People and Generation in this our Day, and for whom he
has also done much, who have long professed him in words, some of them forty
or near fifty years, but what fruit is there brought forth by too to many of
them, though he has waited long, year after year, seeking and expecting Fruit,
of whom he now grows weary, and the Day of his long-suffering and forbearance
is come near unto an end, and that he will say, Cut it down, why cumbereth it
the Ground? And this will be the lot and portion of many, unless they speedily
Repent: Its Fruit that he expects and looks for, and he will not be longer put
off or satisfied without Fruits that may honor him; for barely, a Profession
of the holy Truth, without a holy Life, will stand no Soul of us in any stead
at all, in the great Day of Account, but he will have an Improvement made by us
of his own and what he has committed to our Trust, and he that has not
improved his Gift, but has been idle, sloathful and negligent in his Lords
business in his Day and Time, this Gift or Talent will at last be called for by
the Giver of it, and taken from him, and the Portion of that Servant will be in
utter Darkness forever. He that has an Ear to hear, let him hear this Word,
The Lord is taking away thy Diadem, the Crown is falling from thy head, thy
flourishing Beauty is passing away quickly, the heavenly Sun which thou
rejoiced in for a time, now with-draws its shining, the Darkness is now
thickening upon thee; in stead of spiritual Mirth and Gladness, a Day of
Sorrow, Mourning and Lamentation; in stead of a Girdle, a Rent, instead of well
set Hair, Baldness, and instead of a sweet Smell, behold a stink; and thy Name
shall be for a perpetual Shame and Reproach amongst the Heathen, because ye
have not sanctified the Name of the holy One, but have greatly polluted it in
this Land; therefore I will make ye a Scorn, a Byword and a Hissing to
Nations, and Women shall rule over thee, and strangers shall come up and eat
your Bread, and shall possess your Habitations, and the Lord will call in
others to the heavenly Banquet, the Supper of the Lamb, and who are more worthy
than ye, and they shall enter into the Marriage Chamber, and partake of the
heavenly Dainties, and they shall come from the East and from the West, and
shall enter in, and shall sit down with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob in the Kingdom
of God, and Ye who have accounted your selves the Children of it, shall be
thrust out for your Disobedience; for there are first that shall be last, and
last that shall be first; and as ye were in times past, when little in your own
Eyes, and in a bowed sense before the Lord, you were then reproached, scorned,
mocked and derided of the World, and such as knew not God, for your Plainness,
your Christian Modesty, your Seriousness, Sobriety, Gravity and Moderation,
your Self denial, holy and harmless Conversations, and serious Deportment, and
good Behavior and Testimony against the World, and the Evils and Fashions of
it, which your Minds were far drawn out of in that Day; and because ye could
not fashion your selves after the former Lusts, whilst in your Ignorance, nor
walk as other Gentiles, that knew not God, in the vanity of their Minds; for
that cause, how were ye hated, reproached and reviled, for the Truths sake,
while ye thus stood the Cross; but now on the contrary, since the Offense of
the Cross is ceased with many, to my grief, and many more, I now speak even
with sorrow of heart, and not to upbraid you, may it not now be said, and that
truly, That ye are now become a Scorn to Fools, and a Reproach justly among
the Heathen, for your evil doing, and for your disagreeable Practices to what
the innocent harmless Quakers use to be found in, witness your Persecution, by
Imprisoning, Fining, and taking away Goods from your innocent Neighbors and
Brethren, who for Conscience sake could not conform to you.

And now, that your Evil, Unchristian and Vn-Quaker-like Deeds and
Corruptions, both in Principle and Practice, are brought to light, and which
cannot now longer be hid, but they must come forth to public view, and their
Covering, who have not the Truth purely for their Covering, is stripping off
them, and their Nakedness, and the Shame of it must and will appear to the view
of all. And now instead of looking at the hand of the Lord in it, and humbling
of themselves under it, and owning it to be just upon them, for their
Hypocrisy and great Unfaithfulness, instead of this lay all the blame upon
others, excusing themselves, and blaming and accusing of others with it, and
say, Its this Man or the other has done it, and brought this Dishonor and
Reproach to Truth; and its not we, but G. K. and those in the Separation, who
have broken Unity with their Brethren, but will not own that they have done any
thing that has justly brought the Dishonor, but wipe their Mouths, and say,
They have done no Evil. Yet this I must tell, as I am certainly persuaded of
it, That had you but continued faithful, and retained your first purity and
love to God and his Truth, as ye were once in, this then had not happened, nor
should G. Keith, or any other, then suffered thus to lay open and exposed you
to the world, which you have all along much endeavored to hide your Evils and
Filthyness from, but now, that which has been long hid and kept secret is made
manifest, and brought to light, for as Christ said, There is nothing hid, that
shall not be revealed, nor covered, that shall not be uncovered, and that which
has been spoken in secret shall be proclaimed upon the House top; and since
you have lost that which once made you a good favor in your Neighbourhoods and
Families, and that reached the Witness of Truth in many hearts, having lost
this, you will be left as destitute, as naked, and as bear as ever People was
left, without timely and sincere Repentance.

Friends, as touching my last Paper which I sent, with the other of B. D's to
your Monthly Meeting, in which was some things hard to be rightly understood by
you, especially since I am again with drawn from you, being warned of God so to
do, and that I may keep Truth clear, and my Testimony thereunto, however
censured and looked upon by you, the great thing with me, is, and has been, to
approve my heart to God, and to speak the Truth uprightly, without partiality
of respect to any Man's Person, and whilst I am kept there, I heed it little who
commends, or who discommends me; for not he who commends himself, or whom
another commends, but whom the Lord commends, that is approved; I say, that I
may be the more Intelligible, and prevent and take off, what in me lies, those
evil and hard Constructions which very aptly and readily you may put upon what
I there writ, as concerning Printing and Exposing, as has been of late, both
by one sde and the other, which I shall explain, and give you my sense, thus,
That I have and can honestly and safely testify against such manner of
Exposing as has been of late by both, as that which ought not to be amongst
brethren, who are to dwell together in Unity; yet if the Lord will make use of,
or permit an Instrument to lay open and expose a People for their
Unfaithfulness, and for their treacherous dealing with him, who shall then
withstand the Lord in what he does, who does whatsoever he will? and though men
cannot see it so, yet whatsoever the Lord does, is well, and he is and will be
glorified over all; and if he be not glorified in men's Salvation, he will be
glorified in their Destruction, as he was upon hard hearted Pharaoh and his
people when he wrought that mighty deliverance for Israel; for the Scripture
says concerning Pharaoh, For this same purpose have I raised thee up, that I
may show my Power in thee, and that my Name might be declared throughout all
the Earth. Thus you may see, in one sense we may safely condemn such manner of
exposing, dividing, tending and tearing Member from Member, as that which ought
not to be among Brethren, as the Apostle mentions in one of his Epistles, These
things, my Brethren, ought not so to be; so say I, Brethren ought not to
differ, fall out, and be at strife, but all rather dwell together in Love and
Amity, being all of the same Mind, and of the same Judgment; and this is very
aimable, and a comely thing for Brethren thus to dwell together in Unity; but
if that a People who have professed themselves to be in the greatest Unity of
any People besides, and all to believe the same things, professing the one
Faith, one Lord Jesus Christ, and one Hope of their Calling, if this People, or
a part of them shall be found in Error, and certain men from among themselves
shall arise, and shall teach and assert things contrary to sound Doctrine, and
shall continue and persist to maintain such corrupt and erroneous Principles
and Doctrines, to the infecting and corrupting of one another, so far as to the
Denying of our only Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, and if for this their great
Degeneracy, and contemning of the Word and Testimony of Jesus, God shall
immediately concern and raise up some from amongst themselves, to correct,
reprove, reprehend, and sharply to testify against the same, in the zeal and
fervency of their Spirits, and also to withdraw from their Fellowship and
Communion; and whether it be not right and justifiable in the sight of God so
to do, I leave to the Wise in heart to judge.

Thus you may plainly see I have and can freely condemn the Printing, Exposing,
Seperating and Dividing one from another in the Church of Christ, and amongst
Brethren, that it ought not to be, but in that other sense, as I have told you,
if the Lord does it for a good end and purpose, to make manifest Hypocrites and
evil Workers, who live in Error, and to search out the hidden Workers of
Darkness, and the Hypocrites in Zion, and who profess themselves to be Jews,
and are not, but do lie, and for the laying open Heresy and Error, that has
long lain undiscovered, that so those that are approved of him may be made
manifest; and if he will raise up some from amongst our selves to do this Work,
which you account so ill a Work, yet in this sense, as the Lord does it, in
order to effect and bring to pass his own Purpose, I may not condemn it, it
being the Day that I have much wished for, that those that are approved might
be manifest, and no place found where the Worker of Iniquity might hide his
head; and the Day is come and coming* that will find them out of all the dark
Places and lurking Holes.

So, with little more, I shall conclude, desiring the Lord, if it be his Will,
to turn your hearts to him, and to work a true Reformation and change in your
Minds, that so the thick Vail of Darkness and Error, that is over many of your
hearts, may be effectually rent off and taken away, and that you may come to
know the holy Covering of God, and to put on the Lord Jesus Christ, and to be
covered with his Righteous Power and Spirit, and then I know you will not be
found naked, but might be able to stand before the Son of Man.

Now as to any amongst you who may be conscientiously concerned, as to me, if
any such there be, I am able to give a further or more full and satisfactory
Account of my leaving you again, if desired; and as to my going to and fro for
my own satisfaction, which ye render so ill, and as being now worse than
before, and that it bespeaks me and us of an unstable Mind, and wavering too
and again, for my late condescension in coming so near you (as I was willing to
come as near to you as the Truth would possibly admit) and that in love, for
the Bodies sake, the Church; but how I am the worse for so doing, I may tell
you, and what my Experience has been since I came last amongst you, or rather
that you came to us in your appointed time, for I never did see my way clear to
come to you; indeed I can own, in one sense, I am not the better for my being
last with you; and though it was not long that I was with you, yet I now think
it was long enough, and shall truly and honestly declare my experience, and how
I found it in that time, which thing I kept secret to my self, but I minded it
well, and how the Lord was to me in that time, and whether I enjoyed him now
amongst you, so as I did before, when in the Separation, as knowing what he had
been unto me then; and this Experience I have, and am now free to tell it, That
the nearer I came to you, the Lord he withdrew himself the further from me,
and I wanted those Soul refreshing Comforts that I had from him before; and as
I withdrew my self again from you, the Lord immediately drew near to me again,
and then my Love and Zeal began to freshen and increase more to him, which
(while near to you) began to ^^^^ten and decline, because I was not to sit down
with you in an evil secure state, nor ^ould I sit down with you in the state I
saw you in, nor was it ever in my heart so to do, as knowing certainly, if I
did, the Lord would wholly withdraw himself from me, and shut up, and
withold his wonted goodness from me, and whom my Soul was still concerned
for, that I might not loose him, nor do that which might give him cause again
to hide his face. These things I made Observation of betwixt the Lord and my
own Soul. Also, a a little before I left you, the Lord set it clearly before
me, your unprofitable state, and where you are, and what your lot and portion
will be, and mine also, if I continued with you, so as to sit down and have
fellowship with you in that dark evil corrupt state, which the Lord knows, and
my Soul knows, you are now sitten down in, and he hastened me much before I
left you, as Lot out of Sodom, To haste, and flee as for my Life, and to save
my self from such a Generation as are out of the Faith of the Lord Jesus
Christ, which I can now with greater boldness affirm, than I could before,
having had the advantage to hear and see the second time again for my self, and
which was the main and great cause of my being amongst you the second time,
that so I might have a more perfect knowledge of these things, and like the
Noble Boraeam, desired to find and search out, whether these thing were
altogether so, as the Cry and Report has been: And why should any blame me for
this, or resent so ill, my coming and going to and fro, as being under a Soul
concern? I wish that many amongst you, that are settled on their Lees, were in
like manner so concerned, and that I could see many going to and fro; for its
said, In the latter days they shall run to and fro, and Knowledge shall
increase. And seeing I came to seek the good amongst you, (had it been to be
found) and not to spy out your liberty in Christ, and bring you into Bondage,
yet was willing to spy out whether ye have indeed the Faith of our Lord Jesus
Christ; and finding that you have it not, am warned to withdraw, and have no
fellowship with such as cannot bear to have the Lord Jesus Christ preached
amongst you, the which advantage I have had by my being last with you, seeing
plainly, that its not as you have endeavored to make People believe, viz. That
its not for the Testimonies sake, that ye deny these in the Separation, but for
this dividing Spirit, and for reviling and exposing; But this cover is now
stripping off, and will not longer hide you, but you must now appear as year,
and that ye are of those that love not the Lord Jesus Christ, as your doings
have and do manifestly declare.

Elias Burling.

Postscript.
ANd whereas it was questioned by some in the time of my being last amongst
you, Whether I did really intend and desire to come into Unity with you again?
To which I can say, I did innocently and truly desire it, could I have so done,
and not have joined with men of evil and corrupt Principles and Practices, who
I see, had and have free liberty to preach and pray in your Meetings without
let or interruption, but such as bring the Doctrine of Christ, and set him
before you as the Object of your Faith, cannot have the like liberty, but their
Doctrine and Testimony opposed and contradicted time after time.

Also, whereas it may look strange that I lay so deep a Charge upon some, as
their Denying our only Lord and Savior Jesus Christ; I say, I know none that
have done it in express words, for in pretense they own him largely, but by
necessary and undeniable Consequences they have done it, as can well be made
appear, not only by what mine Ears have heard, but by many more Ear Witnesses
with me, which these Instances following are Evidences, viz. 1 st, Their
Preaching publicly, That the Jews did not see the Worlds Savior; which
naturally is to deny Jesus of Nazareth, the Son of Mary, Abraham and David, to
be he, and contrary to his own words, John 6. and this received by the said
public Meetings and at the same time the contrary plain Scripture Doctrine and
Testimony, denied and opposed, as also at the next Monthly Meeting. 2 dly, The
Testimony of G. Hutcheson, That Christ is now in Heaven glorified in the true
Nature of Man, was opposed by several Persons in the public Meeting, and said
Meeting owned them therein. 3 dly, In that G. H. has been publicly opposed,
in testifying, That the great Mystery of Godliness, (1 Timothy 3.16.) was God
manifest in the Flesh of Christ, (the one had applied it wholly to God being
manifest in our Flesh to destroy sin) and by one called a Novelty, and said, G.
H's Interpretation of said Scripture, was a Perversion, and giving his own, and
a wrong Construction upon it, and an adding thereunto; and with hands stretched
out, Threatened him with the Plagues in Rev. 22.18. and this in a public
Meeting, and no one that I heard reproved him for it, but rather justified him
therein. These, with diverse other Instances that might be given, are Proof
sufficient, that you are greatly ignorant of Jesus Christ, whom God raised
again from the Dead, and has set him at his own Right Hand of Power, having
also appointed a Day in which he will judge the World, even by the Man Christ
Jesus, of which he has given assurance to all men, in that he raised him from
the Dead; and whomsoever have the true Faith, believe, that God raised from the
dead, and that he was received up into Glory, That he that was dead is still in
being, and that he ever lives, and shall come again in the Day appointed to
judge all Mankind; but this is denied by them whom we are separated from,
witness H. W. lately, when G H. was saying, That it was his Belief, (...) that
same Jesus that ascended out of the sight of his Disciples into Heaven, should
outwardly appear again, and that he should see him with the Eyes of his
Resurrection body, which H. Willis wondered at, and with Hands lifted up, said,
He never expected any such thing.

Now I have this advantage by my being last with you, That whereas you have
endeavored to make me and others believe, That its not for the Doctrine or
Testimony's sake that you have denied us, but for Reviling, Printing and
Exposing the Faults and Weaknesses of Brethren, which I also am against as well
as you, and have and can condemn it, so far, That it ought not to be done
against the true Brethren and Israel of God; but Antichrists, and all
Antichristian Practices and Principles are and ought to be born witness and
testified against in the Zeal of the Lord; so that this false Cover and
Pretense will not longer do, it being already seen through by many of the
honest hearted, whose Eyes are so far opened, that they begin now to see you,
and there is no hiding of your Iniquities and Hypocrisy, with this or the
other pretense, for the Lord is about thoroughly to search his Camp, and to rip
off every false Cover, till he has said all open, naked and bare; and there
shall be nothing able to hide any from the face of the Lamb but the pure Power,
and heavenly divine Covering of the holy Spirit of the Lord; therefore it
concerns us all and every particular to see to it, whether we have got this
Covering on, yea or nay.

E. B.

THE END

