A present from a far Country, (...) People of New England.

I. A Great Voice from Heaven, to (...) Part of the Earth: In an Excellent
LETTER FULL OF Divine Rarities. Lately Written from a Terrible PRISON in
FRANCE; By a Pious CONFESSOR of the Reformed Religion, Once an Inhabitant of
this Country. [With some late Remarkables, of the PERSECUTION, upon the
REFORMED in that Kingdom.]

II. The Golden Bells of the Great High Priest, heard from Heaven, through the
Land. OR, Meditations upon the Methods of Grace, wherein a Few Faithful Persons
may be the Happy Instruments of Delivering a LAND, from all its Iniquities and
Calamities.

BOSTON, Printed by B Green, and J. Allen, for Michael Perry, at his Shop,
under (...) West End of the Townhouse. School.

A Short Account OF THE PERSECUTION Lately Harassing the French Protestants.
Introducing, An Excellent LETTER, newly, Received from one of them, at this
Time a Prisoner in France: but formerly an Inhabitant of New England.
F RANCE having had the Rays of Evangelical Truth shot from Heaven into it,
the Professors of the Truth have all along there Suffered a wonderful
Persecution from its Popish Enemies. None but the Books, to be shortly Opened,
at the Coming of our Lord, can contain the Terrible and Barbarous Things, which
His Confessors, in that Kingdom, have Suffered from the Spirit of Antichrist
working in Idolaters. One single Church of Protestants there, within a little
while, afforded Sixteen Thousand Martyrs for the Protestant Religion, and many
afforded Five Thousand Seven, Eight, Nine, Twelve, Thirteen Thousand a piece.
However, in the midst of these Martyrdoms, the Almighty Spirit of the Lord
Jesus Christ, so disposed the Hearts of men to Serve Him, that above Two
Thousand One Hundred and Fifty Churches were Gathered; in many of which, there
were above Ten Thousand Communicants; yea, persons of the Highest Quality
Espoused their Cause; Princes did submit unto the Golden Scepter of the
Messiah, in their Holy Discipline; and Nobles became the Pastors and Elders of
their Churches.

But God granting a Time of Rest, unto those his Flocks, they soon Degenerated.
Such a Degeneracy, and such a Dissolution quickly broke in upon them, that the
Last of their National Synods, held at Loudun, 1659 in an Act, called for an
Extraordinary Humiliation, to Wrestle with God, for the Bowels of His
Compassions, which had been forfeited, by Aggravated Sins, and beseech Him, to
extinguish the Fire of His Indignation, which menaced His poor Churches, with
the severest Chastisement: for they saw with Horror, all sorts of Sins against
the Divine Law, daily multiplied, so that they had cause to fear, Left God
should pour out the (...) of His Fury upon the Land without sparing His poor
Church, (...) separated from the World, by the (...) is too often plunged in
the Corruptions of that Age in which it lives. Behold! now, those Threatened
Vials of the Wrath of God, poured out!

It was by the Loyalty of the Protestants, that the present French King,
obtained the Quier Possession of his Crown; and their Adversaries at the Court,
made the very Services of the Protestants unto their King an Argument and
Occasion for their Destruction. The Popish Clergy suggested, That if the
Protestants were to considerable, as to Save the State from Ruin, they might
as easily Ruin the State at another Time, in siding with its Enemies. An
Extirpation of the Reformed Religion in France, was hereupon Resolved; and the
most horrible and barbarous things that can be imagined, wore after the year
1660. done, in pursuance of this Resolution. All the Cruelties and Butcheries
perpetrated by the Children of Cain, in former Ages, hardly equal, the
Persecution, which now sell upon the Reformed, like an irresistible Tempest:
The Characters of such a Persecution, animated by the most Exalted Spirit of
Hell, are too terrible to be described, otherwise, than as the Painter
Portray'd the Spanish Inquisition, besmearing his whole Table with Blood.

The Reformed saw, their great Idol, breaking the public Faith unto them, in
all possible Instances; Their Temple one after another Demolished; Their
Pastors Banished; every Office Tendered inaccessible to them; and Justice denied
'em, even in all the common Rights of Humanity it self. When the project was
grown ripe for it, the Leviathan at the Louvre, Turned loose a vast Army of
Dragoons, upon those Flocks of the Reformed, whom the Foregoing Temptations had
not conquered. The Leaders of those New Apostles, first Summoned the
Inhabitants of the several Towns together, to let 'em know, 'Twas the Kings
pleasure, they should all Turn Roman Catholics. The poor people Humbly
Replied, They would gladly Sacrifice their Lives and Estates in the Service of
their King, but their Consciences could be at the Dispose of none but the Great
God alone. These Dragons then furiously possessed themselves of the several
Towns, and were every where Quartered in the Houses of the Reformed, like
Locusts devouring all before them. When these Devourers, had first wasted the
Estates of this Distressed people of God, they then fell upon their Persons.
After the most Bitter Execrations, these direful Tormentors, would multiply
Torments upon the Martyrs now in their fierce Hands, whereof, even the General
Kinds, could not in many pages be Enumerated. They would hang up the good
people, by their Feet, and making of great Smokes under them, almost choke
them: If then the Sufferers would not sign an abjuration, they tossed them to
and fro into great Fires, till they were nigh Roasted; and somesimes plunge
them down into deep Wells, till they were half Drowned there. Others they
stripped Naked, and pricked 'em with pins, and Nails, and Bodkins, till they
could endure no more; and others they dragged about, by the Noses, with Pincers
holding of them. Some they kept Waking, by cruel Pinches, and Noises, for many
Days and Nights together, till they utterly thereby lost their Wits; and
others that were sick, they intollerably vexed, with Drums continually Beating
in their Chambers. They bound the men in some Houses, and Ravished their Wives,
and their Daughters, before their Eyes: In others, they pulled off the Nails,
and scorched and scalded the Feet, of the Saints of God; and used a Thousand
other Cruelties, which none but the Wit of Devils could have Invented for them.
So dismal was the success of this Draconick Persecution, that in a little
while, the Great Scourge who did all this, coined Medals, whereon he bragged,
That he had Reduced no less than Twenty Hundred Thousand Calvinists from the
Protestant Religion. If none of these Cruelties, could conquer the minds of the
Faithful, they were cast into hideous Dungeons, where they pined away to Death.
If any did continue Faithful to the Death, their Dead Bodies, be their Port, or
Sex, what it would, were Dragged naked through the Streets, and after a thousand
Indignities, thrown upon the Dunghils. But if any were caught Flying away,
there were all possible Additions made unto the Cruelties employed upon them.

Nevertheless, many Thousands of Protestants flying away, found a merciful
Providence assisting of their Escape: and some of the Escaped, got over to
New England, where before they came, there were Prayers made with many Solemn
Fastings for them; and after they came, they met with further Kindnesses, from
our Churches.

Among these Refugees, there was one, who became an Inhabitant of Boston in
New England. His Employment was that of a Sailor; but Sailing from hence, about
four or five years ago he fell into the Hands of his Idolatrous Country men.
Those Persecuting Idolaters, immediately required him, to Go to Mass; but for
his constant Refusal of that Impiety, he has ever since been undergoing many
Martyrdomes. From the midst of his Miseries, he writes an Excellent Letter,
unto his Wife, in these parts of the World; a Letter breathing such an
Excellent Spirit, that many serious Christians here, who have heard it Read
unto them, have judged it would be a general Advantage unto the Interests of
Religion among us, to Translate and Publish it. What I now do in publishing it,
I do but as the Incomparable Jurien, has done, who very often does insert in
his Pastoral Letters to the French Churches, a Copy of such Things as these,
newly written by some of their Sufferers, without any fear of adding to their
Sufferings; I do it also with the Leave of the Consistory of Elders in the
French Church in Boston: And I do it, with all due caution and concealment, of
any circumstances, that may procure any damage to the poor Prisoner of the
Lord: There having been a greater hazard unto his concerns in his own Writing,
and Sending the Letter, than in our thus Publishing of it.

Let the Churches of New England then Receive this letter, as written by one
that was himself become a New England man: a Dweller in our Neighborhood, a
Sharer in our Charity. Let them admire the Glorious Operations of the Spirit of
the Lord Jesus Christ, Enabling a poor man, of a mean Education and Occupation,
thus to Glorify Him. Let them adore the Distinguishing Benignity of Heaven, in
our preservation from having yet fallen under the Fury of Gallick Oppressors.
Let them consider with Astonishment, how few among us, are able to Deny
ourselves of all things, like that Confessor, whose rare Example is here set
before us. Let them cry mightily unto God, for such Overturning Dispensations,
as may Restore Liberty, not only to this our Brother in Adversity, but also to
all the French Flocks, that are groaning under their Bondage. Let them
Entertain the Holy Counsels here offered, with a due Regard unto the Emphasis
of the Person who writes them, and of the Prison where he writes them. Syrs,
It Is not without a special Providence of God, that you are thus Addressed.

But while I thus Tender unto the Churches of New England, the Rich Monument of
Christianity, here faithfully Translated, by Mr. Nehemiah Walter, the worthy
Minister of Roxbury, I have doubtless herein merited a Leave to Express, unto
the French Protestants among us, our Concern, that there may not be found among
Them, any thing, that shall be Contrary to, and Condemned by, that Spirit, by
which one of these Number has been thus Inspired. I take Leave then, to say,

Mes Freres,

L'Esprit du Christianisme, Exprime par La Lettre de nostre Ami, est fort
Eclatant, et glorieux.

Par la Publication de cette Lettre, traduite en la Langue Angloise, nos
Anglois verront parmi vous, une tres grande Demonstration, de la Religion
Chretienne.

Et nous prions, que cette Demonstration soit bien Fortisie, par vestre
Diligence et Vigilance, que Comme Celui, qui vous a appellez, est Saint, vous
aussi Pareillement Soyez Saints en toute vostre Conversation; (...) que vous
rendiez honorable en toutes (...) Doctrine de Dieu nostre Sauveur. Et Cela
deplus Premierement; Par une zele fort Exemplair' a Sanctifier Le Your de
Dimanche. Par ce moyan vostre Profession de Foy, sera bien test, comme une
Arbre (...) pres des (...) d'eaux courantes qui rend Son fruict en sa Saison,
et le (...) duquel ne flestrit point.

Monsieur Mestrezat, Le sameux Ministre de Charenton, se plaignit de son Temps,
que Le Dimanche, de deux Assemblees, L' une Estoit delaissee de la plus part,
et Cela seulement, pour diner en Leurs Maisons, avee plus de Commodite, ou pour
aller, passer Leur Temps en Jeux, ou Oisivite. Au sujet dequoy cet Homme de
Dieu clairvoyant, S' Exprime ainsi; Certes, mes Freres, nous donnons grand
sujet au Seigneur, de les nous ofter totalement, (...) nous priver d' une Grace
si grande et si precieuse, puisque nous en abusons tant. L'Evenement, n' a que
trop accord avec ses Sentimens si Justes et Saints. It est a esperer, qu'
apres une providence si Demonstrative et parlante, vous cherirez de plus
tendres Esgards a cette Journee Saint, (...) ces Exercises Divines.

Secondement; Par une vie reglee selon les Loix de la Sobrieta Chretienne. Le
bean predicateur, Monsieur Du Bole, a plus d une fois decrie la vie Dissolve,
Libertine, et debauchee des plusieurs Protestans de vostre patrie: Mais nous
nous (...) persuadez, quant a vous, bien aimez, de (...) et Convenables a Saint.

En Troisieme Lieu; Par one vie Tranquille, it paisible. Des Brebis, chassez
dans les Deserts, comme vous, se doivent revetir d' un Esprit, de Paix et
douceur: et par cela, tous Connoistront, que vous estes les Disciples de Jesus
Christ, si vous avez de L'amour L'un pour L'autre.

En Fin; par une soin fort raisonnable, de fair maintenant ce que vous
voudriez avoir eu faite a Pheure de la mort, et de prendre a present Cousil de
la mort, qui ne vous trompera pas.

On a raison, mes Freres, d' attendre, ces chooses, des gens que se sont
declarez, des persecutex, et qui ont pour la Religion Laisses Leur patrie,
Leurs Biens, et rout, ce qu'ils avoient de plus cher au monde.

C'est pourquoy Mon dessein, en donnant au public cette Lettre de nostre Friar;
n'est pas Seulement pour vostre Defense, mais aussi pour vostre avertisement.

Voici, vostre Compagnon de Guerre, qui Endure Les Travaux comme un bon Soldat
de Jesus Christ, vous Exhort, de Combattre le bon combat, et d' estre fidelles
jusques a la mort: et vous Censure, si vous ne perseverez point jusques a la
Fin.

Or, Le Dieu de paix, vous rende accomplis en toute bonne oeuvre, pour fair sa
volonte, faisant envous ce qui est agreeable devant Lui, par Jesus Christ,
auquel soit glory aux Siecles de Siecles. Amen.

The Letter.
My Dear Wife.
THis is the sixth time that I write to you, since the Lord has changed my
condition of a Gally Slave into that of a Prisoner, without having received any
of your Answers. I am ready to believe that it is not your fault, and that you
have written as many to me, as I have done to you, without having received
mine. The Distance and Difficulties are so great, that we can have no mutual
Communications by Writing: and the Devil and men are so animated against me,
that they employ all their power and industry to hinder me from receiving any
External Consolations; and to speak the truth, experience shows me that herein
they succeed; and if they could oblige God to deprive me of Internal
Consolation they would do it with pleasure; but God is Righteous in all his
ways, and full of Goodness in all his works: as he sees me deprived of all
humane relief, he gives in unto me of Divine; if his Goodness and Justice will
not permit him to leave the young Ravens without their food, will his Love and
Mercy abandon a Soul, which he had so often hindered from falling into Hell?
especially after he has made him taste the First Fruits and fore-tasts of
Sovereign Blessedness? no, God forsakes not the works of his hands; he is
faithful and just to accomplish his Promises. Therefore I will say, that in
vain they strive to destroy the work of the Holy Ghost. The Almighty Power of
God is too much interested therein, to suffer them to attain the end which they
propose, they labor more and more to surmount my patience, and conquer my
perseverance, to the end they might triumph over my Faith; but alas! I look
upon my enemies with grief of heart, and my Faith which is sustained by the
hope of Love, despises generously the assaults which they make upon it. Nay, My
Dear Wife, they at present attack me more ardently than ever; the Eternal God
exercises me as an Old Soldier, although I am but a little while since Listed
into his Company. I intend to continue to you the Journal of my Persecutions
since the last March, I mean the abridgment thereof; for to tell you the whole,
I neither can, nor may do, for many reasons. I lived pretty quiet in my Prison
at the Cittadelle, during twenty three, months, wherein I have been alone in a
little Chamber. There was under me a poor Believer in a Dungeon, with two
chains, because he Sang Psalms too loud. It was not perceived that I spoke to
him; for our Persecutors were not willing that we should hold communion
together. I did however speak to him; but very seldom; for he is a man whom God
has afflicted to the Loss of common sense. They came to understand that I spoke
to him, which obliged my Overseers to change my place; but I abode but a little
while in this Second Lodging; for they perceived that I Sang also, and
commanded me many times, to be silent, on pain of being put into the Dungeon;
but I could not obey them. However I Sang very low; but the Cittadelle being
countermined, and a great Cistern in the middle of the Armoury, the least noise
that can be made is heard every where in the Officers Chambers. They then
caused me to be put into the Dungeon; but I abode there only thirty five days;
for the great Provost came to the Cittadelle, with two Guards to fetch me and
the forementioned poor afflicted person, and brought us hither.

It is meet that I excite you to bless God with me, my Dear Heart: for in the
midst of all my troubles the Eternal Exercises an admirable care about all that
concerns me. You may understand that when I was Aboard the Gally, I employed my
self in Copying out some good Sermons, which my Friends gave me. I had about
twenty of them, one half whereof I left in an house Ashore, that if they came
to search me I might not lose them all at once. In going into the Cittadelle,
they took from me seven of the Sermons, with an English Bible, and an
Exposition of the Fifty First Psalm in English, and another little English
Book, all which remained at the Majors till I came out. As I came out, I asked
for them, they gave them to the Provost: God touched his heart; for when I was
in the Boat, he gave them to me, and as I went into the Fort, no one took them
from me, though they saw them; only they kicked them with their feet; and so they
are still with me, by the same goodness of my God. Sing therefore to him, My
dear Wife, a Song of Praise and Acknowledgment; for our enemies are not willing
that we should have either Book or Inkborn.

But, to continue the Story of my Persecution. They brought me hither, and put
me into a little hole on the top of a Tower of the Dungeon, where there is a
Guard; the window they had plaistred up, that there was only an hole of four
Inches to let in the Light to see to eat. I was very ill in that place, but the
Devil thought I was too well of it: and indeed I was magnificently
accommodated, to what I am at present. I abode there only fifty one days; the
twentieth day of August, on Monday about ten a Clock in the morning, the
Commander came himself, to fetch me out, with my Clothes. Here I willingly
confess my weakness, for I wept. The Commander ordered them to search my poor
Straw Bed; they did it, but without success for the Eternal hid all that was
therein, namely, an English Bible, a Quire of Large Paper, whereof this is
some, a Bag, wherein was my Pocket Bock, and Inkborn; and now, my Dear Wife,
will you not praise the King of our Souls, who does such strange things? I
publish them, to the end God may be blessed for them: for if they had found the
fore mentioned things, they would have overwhelmed us with cruel Afflictions:
the Commander is a man without pity, who will let us Blood, with a Pistol
Shot, when we are Sick. They made me come down from the Tower wherein I was,
and go out of the Dungeon: this Dangeon is encompassed with a Dry Ditch; the
Gases of it are a Drawbridge; there are two great Towers at the Entry. After I
had passed this Bridge, they made me go down by a Ladder into the Ditch, where
they threw all my poor Clothes. The Six Soldiers that conducted me with their
Arms, took the Ladder and set it up against a Tower, wherein is an hole like a
little Port hole. This done, they bid me go up thither; and the Officers who
were upon the Bridge, and Spectators of this Tragedy, told me, that I must go
in, my feet foremost; so that I was fain to crawl in at the hole, the Wall
being about eight foot thick. I entered into that charming Habitation; I found
my self envelop'd with profound Darkness; but the Eternal Created that, as well
as the Light, so that I little matter it. Now comes a Second Alarm for me: my
Straw Bed could not come in at the hole; the Straw was fain to be taken out by
little and little, in the presence of the fore mentioned Gentlemen, who looked
down into the Ditch. Ah! Eternal God, said I, thou art my All; as thou art wont
to do Wonders, conduct me still, that I may still prosper. I addressed my self
to the Officer who Led me; I declared to him all that was in my Straw-Bed; I
prayed him to save all that was there; promising to recompense him; he accepted
the Offer: he himself emptied the bed before the Gentlemen; and caused it, to
be carried up to me by little and little; but he kept a little of the Straw,
with all my concerns, in my Straw Bed, and brought them to me himself Admire
here the Protection of the King of Kings! A man I am unknown to him, and
besides poor, and in Chains; judge if any other than God could make such a
charge in the heart all at once? therefore give Praises to God for it; but
Praises of Obedience as well as or Adoration. O, My dear Heart, how many
testimonies do I receive of the powerful protection of my God! it is this that
swallows up my Soul in a River of chaste delight in the midst of all the evil
they make me suffer; the thought of His Goodness is so much the more sweet, in
that he causes it to be frequent and sensible, to the forcing my very flesh to
glorify him with joy. This is what cannot be comprehended, unless experienced!

Here I am then, without Light, in a place full of stinking ordure. But I
undergo a double Martyrdom, in having this poor distracted Believer with me;
for this two years he has not combed himself: his hair is clotted together,
full of ordure; he will not change his Linen which the King allows him: so that
he stinks enough to make a man cast up his heart; those that bring us our meat,
abhor the smelt which is here. I do all that I can to make him shift himself,
but he will not be persuaded, nor suffer his hair to be cut; notwithstanding they
make me eat with him, to aggravate my Servitude. I confess, I suffer more with
this man, and because of him, than by all that my Enemies can do unto me; his
stink is such as cannot be expressed; but besides this, he now speaks not at
all, and it is now a long while since he has spoken to any body; this is the
Sorrowful Society which the Eternal now gives me, after a solitude of two years
and three months; this man had a good Wit, and as is said, was a Scholar: but
alas! he has only the Shape of a man; at the Cittadelle, he spoke very little,
and that which he said, showed him to be crazed; the Almighty God give us
humble hearts, that his Grace make us not proud; for this is the last Sin that
we have to combat with: Pride sometimes rises from virtue it self.

Thus you see where I am in the Story of my Sufferings at this day. Now, My
dear Wife, I pray you to let me know the State of my dear Children, if they be
yet alive, and what Dispositions to virtue are found in them; for though they be
yet young, we may however judge of them by their inclination; and the
Countenance, which is the mirror of the Soul, oftentimes discovers what we
are. I know this rule is not always general, nor do I give it to you as
infallible. I exhort you to be very careful to give them a Christian Education:
You should use all diligence to learn them to read and write, to pray to God,
and Sing his Praises. O the charming Employment for an heart enamoured with
God, to be Singing his Praises! Therefore my dear Heart, neglect not this;
labor to be their mother a second time, by endeavoring with all your might,
that they may be Born again by grace: All the world talk of Regeneration, but
there are only few that know it by experience. Men know how to say that
Nicodemus was gross in his conceptions of it, tho a Doctor of the Law; but it
often happens that those who thus speak, feel the efficacy thereof no better
than he. Know then, that it is not the corporal or animal life which is
renewed, but that of the Soul; the affections, desires and thoughts are
sanctified. When a person is Regenerate, he aims only at the Glory of Christ;
the sentiments of the heart are conformed to the light of the Spirit, that is
to say, the love of our heart is conformed to the Law of God in spite of all
the remainders of our Corruption, which abide in the inferior part of our
Soul, which the Scripture calls the Flesh: Endeavor then to obtain this
New Birth for your self, and your Children, without which you can never see
God: that you may successfully labor herein, I pray Mr. M. your dear Cousin to
send you Mr. Placette's Moral of the Gospel, which will much help you herein;
this Book is a Glass in which you should behold your self. I know that you do
as the greatest part of your Sex, I mean, seldom read; as if women had not a
Soul to instruct and save as well as men. I therefore exhort you to read that
Book with attention. You never have seen it, for which reason you should be
more ambitious to read it speedily and attentively. If you love me, give me
this testimony of your amity in obeying me herein. I sincerely aim at your, and
your Childrens Salvation. I Recommend my self unto the Prayers of your Faithful
P astor, as well in Private, as in Public. I salute the whole Congregation,
and every one in particular. Pray always, Mr. Dear Heart, for my (...), That
God would give me the Grace, to suffer, the Breaking of my Bones, the Roasting
of my Flesh at the Fire, and my Marrow on the Live-coals, and to be cast into a
Burning Furnace, rather than to commit any this unworthy of His Glorious
Presence. Know, that will never forget you, as long as I Live; I pray God for
the progress of Sanctification, in you, and our Little children. I am, Your
Faithful Husband.

A Brief DISCOURSE, Made unto the Great and General Assembly of the Province of
the Massachusetts Bay, New England, 21 d. 8 m. 1697.
Behold, I bring you Good News of Great Joy, for all the People of New England.
You have it in LEV. IV. 21. A Sin-Offering for the Congregation.
I Behold no less than a Congregation of our whole Province, met at this Time,
in one GREAT AND GENERAL ASSEMBLY. The most Happy and Joyful Tidings, that ever
were uttered in any Assembly are now to be brought unto YOU, O Congregation of
the Lord.

Never did any Sinful congregation more want a Sacrifice, to Appease the
Exasperated. Indignation of Heaven: Our multiplied So have so provoked the God
of Heaven, that we are Consumed by his Anger, and by His Wrath we are Troubled:
The offended Majesty of Heaven, is every day Siezing on our Friends, and
Siezing on our Fields, and Siezing on our Ships, and Siezing on our Stores, and
Siezing on our very Lives, for Sacrifices. But you are now Entertained, with
the Advice, of a Sacrifice for the Congregation; a Sacrifice, whereto if we do
in a right manner Apply our selves, out God will call for no further Sacrifices
from among us, to Atone His Incensed Majesty: Our Adversity will soon be turned
into Prosperity; and we shall Sing that Song, O Lord, I will praise thee, for
though thou wast Angry with me, thine Anger is turned away, and thou will comfort
me.

Wherefore I ask your Attention to a Discourse, on that very Important

CASE.
What is the Sacrifice provided by God for His People, Collected and Considered
in a whole Congregation; and how may a Congregation obtain the Benefit of that
Sacrifice?

Methinks, one may see a peculiar circumstance in our New-English Congregation,
to Invite our most affectionate and Importunate Application unto such a
Sacrifice! The Sin Offering for the Congregation, was to be, Burnt without the
Camp: With regard whereto, the Apostle said, in Heb. 13. 13. Let us go forth
unto Jesus without the Camp, bearing His Reproach. Syrs, The First Planters of
New England were driven forth without the Camp; we arrive to this Plantation,
Bearing the Reproach of our zeal for our JESUS, in all His Offices. What shall
we now do without the Camp? What, but Fly to the Sin Offering for the
Congregation, which without the Camp we are Entertained withal?

Our Discourse on this CASE, will come to a comfortable Issue, in these
Conclusions.

Conclusion I.
We have Sinned against the God that made us, and our Sin loudly and sadly
calls for a Sacrifice unto the God against whom we have Sinned.

The Blessed God has given a Law to His Creatures; and a Law Armed with a
Penalty. Without a Law, we cannot suppose a Sin committed; and without a
Penalty, we cannot suppose a Law significant. If this Law be violated, the Just
God has obliged Himself, that the Penalty of it shall be Executed. The
Punishment of Sin is upon this presupposal, become a Necessary Thing; It Is
Necessarily expected from that Holy God, who, as we read in Exodus 34. 7 Will by
no means clear the Guilty; and who, as we read, Psalm. 5. 4. Is not a God that
has Pleasure in wickedness. The Natural Conscience of man therefore Terrifies
him, with such an Expectation; God has written it upon the Souls of men, with a
Pen of Iron, and a point of a Diamond; Men that are never so Barbarous, are
smitten with Apprehensions of a VENGEANCE, that Sin must be followed withal.

But now, the Subject, which undergoes the Punishment of Sin, is therein made a
Sacrifice for Sin. God becomes not Favorable unto the Sinner, until His
Glories, which have been Denied by Sin, be Displayed in such a Punishment of
Sin, as His Threatenings have denounced. Now the Punishment of Sin, infers and
inflicts DEATH, on the miserable Subject which it falls upon. The Punishment of
Sin, is nothing less than that, in Genesis 2. 17. Thou shall surely Die: Nothing
less than that in Ezekiel. 18. 4. The Soul that Sinnneth shall Die: Nothing less
than that in Romans 6. 23. The Wages of Sin is Death (just contrary unto Eternal
Life.) Such is the Dignity of the Object who is by Sin Reproached, Affronted,
and Opposed, and such is the Reproach and Affront, by Sin cast upon that
Infinite Object, that nothing less than Destruction can be a due Punishment for
it. But This makes a Sacrifice! It belongs unto an Expiatory Sacrifice, to be
Destroyed: Such a Sacrifice is nothing else but, Oblatio rite Consumpta. A
Thing Suffering Destruction for Sin, to Demonstrate the Holiness of God, which
by Sin has been wronged, is therein made a Sacrifice.

Conclusion. II.
There were many Sacrifices Appointed and Accepted by the Great God, before the
coming of the Messiah; but they were of no Account any further, than as they
respected the Great Sacrifice of the Messiah to come.

Sacrifices were made unto God by the Saints of the Old Testament; but still
they were Sacrifices that God Himself had Instituted. The Custom of
Sacrificing was practiced, by the First Men that ever were; and thence Derived
unto all Nations of men. Our First Parents had their First Garments of Skins;
and there is no doubt, that the Beasts from whom the Skins were taken, had been
Slain for Sacrifices. Now, as it is said, in Genesis 3. 21. The Lord God made Coats
of Skins, and Clothed them: So it is plain, that the Lord God Approved, and
therefore He Appointed, the Sacrificing of the Things thus despoiled of their
Skins. And among all the Sons of these our First Parents, the Rite of
Sacrificing has been mentained every where, but where the Preaching of the
Gospel has Abolished it. Had it been a Dictate of the Law of Nature, the
Gospel would not have Abolished it, but Continued it, but Confirmed it, but
(...) it. No, It was God Himself, who Appointed the Sacrifices, which Repenting
Sinners then brought unto Him. It Is said of Abel, in Heb. 11. 4. By Faith be
effered unto God, a more Excellent Sacrifice. Had Sacrifices been only Humane
Inventions, they could not have been offered in Faith, nor would God have
called 'em Excellent. It may seem an Harsh Doctrine, which the Churches of New
England have hitherto owned, and the Lord Jesus Christ will Spue them out of
His Mouth, when they shall cease to own it! But it was the Doctrine of the
Blessed Martyrs, in the Days of the Marian Persecution, and of the First and
Best Reformers of the Church of England: They are the very words of the
Reverend Hooper, in his Confession of the Christian Faith; They are not only
Idolaters, which Worship and Serve Idols and Strange Gods, but also all those
which Worship and Serve the True God of Heaven, after their own Fantasy, or
after the Traditions of men, without Faith, without the Word of God, and
otherwise than God has commanded them. On this Principle [And it is a sound
one!] I say, That Sacrifices must need be no Humane Inventions; no, they were
Divine Institutions. How unsafely so ever many of the Fathers have Expressed
themselves on this point, Eusebius of Coesarea, seems to have better determined
it, That the ancient Sacrifices were not Humanely Invented, but KATA THEIAN
EPINOIAN. Accordingly, When God was Recovering the Nation of Israel, from the
Degeneracy, wherein the other Nations of the World had woefully depraved
themselves, He Renewed the command of Sacrificing, with Supernumeracy and
Innumerable Ceremonies. Indeed, by the Edicts of God unto the Nation of Israel,
Corporal Death was to Ensue upon every Act of Disobedience. Now the Lord, who
was the Law giver of Israel, Relaxed that Extremity as to many Offenses, and
for the Corporal Death of the Offender, He admitted the Death of the Sacrifice.

But of what Account were the Sacrifices thus Instituted? Alas, Tho they were
thus instituted, yet they were all Insufficient. Consult the Beginning of the
Tenth Chapter to the Hebrews, and you will see a considerable paragraph in the
Word of God, written on purpose to prove them so. Indeed, it was not consistent
with the Honor of GOD, for Him to be contented with the Blood of a Beast, as a
sufficient Expiation for the Sin of a Man. The Exact Righteousness, the
Spotless Purity, the Infinite Grace of God, are to be manifested, in a
Sacrifice for our Sin. Was the Blood of an abject Bull or Goat, any agreeable
manifestation of the Infinite Perfections of God? God published His Will, in
Thunders and Lightnings and Earthquakes, and with millions or Angels which
attended the giving of His Fiery Law. Shall the Death of a sorry Brute, be
enough to make amends, for the Rebellion of the Soul of Man against that
Sovereign Will? No man in his wits, can think so despicably of the Divine
Majesty. What proportion is there, between the Sin of a Rational Soul, and the
Blood of an Irrational Machin? How can the Butchering of contemptible Cattle be
a compensation, for the Disparagement, that Sin has done to the Almighty GOD,
who crtated all the Cattle upon a thousand Hills? The most High often Expressed
His contempt of the Sacrifices in themselves; The people that abounded in
Sacrifices, but looked not beyond the Surface of them, He Rebuked for their
Vain Oblations. [Consider Isa. 1. 11. and Psalm. 40. 6.]

And I pray, What then were the Sacrifices for? Our Great Lord-Redeemer, was to
be made a Sacrifice: And All the Sacrifices were Nothing, any further than they
were Figures of that Great Sacrifice. In the Ancient Sacrifices, God would have
a Representation of the Sacrifice, where with our Lord Redeemer would, in the
Fullness of Time, Reconcile Him unto us. This was the use and scope of the
Sacrifices; They were but Christ in a Cloud, when the Smoke of them went up in
a Cloud before the Lord.

Conclusion III.
Our Lord JESUS CHRIST, who Knew no Sin, has been made a Sacrifice; a Real,
Proper, Erpiatory Sacrifice to God, for our Sin.

There have been two sorts of Sacrifices; Excharistical, and Expiatory. None
ever Dreamed that our Lord was an Eucharistical Sacrifice: That and How, He was
an Expiatory Sacrifice, is now to be Declared. If you pursue the Hebrew word,
Phadah, To Redeem, as far as the Arabic, Fadah, You Will find, it signifies, To
Devote ones self to Death. Truly, It Was by Devoting Himself to Death, as a
Sacrifice for us, that our Lord Jesus Christ has Redeemed us, For,

First; All that belonged unto a Real and Proper Sacrifice, was done to and
found in our Lord Jesus Christ, when He Suffered for us. Particularly; Our Lord
Jesus Christ, as God and Man in One Person, as our Immanuel, as our Mediator,
is a Glorious Priest. It is our well-grounded Belief, in Heb. 8. 1. We have
such an High Priest, who is set on the Right Hand of the Throne of the Majesty
in the Heavens.

Now, this Illustrious Priest, has presented unto God, an Offering for us.
This Offering was, His Manhood; An Humane Body; as it is said in Heb. 10. 5.
Sacrifice and Offering thou would not, but a Body: And an Humane Soul; as
it is said in Isa. 53. 10. His Soul, a Trespass Offering. Yea, and this was an
Offering of Gods own Prescribing too. An Offering that God Himself has not
Prescribed, is as a Dogs Neck, and a Swines Blood unto Him; whereas the
Offering of our Lord Jesus Christ, is that whereof He could say, as, Thou, O
God, have prepared it, so, Thou, O God, have prescribed it.

But then, there most be an Altar, whereon our Priest presented this Offering.
That Altar is His Godhead. It is the Altar, which Dignifies and Sanctifies the
Offering. The Humanity of our Lord Jesus Christ, being taken up into One
Person, with the Second Person in God, the Worth of the Offering, by its
Intimate Relation to that Person, is no less than Infinite. The Blood that has
been Offered, is, as in Act. 20. 28. The Blood of God. The Life that has been
Offered, is, as in 1 John 3. 16. The Life of God. The Offering of our Lord
Jesus Christ, is therefore enough to purchase for us, all the Blessings of God:
It may be said of all the most Invaluable Blessings, Their Full Value has been
Offered for them!

Christians; You see a Priest, an Offering and an Altar, in our Lord JESUS
CHRIST, Yea, Behold, the Mystery; ONE CHRIST is All! And what is wanting to
make up a Sacrifice? One Thing more; A Sacrifice must be Cut Off. And so was
our Lord JESUS CHRIST. It is said, in Dan. 9. 26, 27, The Messiah shall be cut
off, but not for Himself; and he shall cause the Sacrifice and Oblation to
cease. All Fulfilled in our JESUS, most Punctually, and Gloriously! Was there
not a Sacrifice, when His Blood was poured out, when the Flames of Hell took
Hold of Him, when He was horribly Burnt in the Fire of the Wrath of God?

Secondly; Our Lord Jesus Christ, being thus Offered a Real and Proper
Sacrifice, did by His Deadly Sufferings make an Expiation for our Sins. The
Sorrows of our Lord Jesus Christ, when He became a Man of Sorrows, fully
answered the Intentions of an Expiatory Sacrifice.

As now;

Did an Expiatory Sacrifice Bear the Sins of the People? This was the meaning
of that Usage, in Lev. 1.4. He shall put his Hand on the Head of the Burnt
Offering, and it shall be Accepted for Him. Thus, as the Hebrew Doctors tell
us, they Transferred their Guilt from Themselves to their Victim. Well,; Such a
Sacrifice is our Lord Jesus Christ, as to Bear the Sins of His Elect. It is
said, in 1 Pet. 2. 24. He, His own self, Bare our sins, on the Tree. Though our
Lord Jesus Christ was not Culpably Guilty, yet He was Penalty Guilty, of our
Sins. It is a Rude and a Crude Speech, to say, That Christ was the Greatest
Sinner in the World; For, Christ never was a Sinner; If He had been a Sinner He
could not have been a Savior. But He became a Surety for Sinners, and therein
He became Responsible for all our Sins: All our Debts, He took upon Himself.

Again; Was the Misery due to the Sinner, laid upon the Expiatory Sacrifice?
The Order for the Sacrifices was, to Wound it, Stab it, Kill it, Flay it, Pull
it a Pieces, Wring off the Neck of it, Burn it unto Ashes. Why? The Sinner must
say, All of this, have I, by my sins deserved! Well; Such a Sacrifice is our
Lord Jesus Christ, as to Encounter that very Misery, which belonged unto us. It
is said, in lsa. 53. 4, 5. Surely, He has born our Griefs, and carried our
Sorrows, the Chastisement of our Peace was upon Him. Whatever was Essential
unto the Death, which we were to undergo for our Sinning against God, was all
undergone by our Sinless Jesus. It Is true, There are many particular miseries,
which come upon these and those Individual men for their Sins, that yet our
Lord Jesus Christ must not undergo, but then He did undergo what was
Equivalent thereunto: Yea, What He underwent was Equal to what all we have
Deserved. Indeed a world of Penal Evil does besal the Reprobate Sinner, which
is not Simply from the Curse, but from the Disposition of the Sinner under the
Curse. A total Separation from God; Blindness of mind, Hardness of Heart,
Eternity of Wretchedness, are Circumstantials, and Accidentals of the misery
due for Sin, which the Condition of the Sinner as Personally defiled with Sin,
and unable to help himself, does Expose him unto; our Lord underwent not these
unhappy circumstances: His condition rendered them not Necessary for Him. Yet,
all the Essentials of our Death He submitted unto; all the Death which the Law
imposed on Him.

Once more; Was the Expiatory Sacrifice of old Substituted in the Room of the
Sinner? That so the Sinner might Escape, the Sacrifice must Supply his place;
Nephesh tachath Nephesh, as they Expressed it; Life must go for Life, and Soul
must, go for Soul. Well; Such a Sacrifice is our Lord Jesus Christ, as to be
Substituted for Us, and to Die in our Stead, as well as for our Good. It was, as
in Math. 20. 28. To give His Life, a Rensome for many. When our Lords Dying For
us, is affirmed, the preposition, ANTI, is often Improved; a preposition, that
implies a Commutation. Yea, the Phrases for it, all over the New Testament are
such, that, until all the Greek Books under Heaven, are annihilated, the Notion
of our Lords Dying in our Place, cannot be Refused.

Finally; Was God Atoned upon an Expiatory Sacrifice? and the Criminal Released
from the Confusion that belonged unto him, and Restored unto the Compassion of
Heaven? Yes. Well; Such a Sacrifice is our Lord Jesus Christ; that our Peace
with God, is thereby obtained. We read in Romans 5 9, 10. We are Reconciled unto
God, by the Death of His Son. So, Now we are not under a Sentence of
Everlasting Death, as we were before our Believing on that Sacrifice. Now we
draw near to God, whom we see sitting on a Mercy Seat. Now we have a claim to
all that the Good Will of God has promised for the Heirs of Glory.

But is it not an Unjust Thing? -- Thirdly; No; It Is no Unjust Thing, that our
Innocent Lord Jesus Christ, should be made an Expiatory Sacrifice, for the Sins
of His Poor, Guilty, Condemned, Ungodly and Unworthy People. Indeed, A
Translation of the Punishment of Sin, by the Dispensation of God, is the very
Foundation, of the Christian, and all Revealed, Religion. And that such a
Translation may be without Iniquity in the Great God, is evident from the
Instances actually given of it, by that God who can do no Iniquity. [See Exodus
20. 5. and Lam. 5. 11. and 2 King. 23. 26, 27. and Genesis 9. 25. and 2 Samuel 21.
8, 14.] But, this Administration of Justice, is not Promiscuous. There are Two
Things Especially, that render it, a Just Thing, that here the Just Suffer for
the Unjust.

First; Our Lord Jesus Christ, in the Eternal Covenant of Redemption, freely
offered, Submitted, and Engaged, for to become our Sacrifice. Our Lord says, in
Psalm. 40. 7. Sacrifice and Offering thou did not desire; -- then said I, Lo,
I come; in the Roll of thy Book, it is written of me. The Hebrews wrote their
Contracts, Agreements, Indentures, in Rolls; The meaning of this passage may
be, that there was a Contract, or Covenant, between God, and our Lord Jesus
Christ, for His becoming a Sacrifice. The Decree of our Salvation, by the
Sacrifice of the Messiah, was the Decree of God the Son, as well as God the
Father. He was not Compelled unto the Undertaking of Redeeming us, by the
Sacrifice of Himself. Now, Volenti non sit Injuria.

Secondly; Our Lord Jesus Christ, that He might become our sacrifice, became
nearly siclated unto us. The Legal Relation between the Debtor, and the Surety,
He took on Himself. Now, as his Legal, according to the Sentence of the Wise
man, in Prove. 11. 15. He that is surety for a Stranger, shall smart for it; So,
our Lord Jesus Christ, became a Surety for a Sinner and then, Lo, He Smarts, He
Bleeds, He Dies for it. Hostages may be made a Sacrifice, for them, whom they
are given for. Our Lord Jesus Christ, gave Himself up, as a Pledge to the
Justice of God for us. Husbands and Wives are sometimes made Sacrifices, one
for another. Our Lord Jesus Christ is that One Husband, whom His Church is
(...) unto. Parents and their Children, and sometimes made Sacrifices, one for
an another. Our Lord Jesus Christ (...) our Everlasting Father. Rulers and
their Subjects, are sometimes made Sacrifices, one for another. Our Lord Jesus
Christ, is the Ruler in Israel.

Conclusion. IV.
Our Lord JESUS CHRIST, is the Illustrious Antitype of the Sacrifices used in
Israel, and particularly of that which was Commanded for the whole Congregation
of Israel.

The very Affection, That our Lord Jesus Christ has been made a Sacrifice,
proves Him to be the Antitype of all the foregoing Sacrifices. If the former
Sacrifices could have made Satisfaction to God for our Sin, He would never have
put His own, His only Begotten, His Dearly Beloved, SON unto the horrible
Grief, of being made a Sacrifice. Much more than the Epistle, to the Hebrews,
must be curt out of our Bibles, before we foregoe this Glorious Truth. And
indeed, All the True Believers, before the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, had
an Eve to the Messiah, in the Sacrifices; their Sacrifices were but so many
Remembrances of the Messiah, who was promised, one day to be Bruised, for our
Deliverances from the old Serpent. Hence we read, in Psalm. 51. 16, 17. Thou
desire not Sacrifice, thou delightest not in Burnt offering: The Sacrifices
of God are a Broken Spirit; a Broken and a Contrite Heart, O God, thou will not
despise. The special Character, which the Spirit of God put on the Messiah,
coming to be a Sacrifice for Sin, was that of, The Bruised one: Yea, the very
First Time that ever the Messiah was mentioned in the World, His being Bruised,
was the Thing proposed concerning Him. The Messiah, was to be, A Broken and
Contrite one: There never were such Heart breaking Things Encountered by any
Living, as what very felt by our Lord Jesus Christ, in the Rich Bay, when Earth
and Hell joined for the Afflicting of Him, and His Father also treated Him, as
one made a Curse for Sin. In the Agonies which then came upon Him, He cried
out, My Heart is Broken! This, This was the Sacrifice, which thou, O David,
still did six the Eye of thine Hope upon. Yea, and all the Faithful People of
God, then knew no other Hope. Thus we read, in Psalm. 130. 6. My Soul waits for
the Lord, more than they that watch for the Morning. The Messiah is
undoubtedly, The Lord, there waited for. In the Morning, the Priests that
Watched in the Temple, had their Daily Sacrifices. Yea, but the Faithful People
of God, when they brought their Sacrifices unto Him, had their Faith Waiting
for the Messiah, who was to bring a Plenteous Redemption with Him. Thus we
read, in Heb. 6. 1, 2. Repentance from Dead Works, and Faith toward God, the
Doctrine of Baptisms, and of Laying on of Hands. As Repentance, was the Thing
Taught by the Baptisms, or Washings used among the Faithful People of God; So,
Faith in the Messiah, was Taught by the Laying on of Hands. When they brought
their Sacrifices, they were to Lean with their Hands there upon; and hereby
their Faith, which is a Leaning, a Staying, a Resting, on the Christ, intended
by the Sacrifices, was intimated.

Now, if you Consult the Book Leviticus, you will find Six kinds of
Propitiatory Sacrifices, among the Jews; all of them, the Types of our Lord
Jesus Christ, who is a Propitiation for the Sins, not only of the Jewish, but
also of the Gentile World. There was, (I) The Burnt-Offering. (II) The Meat
Offering. (III) The Peace Offering. (IV) The Sin Offering. (V) The
Trepass Offering. ( VI) The Offering of Consecrations. All these were
Offerings at the Brazen-Altar; All these were Offerings made by Fire; All these
were Offerings designed for Propitiation.

Among these, one is a Sin-Offering. The Difference between the Sin-Offering,
and the Trespass Offering, Lay in this: The Sin Offering was for Sins of
Ignorance, of Infirmity, of Greater Surprisal by Temptation: The
Trepass Offering was for Sins against Knowledge, and Crimes of a more grievous
and heinous Nature.

Now the Law of the Sin-Offering, distinctly directed it for Four sorts of
Subjects: ( I) The Priest. ( II) The Body of the People. ( III) The Ruler of
the People. ( IV) Any Private Person among the People.

Behold, among these, A Sin-Offering for the Congregation; A Young Bullock,
made a Sin Offering for the Congregation. And the Gospel of that Sin Offering,
we will Endeavor now to set before you, O Congregation of our New English
Israel, in the Ensuing Admonitions.

1. Let us, with a most Affectionate Contemplation, Behold the Circumstances of
the Sin-Offering for the Congregation, wonderfully answered in the Sacrifice of
our Lord Jesus Christ; who, by being made a Sin Offering, did Condemn Sin in
the Flesh. As now:

Was the Sin Offering for the Congregation, to be a Young Bullock, without
Blemish? Truly, Our Lord Jesus Christ Suffered for us, even in His Youth; The
Ancient of Days indeed Suffered for us, before He was an Old Man. He Suffered,
because We must say, Lord, I have been as Bullock unaccustomed unto thy Yoke!
And when He Suffered, He was altogether free from any Blemish upon Him: His
Perfection was Absolute.

Again. Was the Sin Offering for the Congregation, to be Slain? Truly, Our Lord
Jesus Christ, felt nothing less than the very pains of Death for our Sin;
Death, very Death, is the Doom of Sin. It Is therefore said of our Lord Jesus
Christ; He became obedient unto Death, even the Death of the Cross. The
Almighty God said unto our Lord Jesus Christ, as Abraham said unto his only
Isaac, My Son, Go Die! He Dyed most Obediently. The Legacies of Blessedness,
ordered for us, in the Testament of our Lord Jesus Christ, could not have come
unto us, but by the Death of the Testator.

Furthermore. Was the Blood of the Sin Offering for the Congregation, to be
Sprinkled Seven Times before the Vail or the Sanctuary, toward the Holy of
Holies? Truly, Heaven, the Holy of Holies, is, A purchased Possession: And so
is that Heavenly State of Holiness, which the Church on Earth, must in the
Seventh Age of the World, arrive unto: It Is the Blood of our Lord Jesus Christ,
that has made a Purchase of it. We read, That we Enter into the Holiest by the
Blood of Jesus: Oh! we shall never, never, never come there, but by the Blood
of Jesus!

Moreover. Was part of the Blood, of the Sin Offering for the Congregation, to
be put upon the Horns, of the Golden Altar of Incense? Truly, The Intercession
of our Lord Jesus Christ, is founded in His Blood: Our Lord Jesus Christ Above,
with the Incense of His Intercession concerned for us, has carried the mention
and the merit of His Blood thither with Him. We are told, By His own Blood. He
Entered in once into the Holy place, having obtained Eternal Redemgtion The
Salvations, which our Lord Jesus Christ in the Holy Place is demanding for us,
He demands upon this Consideration, Oh! my God, and my Father; my Blood has
bought all that I callenge!

Once more. Was the rest of the Blood of Sin Offering for the Congregation, to
be Parish forth at the Bottom of the Altar of Burnt-Offering? Truly The Blood
of our Lord Jesus Christ, has been Poured forth: It Is said, He has poured out
His Soul unto Death. When Circumcised, when Buffeted in His Agony when Scourged
with Thongs, when Crowned with Thom. when Fastened with Iron unto a Tree, (for
our Lord, becoming the Servant of God, must have his Ear-Bored, and a Body
fastened with Iron, unto a post of Wood!) When Pierced with a Spear, in all
these, His precious Blood was poured forth. But the Efficacy of this Blood,
that which renders if so Precious, is, Its Nearness to the Altar. Our Lords
Deity, is that Altar, from which the virtue of His Blood arises: Were not the
Blood our Lord Jesus Christ, at the Bottom of that Altar, it would have no
virtue, and small value in it.

To Conclude; Was the Sin Offering for the Congregation, to be Burned; the
Inwards of it, on the Altar; all the whole Carcass beside, in a clean place
without the Camp, or without the City-Gates? Truly, The Wrath of God, like a
Formidable Fire, Seized on our Lord Jesus Christ: It was a Fiery Trial That
came upon Him: His very Inwards were all on a Light Fire under the Wrath of the
Most High. This horrid Fire, cast all His Inwards into such an Anguish, as
caused a Bloody Sweat upon Him. Then was our Lord carried forth, without the
Gates of the City: It Is said, They carried Him out of Jerusalem, to Golgotha.
So says our Apostle, in Heb. 13. 11, 12. The Bodies of those Beasts whose Blood
is brought into the Sanctuary, by the High Priest, for Sin, are Burnt without
the Camp. Wherefore Jesus also, that He might Sanctify the People with His own
Blood, Suffered without the Gate.

Now, Let this Contemplation be your Preparation, for some Actions, that may
Save the whole Congregation from the Wrath of God.

II. Let us Humbly Plead with God, the Sacrifice of our Lord Jesus Christ, not
only for our own Souls, but let every Soul do it, for this whole Congregation.
The Sacrifice of our Lord Jesus Christ, is not only, pleadable for Persons, but
also for Peoples, that belong unto Him. Alas, my Friends; It Is utterly a Fault
among us, That we make too little use of our Lord Jesus Christ. Particularly,
In our Prayers and our Cares, for the welfare of our whole Congregation, we
make too little Use of this Alsufficient Sacrifice. We read in I Sam. 7. 9, 10.
Samuel offered a Burnt Offering wholly unto the Lord, and Samuel cried unto the
Lord for Israel, and the Lord heard him: And as Samuel was offering up the
Burnt Offering, the Lord Thundered with a great Thunder on that day upon the
Philistines, and discomfited them. It may be, if we had more pleaded the
Sacrifice of our Lord Jesus Christ, that Lamb of God, for our Israel, the Lord
would have long e're now, heard our Cries, and Thundered with a great Thunder
on our Philistean Adversaries. I may tell you, Syrs; We are not less
Accommodated with a Sacrifice for our Land, than the Old Church of Israel was
for Theirs!

Attend, I beseech you, to this GRAND METHOD, of Deliverances!

There are Three or Four Things, which we are to Plead, with a Lively Faith
before the Lord.

Let our first plea be This: That our Lord Jesus Christ, has Endured those
very Judgments of God, whereto our Sins have made us obnoxious. Do the
Judgments of God, Impoverish us? They did as much Impoverish our Lord Jesus
Christ, when He had not an House where to lay His Head, when He had not Money
enough upon Earth to pay His Tax, when He wanted Bread, and had nothing but a
Stone, to feed upon, and when His very Garments were violently taken from Him.
Do the Judgments of God Commission Enemies, to vex us with all Adversity? They
Let Loose as many Enemies on our Lord Jesus Christ, when Earth and Hell
combined for His Ruin Do the Judgments of God, fill us with Animosities one
against another? They turned the like Animosities on our Lord Jesus Christ,
when His own Countrymen made continual Clamours against Him. Are we killed by
the Judgments of God? They were Killing Judgments that fell upon our Lord Jesus
Christ, when He cried out, My Soul is Exceeding Sorrowful, even unto Death.

Let our Second Plea be This; That God had more Glory from His Judgments on our
Lord Jesus Christ, than if our people should perish under the Ireful Direful
Plagues of His Indignation. In the Calamities of our Lord Jesus Christ, the
Perfections of God slashed out, unto the view of men and Angels, with a
Brightness more dazzling, than that of the Brightest Lightning. The Holiness of
God was never so glorified, as when He Spared not His own Son, but gave Him up
to Death for us. The Wisdom of God, was never so Glorified, as when He cured
the desperate Wounds of the Patient, by wounding the Physician. The Power of
God was never so Glorified, as when He upheld a man in that conflict, which
would have made an Arch Angel saint. The Goodness of God, was never so
Glorified, as when He made His only Son, to feel and quench His Burning
Displeasure against His Enemies. The Truth of God was never so Glorified, as
when He Inflicted upon our Lord, all that He had Threatened unto us. If all the
Trees of the Woods in this Country were laid in one pile, and all the Men Laid
on that pile, and the Breath of the Lord, like a Stream of Brimstone, should
kindle it, there would not be such a Discovery of the Greatness and the Glory
of God, as there has been, in the Death of our Lord Jesus Christ. That Cry, in
the Mouth of our Lord Jesus Christ, Oh! my God! Why have thou forsaken me? has
proclaimed the Glory of God, infinitely more than if our Houses were all filled
with the Cries, of Murdered infants and Ravished Women, and Men Massacred by
Indian Salvages.

Let our Third Plea be This; That if God will Deliver us from His Judgments,
the Oblation of our Lord Jesus Christ shall have the Glory of it all; We are as
an Unfruitful Figtree before the Lord; that old Picture of the Jewish Nation,
is Ours; We Deserve Cutting down: Our Lord Jesus Christ sees the Axe of Divine
Vengeance ready to strike the fatal Blow; He takes the Blow upon Himself, and
is Cut off out of the Land of the Living. If we then are Saved from Desolating
Blows, laid at the Root of the Tree, we will say, Thanks be to our Lord Jesus
Christ for This! He warded off the Blow: For the Transgression of my People,
was He Stricken. Sirs, You cannot Imagine, how Delightful it will be unto the
God of Heaven, to hear us Pleading of these Arguments?

But Add one more unto them. Let our fourth Plea be, That our Lord Jesus
Christ, has been made a Sacrifice for Sins, which had no Sin Offering allowed
unto them. Atrocious and Flagitious, and Prodigious Impieties, for which the
Sin Offering was never directed; no, nor the Trepass Offering neither; even
for Those, is our Lord Christ a Sacrifice. There was a chief man in Israel, who
could say, Thou desire not Sacrifice: The Jewish Commentators give This, as
the Sense of it; That his Crimes were such as had no Sacrifice in the Law of
Moses provided for them. Yea, but for such is the Sacrifice of the Messiah
provided. Hence the Apostle says, in Act. 13. 39. By Him, all that Believe* are
Justified from all Things, from which ye could not be Justified by the Law of
Moses. Even Blasphemy it self, which had no Sacrifice in the Law of Moses, may
find one, in the Lord Jesus Christ: Says Paul, I was a Blasphemer, but I
obtained mercy! The Law of Moses tells us, Number. 15. 25, 30. The Priest shall
make Atonement, for all the Congregation, and it shall be Forgiven them, for it
is Ignorance: But the Soul that does ought presumptuously, shall be cut off.
Yea, but in our Lord Jesus Christ we have a Sacrifice, for which our
Presumptions also may be Forgiven unto us! Oh! plead it; plead it, with the God
who forgives Iniquity, Transgression and Sin.

But will it not be a presumptuous Thing to do so? or, will it not Encourage
and Embolden the Congregation to Go on still in their Trespasses, if we venture
to plead the Great Sacrifice for the Congregation, before we see a General
Reformation of our Trespasses?

I Answer; God Forbid! Methinks, there is little Evangelical in this Objection.
For,

First; Nothing will have such a Tendency to a General Reformation, as to fly
more generally to the Great Sacrifice for the Congregation than we do. It may
be, the General Reformation so much desired and required, hitherto sticks at
This; the Great Sacrifice for the Congregation is not first of all enough
Recognized: Our Attempts about a General Reformation prove abortive, because we
Attempt it, with too much of the Spirit of the Old Covenant Prevailing in us.
Mark What I say; A Sin will never be thoroughly Reformed, until it be Pardoned.

Secondly; We are to plead the Great Sacrifice for the Congregation, that so we
may obtain from God, the Grace for a General Reformation. God must be
petitioned, for a General Reformation, as purchase by the Great Sacrifice for
the Congregation: The Spirit which is to Dispose us, and Assist us, unto a
General Reformation is the purchase of the Blood of our Lord. Our Lord Jesus
Christ has been made a Sacrifice, to obtain the Reformation of His People, and
purify us to Himself a peculiar people, zealous of Good works.

III. Let us, with much Abhorrence of our Sins, and of our Selves for our Sins,
Confess over the Sacrifice of our Lord Jesus Christ, the many Sins, by which we
have, as a Congregation exposed our selves unto the Displeasure of God. As in
one peculiar Sin Offering for the People, there was the practice Enjoined; in
Lev. 16. 21. He shall confess over it, all the Iniquities of the Children of
Israel, and all their Transgressions in all their Sins: Thus, Let us take a
Catalogue of the Iniquities, and the Transgressions, wherewith our Congregation
has Sinned against God. [Alas, We have many a sad Catalogue, published among
us!] And Let us, with all sincere Impartiality, with all humble Sincerity,
Confess them all. Confess all our Sins against the Rulers of Piety, and of
Charity; all our Sins against the Profession that we have made; all our Sirs
against the Covenant that we have owned. Yea, though we have Sinned Ignorantly,
when we have Sinned, yet, as it is here said, When the Sin which they have
Sinned, is known, Then the Sin-Offering must be, with all suitable Confessions
applied unto.

Syrs, We cannot be too Exact, in these Confessions of our Sins, and in
Enquiries after the sad Occasions for these Confessions. Our Land may be more
Denied with Sin, than we are well aware; for sometimes the miscarriages of One
man, may be equivalent unto those of the Whole Congregation. It is Remarkable;
If a Priest Sinned, there must be as Great an Offering for him, as for the
Whole Congregation besides. Why, what would become of us, if the Whole
Congregation should fall into filthy Wantonness, or, if the Whole Congregation
should fall into beastly Drunkenness, or, if the Whole Congregation should fall
into Scandalous Coveteousness? Alas, if any in Chief Place among us, do Sin at
that rate, on those doleful occasions, we are to Abase our selves, as if the
Whole Congregation were become Abominable before the Lord. But how much then
ought they themselves, who have brought the Whole Congregation Lo; for ever Ly
Low before the Lord and cry out unto His Whole Congregation, Calcate me,
Insipidum Salem, Calcate me!

W. Though All the People are to Act Faith on the Lord Jesus Christ, as the
Sacrifice for the People, yet the Elders of the People are most of all to do it
with a most singular Application.

Let All men fly to the Sacrifice of the Lord Jesus Christ, first for
themselves: Thou, O man, must thy self becoming a Sacrifice to the Burning
Revenges of God, and Suffer the Vengeance of Eternal Fire, if thou do it not!
Now, if every man in the Land, would thus assure his own Interest in the
Sacrifice of our Lord Jesus Christ, there would be None in the Land, under the
offense of Heaven But, until Then, [and therefore, Always!] a few must Act
Faith for all the rest. And there is not any One Christian among all this
people, but what may and should put in suit, the Sacrifice of the Lord Jesus
Christ, for all the people. As the Sin of some ONE person, may go a great way,
to pull down the Wrath of Heaven, upon the Whole Congregation: ONE Achan, Did
not that ONE MAN Sin, and the Lord was wroth with the Whole Congregation! So,
who can tell, how far the Faith of ONE Person, in the Sacrifice for the
Congregation, may go to avert the Wrath of Heaven from us all? ONE Amos, (and
so, ONE poor, obscure, Devout Husbandman, or Mechanic!) may be Instrumental to
Save a Congregation from Desolation!

But, O you that are the Elders of our Israel It Is YOU, that are concerned
above others, to present before the Lord, the Great Sacrifice for the
Congregation. Of the Sin Offering, it is here said, The Elders of the
Congregation shall Lay their Hands upon the Head of it, before the Lord. Out
magistrates, our Ministers, are by the Ordination of God, the Elders of our
Congregation; It Is on YOU, My Fathers, that this thing is most of all
Incumbent: YOU, YOU, are They that must Believe in the Sacrifice of our Lord
Jesus Christ, not only for your sake, but also for all the Congregation. My
Fathers; You see, that we are a very Faulty, yea, and a very Froward,
Congregation, and a Generation of sinful men. Do YOU, by Faith Lay before the
Righteous and Jealous God, the Sacrifice of our Lord Jesus Christ, on our
behalf, and beg of Him, to Spare the Whole People for the Sake of that
Sacrifice. Blessed art thou, O Land, when thou do Enjoy Elders, that will be
thus concerned for thee!

Do This, when you are Asunder, in daily, frequent, solemn Supplications. But
especially when you are Together, Then, Then, is a special Opportunity, for
this your Faith, to be Exercised. Can a General Assembly of the Representatives
of a Province, do a better thing than This; To, Join as one man in Solemn
Devotions, with Fasting and Prayer, and Laying their Hands more Explicitly than
ever on the Head of our Great Sacrifice?

Oh! were this Thing in a due manner done, the God of our Lord Jesus Christ,
would Earnestly Remember us: My Bowels would be Troubled for them. I would
surely have Mercy on them, says the Lord. The Great God would say to the
Destroying Angel, Put up thy Sword; I will require no further Sacrifice for the
Congregation; Through the Sacrifice if my Son, I am well pleased, and Atoned.
Then, as after the Sin Offering for the People, in Lev. 9. 15, 23. He brought
the Peoples Offering, -- And Moses and Aaron came put, and Blessed the People,
and the Glory of the Lord appeared unto all the (...). So, the Blessing of God
would now rest our People; Salvation would be Nigh unto and Glory dwell in our
Land.

My Fathers, and Brethren, How can we stir from the Place where we are, until
this Exhortation be put up in (...)? Star up, Sirs, and with Raised Hearts, and
Har^^^. Let us now Express our Faith in our (...) Sacrifice, before the Lord!

FINIS.
ERRATUM.
PAge 12. line 8 read Conseil [And let the French Reader, Excuse our Presses
wanting of pointed e's.]

Advertisement.
THERE is now in the Press, and will speedily be Published, a New Book,
Entitled, A Good Man making a Good End. Or, The LIFE and DEATH of the Reverend
Mr. John Baily, [full of Observable ^assages] Comprised and Expressed in a
SERMON on the Day of his Funeral. Thursday. 16 d. 10 m. 1607.

By the Reverend Mr. Cotton Mather.

Sold by Michael Perry, at his Shop under the West End of the Town House in
Boston. 1697.


