To his Excellency Richard Earl of Bellomont, Capt. General and Governor in
Chief of his Majesty's Province of New York, etc. The Humble Petition and
Remonstrance of the Representatives of this His Majesty's Province of New York
in America, convened in General Assembly.
May it Please your Lordship;
WE the Representatives of this His Majesty's Province convened in General
Assembly, do with all due Respect and Humility, approach your Lordship, to
assure you, That the same Inviolable Loyalty which has hitherto affected and
inflamed our hearts toward the Crown and Government of England, will ever
preserve us in a most Religious and steady Perseverence therein, being
thoroughly sensible how great a Blessing it is to be subject to the best and
greatest of Kings, and under so Noble a Constitution of Laws, as makes ENGLAND
this day the Envy of all its Neighbor Nations. Yet we cannot but with great
grief of heart represent to your Lordship, that we have not of late Years
enjoyed the Felicity of those excellent Laws, which in their own Nature and
Designment are to extend to all the Subjects of the Crown, how Remote soever,
at least virtually, and wherein the Lives, Liberties and Properties of the
Subjects are concerned.

We were very Uneasy under an Arbitrary Commission in the late King James's
Reign, which gave the Governor of this Province, among other Arbitrary Powers,
that of levying Money without calling an Assembly, whereby we reckoned that our
Lives, as well as Estates, were subject to the Arbitrary Will of a Governor,
contrary to the known Laws of England; and Money was actually levied on us,
pursuant to the Illegal Powers of the said Commission. The Exercise whereof,
and the dreadful Violence we also apprehended would be done to our Consciences,
in respect of our Holy Protestant Religion, from a Popish Arbitrary King, made
Us Unanimously and heartily throw off the Yoke of Popish Tyranny, and Declare
for his then Highness the Prince of ORANGE, upon the first News we had of his
Glorious and Unparralled Expedition into England.

We acted then, as we conceived, on a Right Principle, and we were the more
confirmed in that Belief, because we acted in Commerce and Conformity with the
Glorious People of England. But to our great Amazement and Sorrow we have
suffered severely for our early Service to King William and the Crown of
England, most of us in our Liberties and Estates, and two of our Friends (who
had the Honesty and Courage to stand in the Gap (when others shamefully drew
back and deserted the Protestant Cause, and were therefore by Universal Consent
of the People thought most Worthy to be Chief in Command, till Orders should
come from England) who fell a Sacrifice to the Rage and Malice of the Jacobite
Party in this Province, who though few in Number, at that time, had
nevertheless the Power and Influence to prevail on the weakest of Men, Coll.
Henry Slaughter, Governor of this Province, to order a Trial for those brave
Men, and appoint such a set of Judges, as by Principle and Prejudice, would not
fail to gratify the Malice of their Party, as they did, under a form of Law,
which made it the more Cruel and Arbitrary, the said Trial being ordered by the
Governor, and managed by the Bench, contrary to all the Rules of Justice and
Humanity; for we are able to make appear, if thereunto required, that never a
Revolution was carried on and managed with more Moderation in any part of the
Christian World.

And further, to instance the Weakness, as well as Cruelty of the said
Governor, in appointing Nicholas Bayard, William Nicolls (lately suspended by
your Lordship from his Majesty's Council) and several others, to manage, the
Trial against Capt. Leysler, Mr. Millbourn, and the other six Prisoners, who
were all their avowed Enemies, and bore a mortal grudge to the said Capt.
Leysler, for their having been by him imprisoned in the Fort, for opposing the
late happy Revolution, and endeavoring to raise a Tumult among the People, and
disturb the Peace of the Government, and for telling Capt. Leysler to his face,
That the Parliament of England voting and enacting the Thrones being Vacant,
was Nonsense, that there was no such thing possible in Nature, nor by the Laws
of England. Governor Slaughter too by lodging in Nicholas Bayards House, was
the more pressed, and sooner prevailed on by Bayard's Importunity, to sign the
Warrant of Execution. And as an infallible token of the share he had in that
Council, there was Flag hung out of a Window of his House for two days together
before the day of Execution, as a Trophy and Signal of the Point gained by him
on the said Governor, and of the Victory over the Lives, not only of innocent,
but most deserving Men. In those days it was, when the Protestant Subjects were
Dis-armed, and Papists Armed; Nay, the public Faith of Government was
Violated; for a Reprieve had been sealed to respit the Execution of these
Gentlemen, until His Majesty's Pleasure should be known; yet before this could
reach his Majesty, they were Executed. And notwithstanding the Governors
Proclamation to invite such as fled to shun the same hard Fate, several whereof
were nevertheless Fined and Imprisoned; and certainly more had undergone the
hard Fate of Capt. Leysler and Mr. Millbourn, had it not been for Governor
Slaughter's sudden Death, and the Reflection he had, though too late of this
Barbarous and Unwarrantable strange Execution. This was the end of Capt.
Leysler and Mr. Millbourn, the former whereof has expended 2700 l. out of his
own proper Estate, for the Service of his Majesty. These were the days of Wrath
and utter Darkness, so that we must say with the Apostle, Woe unto them, for
they have gone in the way of Cain.

Then, contrary to his Majesty's Letters Patents, Richard Ingoldsby, a hot
headed inconsiderate Person, and only a simple Captain of Foot, is made
Commander in Chief; and in all the time of his Administration, Oppression is
still continued. Nor could change of Government remedy the same, by the coming
of Coll. Fletcher, who, although no blood spilt, yet bruised the Bone of the
Remnant left, and made his Government an entire mass of Corruption, by
encourageing Pyracy and Unlawful Trade, and giving away almost all the vacant
Lands in the Province, to a few Disaffected and Undeserving Men, neglecting the
Fronteers of this Province, and packing Representatives to serve in General
Assembly, imbezeling and squandering away the Revenue, and other Public
Moneys, setting Atheistical Persons in Places of greatest Trust in the
Government. All which, and many more Instances of his Maladministration, as
we are informed, have been already transmitted to England by your Lordship.

The Representatives convened in several, taking Notice of what was done herein
for Relief, by that most august Senate, the Parliament of England, in Reversing
of the Attainders of Jacob Leysler, Mr. Millbourn, and others, Cannot but with
the greatest of Zeal, and fervency of Affection send up their Prayers to the
great Majesty of Heaven and Earth, for the Preservation of his Majesty's Royal
Person, and of that most excellent Constitution, and for the Ministers of
State, the influence of whose wise and honest Council, is felt, even at this
vast Distance from England. And in humble Confidence of his Majesty's Goodness,
We humbly pray your Excellency to lay before his Majesty, this our most humble
Petition, hoping that the same good Angel who led your Excellency to attend his
Majesty, when Prince of Orange, in his glorious Expedition for England, and
brought your Excellency safe amongst Us, to put a stop to the Oppressions we
groaned under, will now move your Lordship in our behalf, to interceed with his
Majesty for our Relief (although as Christians we would forgive our Enemies and
Oppressors) That he would be graciously pleased to extend of his Royal Bounty
and Favor on the Families of the said Leysler and Millbourn, and also order
the said Sum of two Thousand seven Hundred Pounds to be paid unto her, (and
that care be taken to pay such Debts as are owing for what was expended in the
late happy Revolution in this Province) in consideration of their Sufferings
and Services for his Majesty's Interest and this Province.

That for the better Administration of Justice two able Judges may be sent from
England, and two or three able Council, who have acquired to that Noble
Profession by Study, and not by Usurpation, for the Maintenance whereof we
shall not be wanting.

That Coll. Fletcher's Coat of Arms may be pulled down from the Kings Chapel
in the Fort, and Trinity Church in this City; that since he left no Monuments
of Vi^^^^ and a just Administration, those of his Nautious and Insupportable
Pride and Vanity may not remain to Posterity, especially since his Birth was so
mean and obscure as that he was not entitled to bear a Coat of Arms.

All which the Representatives again humbly move your Excellency to lay before
his Majesty, together with our most Inviolable Loyalty and Obedience to his
Majestys Command.

By Order of the House of Representatives, Abraha. Gouverneur, Speaker.
Die Luna 15 May, 1699.

