Province of the Massachusetts Bay. ss.
BY Virtue of an Act of the General Assembly, of this Their Majesty's Province
of the Massachusetts Bay. Entitled an Act for the Granting unto Their
Majesty's, An Assessment upon Polls and Estate; Passed the 24 th. of June, 1692.

These are in Their Majesty's Names to Will and Require you, and every of you
to Demand and Receive of the Select Men of your Town, the List of Said
Assessment within your Town; ar to Collect all and every the Sums of Money,
mentioned in the Said List of Assessment, amounting to (...) in the whole being
their proportion of the said Assessment. So that you Duly pay the same (which
you are alike required to do) unto my self or Successor in the Office of
Treasurer. In manner following.

That is to say, one Moiety thereof being the first payment of the said
Assessment on or before the Twenty Fifth Day of December next ensuing. And the
other Moiety thereof, being the second Payment of the said Assessment to
complete the same, on or before the First Day of May, then next following.

And in case any person or persons shall Neglect or Refuse to Pay any sum of
Money whereat he is in the said Assessment rated or Assessed, then you are
hereby Authorized, and Required, to Levy the same by Distress, and Sale of the
goods of such person or persons, so Refusing or Neglecting to pay; Deducting
the Sum Assessed, and Reasonable Charges of Distressing, and to return the
Overplus to the Owner thereof (if any be) And hereof you are not to fail upon
the Pains and Penalties as may in such case by the said Act, be Inflicted on
you.

Given under My Hand and Seal of Office, at Charlstown the (...) Day of
November. 1692.

In the Fourth Year of Their Majesty's Reign.

To the Constables of (...)


