THE DOOR OF Heaven Opened and Shut. OPENED To the Ready and Prepared, SHUT
Against the Unready and Unprepared OR, A DISCOURSE Concerning The Absolute
Necessity of a Timely Preparation for a Happy Eternity.

By JOHN FOX Minister of the Gospel, and Author of the Discourse concerning
Time, and the End of Time.

BOSTON: (...) by B. Green, for Nicholas Buttolph, at the (...) Shop at the
Head of King Street. 1709.

TO THE READER.
READER,
UPon the often and earnest Desire and Solicitation of some Sober Persons, that
heard these Sermons Preached, I have adventured to make this Plain Discourse
(about Timely Preparation for Heaven) Public. And if thou art Reconciled to,
and really in Love with Truth and Holiness; here is that put into thine Hand,
(which if GOD add his Blessing) will stir up thy pure Mind to greater
seriousness and diligence in the matters of thy Soul. Now, that it may conduce
to thy spiritual and eternal Advantage, is his Desire who Prays for thy Souls
welfare,

J. FOX.

The DOOR OF HEAVEN Opened and Shut.
MATT. XXV. 1. And they that were Ready went in with Him to the Marriage, and
the Door was shut.


THE Things of greatest moment are by most men little believed, less
considered, till it be too late; That besides this present World, (which must
have (...) period) there is another World of internal duration: And that
according to our choice* life, and doing here will our doom and eternal
habitation be in the World to come; so that there is ^n indispensible Necessity
to make ready for a blessed Life of Immortality. This grand Concern, the
Parable of the ten Virgins warns and alarums as ^to. In which Parable are two
parts*

First, the Churches Preparation to meet Christ, called here The Bridegroom,
from the first to the fifth ^se.

Secondly, the Bridegrooms coming forth to meet the^, from the fifth to the
^fth verse. The Text fall under the second part. viz. The Bridegroomes coming
to fetch home his Bride: O welcome day! The words serve as a Glass or bright
Sunbeam, to represent the different estate of believers and unbelievers, wise
and foolish Virgins, at Christ's coming by Death or Judgment.

In which observe three things.

1. The preparation of the wise Virgins, They were ready.

2. Their Welcome and Admission to the Marriage, They went in with him, i e.
into the Presence Chamber of the King of Glory.

3. We have the doleful Rejection and Exclusion of the foolish Virgins, And the
Door was shut.

The Doctrine that I shall Collect and Handle from the words is this, They and
only such who are graciously qualified and prepared for Christ in this World,
shall enjoy eternal Fellowship and Communion with Christ in the other World.

The greatest part of our happiness that we shall have in Heaven lies in this,
That we shall be with Christ. Do thou desire a better Country? viz. (...)
safe to Heaven: Keep thine eye ever upon thine end, and know that here life is
gotten or lost to Eternity. Sinner, do not deceive thy self, to hope for
Heaven, and do the work of Hell; if thou do expect to go in with Christ, and
enjoy God and glory hereafter, daily use the means, and go in the way to Heaven
here. There is a congruity between the way and the end: They answer one
another, as face answers face in the water; or as the War and (...) Seal, the
Voice and the Eco^^ (...) answer each (...). If thy heart and Life cry ^eaven,
Heaven, (...)* End or Death will (...) Heaven; but if (...) and Practice cry
hell, hell, thine End like the E^ to the Voice will cry hell, hell. As men
(...) they drink, and receive wages according to their work; and as you sow you
reap: the Harvest is the end of the World; they that were ready went in, not
one more. Heaven consists partly in the fitness and preparation of the Soul
and body for that blessed Society above. The Paradise of God would be a Prison,
may I not say a hell, to the impious and unholy.

Sore eyes cannot behold the Sun without grief, Swine will not stay in the most
pleasant Medows ^ hence, no work so irksome as Christ's, no time so
uncomfortable and tedious to wicked men, as abiding under Christ's wings in his
Ordinances.

Before I proceed to speak to the several branches in the Doctrine, I must
enter a Caveat or Caution.

First, this Meetness, Fitness, and Preparation for Heaven, is not to be
understood in a way of Popish Purgation or Merits, viz. by Prayers, Acts of
M^^ificence, Alms, Pilgrimages, Penance, Purgatory, etc. The Reward is of
Grace, not of Debt, or Desert, for all our Righteousnesses are but as filthy
rags; and when we have done all we art but unprofitable Servants (says our
Savior,) Isa. 64.6. Luke 17.10. Our good hope and everlasting consolation is
through grace.

Secondly, the readiness is not to be understood* as if all that shall go to
Heaven with Christ have an inherent, sinless, and personal Perfection; As Stars
have their twinklings, and Diamonds their flaws, and the best Gold does need
some grain of allowance, so the most eminent Christians have their frailties
and mixtures of corruption. Solomon challenges the whole world, when he says*
(...) say I (...) made my heart clean, I am pure from (...) It Is (...) there is
a generation pure in their (...) yet, you are (...) from their filthiness,
Prove. 30, ^^. Such (...) the Pharisees, and some Perfectionists of this (...);
whereas the Life of the most holy Man in the World, is not as a Garden without
we^^^ this is reserved for Heaven. And if none die comfortably, or go in with
Christ but those who have lived perfectly, then every man must go out of the
World with despair and terror; for the failings of Gods People are more than
their duties, their Corruptions more than their Graces: so that whoever goes to
Heaven, must be beholding to the redeeming blood, and justifying righteousness
of the Lord Jesus. This being premised, I shall proceed to the Explanation of
the Doctrine, in which I shall observe this Order and Method.

First show, That there is a Fitness and Preparedness in Believers for their
future state of blessedness.

Secondly, That this Fitness is in the day and time of Life, not after Death.

Thirdly, What this Fitness for Christ and Heaven is.

Fourthly, I shall give the Reasons upon which all must prepare, and why none
else must go with Christ.

Fifthly, Improve all in several Uses.

SECT. I.
FIrst, That Believers are divinely qualified for their state of Blessedness;
being a People made ready and prepared for the Lord, Luke 1.17. That those wise
Virgins are fit and accounted worthy to go in with Christ, will appear three
ways.

First, by their int^^^fecal Endowments and Qualifications, or what God has
done in them

Secondly, by the choice Epithites and Titles given to them.

Thirdly, their Privileges and Regalities with which they are invested and
ennobled.

First, their inward Frame and Constitution dot^ exceed the whole World. There
is most rare, curious and inimitable work of the Divine Spirit upon the souls
of all that shall go in with Christ. ^vers are his Workmanship; They are
renewed in (...) Spirit of their mind, and have put on the new man, (...) after
God is created in righteousness and true holiness. They are holy Brethren,
Partakers of the heavenly Calling, and a divine Nature, and transformed and
changed from glory to glory into the same Image. They are said to be called to
Glory and Virtue, and the life they live is called the Life of God, and their
conversation is said to be in Heaven, Ephesians 2.10. Ephesians 4.23, 24. Heb. 3.1. 2 Pet.
1.4. 2 Cor. 3.17.

Secondly, their Titles do speak their Fitness; They are called, the Children
of the Bride-chamber, Children of the Kingdom, Children of the Resurrestion,
Christ's fair One, the Kings Daughter, Gods Jewels, his peculiar Treasure, his
excellent Ones, such of whom the World is not worthy.

What is the chaff to the Wheat, or pebbles to Pearls, or clods of Earth to the
bright Stars, or the children of hell to these earthly Angels. The Name of a
Christian is a most honorable Name. Alexander thought himself happy that he
might be named Achilles, and Caesar if he might be called Alexander. The
Believers Name is of greater Renown. Solon was called the Wonder of Greece, and
the Glory of the Greeks, but he was not to compare with the meanest Saint.
Constantine and Valentinian, two famous Emperors, called themselves Vassallos
Christi, the Vassals of Christ; and Theodosius another Emperor professed, It
was more honor to him, to be Membrum Ecclesiae quam Caput Imperii, a Member of
the Church, than Head of the Empire.

Thirdly, their Privileges also do evidence this Fitness, which are all Royal*

First, they have a Royal Descent, and so the Sons and Daughters of the Lord
God Almighty, My Firstborn, says the Lord of Israel of his people. We read of
the children of base men, viler than the Earth, Job 30.8. Jezabel is called a
cursed woman, though a Kings Daughter. Nebuchadnezzar is called an abominable
branch, and Antiochus Epiphanes, a vile person. Believers are of God, and born
not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of men, but from above, John 3.

Secondly, Moreover they have a Royal Spirit. Nebuchadnezzar told Daniel. In
him was the Spirit of the holy Gods. Joshua and Caleb (that entered into the
holy Land) were men of another spirit, Numb 14 24. This Spirit that fits them
for Heaven is a holy Spirit, Romans 1.4 A Spirit of Grace, a Spirit of Glory. 1
Pet 4 14 So called, because it comes from the God of Glory, and prepares them
for Glory.

Thirdly, they have Royal Offices, and are employed about Royal business They
are Kings and Priests, whose Employment is Prayer and divine praise, Rev 1.6.
Psalm. 6 24. 1 Pet. 2.5, 9

Fourthly, they have Royal attendance, the glorious Angels; these Watchers who
are great in strength, stand as Sentinels at their doors to protect their
Persons, day and night while they live: And they must Convey their Souls
thorough the Devils Territories safe to the Place of their everlasting
habitation, after they are dead, Psalm. 34 8 Heb. 1.14. Luke 16.22. If you are
by Grace prepared for Glory. God is your God, and this is your Guard.

Fifthly: they have a Royal Law, which is the Rule and Standard of their
Obedience to God. Jam. 2. 8. The Writing was the Writing of God, who was both
the Doctator and the Scribe, Exodus 32.16. where note, that the Scripture is the
word of God, John 10 35.

Sixthly, they have Royal Apparel a Royal presence, and belong to a Royal City:
and when they go in with Christ, they shall be on the Throne Royal, and have
the Crown-Royal.

It cannot be denied, but that they are set apart for God, and fitted for his
Presence, Psalm 4 3 God has se^ as (...) the man that is godly for himself.
Mire segregavit cum indicio excellentiae, ( says one upon the Place) God has
gloriously, wonderfully, miraculously separated to himself the godly man. Here
Note.

That we do not make our selves fit, or meet for Heaven, God must do it. Who
can make his heart clean? we may wash the outside of the Cup, God must cleanse
that which is within, viz. the heart, from wickedness. I am the Lord that
heals thee.

Christians are made fit by Redemption, by Vocation, by Adoption, by
Justification, by Sanctification.

This shall cause the godly to wonder at the Power of Divine Grace. If a King
cast his favor on a mean subject or slave, and prefer him to a great and
honorable Office, yet he cannot change his nature, and give him fitness for
that place: But God does not only give a Kingdom to his Saints, but inwardly
adapt, and fit them for that Kingdom. And as none had right to the Land of
Canaan but the Israelites, so none have right to Heaven but the Saints; (but of
this more afterward.)

SECT. II.
SEcondly, This Readiness is in the day and time of Life, not after death. Oh
that thou had known in this thy day (said Christ to the Jews) the things that
belong to thy peace. There is a time known and appointed of God, after which
they shall never repent and be converted, who have enjoyed and lived under the
means of grace, and are not converted. It Is true, the eternal God is not
limited to any term or means, but man is limited to time and means. Sinner,
thou have a great work to do, a long journey to go, and many and mighty
adversaries to divert and hinder thee; thy Work is to prepare for Death and
Judgment, which is very near; thy Voyage or Journey is to the everlasting
World, Provision must be made while in the way. To apply this a little, and to
quicken you to husband the precious Talent of Time in order to Eternity. I
shall propose three things; First, consider how short and uncertain our being
in the World is. Secondly, as life is short, so the continuance of the means of
grace will not be long Thirdly, when gray hairs, old age, sickness, ( Solomon's
evil day) comes, that is not so fit and proper a season to prepare for Heaven:
First, remember how short and uncertain thy being in the World is; Our life is
but a vapor, Jam. 4 14. that soon appears and disappeareth, dispersed as
soon as raised. It Is a little spot of time between two Eternities. One of the
Ancients doubts, whether to call it a dying life, or a living death: And if
our life (which is a breathing death) had been less then a vapor, it had been
nothing at all. The Psalmist describes Man as Grass, Psalm. 90 In the Morning it
flourishes, in the Evening it is cut down, and withers.

Man continues but a very short time, his life is but a span long, or but a
day long, like Jonah's Gourd, came up in a night, and perished in a night. The
first step man sets upon the stage of this World, he is going out of the World.
The Naturalists speak of a Fly they call Ephemeron, a creature of one day,
which comes forth in the Morning, is very active about Noon, but when the Sun
declineth, it declineth too, and sets with the setting of the Sun.

Man is an Ephemeron, a creature of one day. The Ancient of days sets up our
Glass in Heaven, there at is running, and we see not how it hastens to an end.
Think, O devout soul, of the sugarity and swiftness of thy time here below, the
Line and Lease of Life will quickly be out: It is but a point of time that we
live, while we do but turn, Immortality is present. This present Life is but
the place of our Inn and Sepulcher; The Beginning of this Life is but the
Exordium of Death, Vita hujus Principtum statim Mortis est Exordium We are
carried every moment of time to the End of Time. Our Life is but but like one
sailing; he who does sail, whether he stand or sit, whether he sleep, watch or
walk, he is carried nearer the Port; may we not say with old Jacob, Gen 47.4
Few and evil have the days of the years of my life been: where we have his
Account cast up; God is the great Landlord of our time, the Lease is for life,
not years but days, not many days but few. Life (said one) is a Rose which if
we view in its growth the Cold nips it, the Heat withers it, the Wind shakes
it, be it never so fair it withers: Another says, Life is a counterfeit, what
if the Colors be fair, and the Resemblance near, the Shadows of Death, and the
Curtains of the Grave will darken all; It Is a Play, We enter at our Birth, and
Act all our Life, presently there is an Exit, or end, and away we go. One being
asked what was Life, he shows himself a little, and hides himself again, his
meaning was this. Our Life is but a little show, no sooner are we seen, but
immediately we are hid and gone. O sleepy and secure sinner, think of the
certainty of Death, the danger of thy Soul, the nearness and length of
Eternity, and the Necessity of preparing in a moment of time for an everlasting
estate. Die and leave the World we must, in the Grave there is no work, after
Death the Judgment, Heb. 9 27. Sin poisons the Arrow in the Quiver of the King
of Terrors, and puts the Sithe into Deaths hand that cuts us down* Methinks
Sins speaks to the several Generations of men whom Death has conquered, as
David to the Priest who had escaped Saul's bloody sword, I have been the
occasion of all this. Sin and Death are coupled together, Romans 8 2.

Secondly, as Life is short, so the continuance of the means of Grace will not
be long. There are many faithful, able, painful Ministers have Preached their
last; and an abundance, yea, multitudes of Sinners, time-losers, that have
heard their last; and this will be my case and yours in a little time. The
Prophets, do they live for ever?

We have but a little time to entreat and to treat with you about your Souls,
to call, invite and persuade you to come to Christ, and accept of mercy: and
which Minister or Sermon shall be the last thou shall hear, who can tell? There
are six days, said the Master of the Synagogue, Luke 13. in which men ought to
work, in them therefore come and be healed. We must seek the Lord while he may
be found, Isa. 55 6 For behold now is the appointed time, now is the day of
salvation. 2 Cor. 6.1. Moreover, as the Ministry and outward means is
uncertain, so the time of the Spirits working with the Word is uncertain, My
Spirit shall not always strive with man: The Spirit is compared to the Wind,
who can tell when the Wind will blow, and how long it will continue its sweet
gales to convey us to glory. The Door of grace is yet open to lost and undone
sinners, who have slighted mercy. God did not deal so with the Angels that
fell, they sinned, and the Lord cast them down, and shut the Gate of Glory upon
them immediately. But the day for the things of thy peace is continued. Its
said, the Devil is busy because his time is short, Rev. 12.12. And shall we be
worse than the Devil: The time is short, 1 Cor. 7.27. The Angel will ere long
swear by him that lives that time shall be no more. You that are traveling
toward Heaven must make haste, the Workman that sets a time for his task,
listens to the Clock, and counts the hours. We have a great task and a short
time, redeem it in order to Eternity. This is Gods hour, and this is mine; what
I do for my dear soul, what I lay up for Eternity must be now done or never. O
remember, its but an hour, but a day, and this will quickly pass away: In what
anguish of soul, despair and torment, will many wish for those hours again: the
loss of so many opportunities for the gaining of Heaven, will be ^s so many
drops of gall and poison in thy honey* it makes me weep, said one* when my
Hourglass is beside me, to see every speck of sand to follow other so
speedily; therefore the Apostle exhorts to Redeem time; I must work, said our
dear Lord, while it is day, Joh. 9.4. Sinner, if Death should come, and find
thee unready, thou art undone soul and body for ever.

The time of gray Hairs, old Age, Sickness, is not the fittest season to
prepare for Heaven. When thou come to a Bed of Languishing, and thy strength
wasted, thy breath short, do thou think to Cough-up. Lord have mercy upon my
soul, and that will be sufficient to prepare thee for Christ, and bring thee to
Heaven. Besides, it is almost a wonder to hear of any one converted to God at
the last gasp, when men are ready to enter into the Gulf of Eternity. In the
Word we have only instance of the Thief upon the Cross; but remember his
Conversion was one of the Wonders of Christ's Passion; when Christ was on the
Cross, the Sun was darkened from the sixth hour to the ninth hour, the Vail of
the Temple was rent in twain, the Earth did quake, the Rocks rent, the Graves
opened, the Bodies of Saints which slept arose, and a notorious sinner was
converted, all which is wonderful. Austin being sent to give his judgment of
one that had delayed, and put off his repentance, returned this Answer, Non
dico damnabitur, no^ dico salvabitur, I do not say he shall be damned, (...)
not say he shall be saved, but repent while it is well; Life or Death,
Salvation or Damnation, may depend upon this day. Tamerlain, when he had laid
siege to a City or Fort, first Erected a white Flag, thereby offering Peace;
the second a Red, to signify blood; thirdly, he showed them a black Engine,
denoting devastation and destruction: The Holy Ghost says, To day if you will
hear his voice, harden not your hearts. There was one resolved to kill Julius
Caesar such a day, the Night before a Friend sent him a Letter to acquaint him
with it; but being at supper and busy, I will not look upon it now, (says he)
to morrow is a new day: The next day when he should have read the Letter he was
stabbed. God sends thee a Letter, a Message from Heaven, To day hear his voice,
to day repent and leave thy sins, or for ever to Hell.

SECT. III.
THirdly, Let us now enquire what this Prepararation to go in with Christ is.
And I wish that all who read this Discourse may understand it, not only
notionally, and speculatively, but also heartily and experimentally.

In answer to this third Particular, here is something Negatively, and
something Positively, and both in reference to believers and unbelievers.

Negatively, Preparation for Christ and Heaven, does not lie or consist in any
thing that is natural, or acquired by man's utmost industry. Let the
Qualifications, Endowments, Improvements and Seize of men be never so
rare and excellent, while without supernatural regenerating Grace, they cannot
be fit and prepared for immediate and eternal fellowship with God. To explicate
this, take these four Particulars.

First, Readiness for Christ and Heaven does not consist in being Virgins, i.
e. Church Members, and in having the specious leaves of Profession. There are
more than a few who pretend to and profess the true Religion, that are carnal,
rotten and false in that Religion: All in the visible Church, that are sealed
with the Sign and Sacrament of Initiation, are not fit for Divine Communion.
Nicodemus was Circumcised, yet not fit for the Kingdom of Heaven Judas was an
Apostle and Preacher, but the Son of Perdition: Simon Magus was Baptized, and
in the gall of Bitterness.

Many think, it is sufficient to save them, that they were born in England, and
descended of Religious or Protestant Parents, that they keep their Church, say
their Prayers, receive the Lords Supper, and procure their absolution when
dying; The unbelieving Jews gloried in their External Rites and Privileges,
crying out, The Temple of the Lord! And because they had their Priests and
Sacrifices and could go up to Jerusalem to worship, they were (as they thought)
the happiest people in the whole world. How many Atheists and Haters of God and
Holiness, have been Baptized? Rest not here; for he is not a Jew that is one
outwardly, Romans 2.28. Gal. 6.13. God calls the Circumcised Israelites, Kine of
Bashan, and the Children of the Ethiopian, An. 4.1, 7, 9.

Secondly, Neither does it consist in trimming of Lamp^, i. e. in External
Duties and Religious Acts, which to the view of the world may be splendid and
very plausible. Bona opera non faciunt bo^um ^irum, sed vir bonus facit opera
bona^ Luther. Good works do not make a good man, but a good man makes good
works Unregenarate men their services proceed from the same principle that
their sins do. The Tree must be good before the fruit can be good* the outside
of the cup or platter may be clean; men may hear the word gladly, so did Herod,
and pray frequently, so did the Pharisees, and those Hypocrites Isa. 58. Men
may receive the Lords Supper, so did Judas, and do much more, and yet be far
from the Kingdom of Heaven: Moreover, they may be exact in their Second Table
Duties, wrong no man, be just and righteous, give unto Caesar the things that
are Caesar's, (so were some of the Heathen) and yet be strangers to God, the New
Birth, Union and Communion with Christ, without which no man can be
capacitated, and prepared for the Divine Presence.

Thirdly, Neither does this readiness for Christ lie in being of such a party,
and opinion, or in being hot and zealous for such modes and forms of Religion
and Worship. A man may be Episcopal, a Presbyterian, an Independent, an
Anabaptist, and a stranger to the Life and Power of Religion. The Jews, High
Priests, and Elders: The Scribes and Pharisees were zealous for Moses Law, the
Custom and Traditions of their Fathers; but the worst Enemies Christ had. The
Prelate of Rome sticks not to Impose on and Depose Princes, and their bloody
deluded Vassals can murder and shed the blood of Protestants out of cruel
religious Zeal.

Fourthly, Neither does it lie in mental Illuminations and excellent rare
Parts, Gifts, Common Grace, and good Opinion, and Approbation of the best, most
serious and judicious men. A man's Mind and Intellectuals may be Adorned with
rare Notions; he may be able to dispute most readily, accurately and profoundly
about Theological Principles; he may Pray and Preach like an Angel, and be in
high esteem in the Church; and yet have nothing in him to Entitle him to
Christ, and prepare him for heaven. There is shining Dross and counterfeit
Silver, which deceives many, as a Bristol-stone may show and shine like a
Diamond, and a Counter like a piece of Gold; the Picture of a man may be like a
man, and Artificial Flowers are as fair, and look like Natural Flowers; so
Common Grace has the resemblance of Saving Grace; so that some question
whether it differs in Specie or Degrees only. There are partial and almost
Christians, who seem to bid fair for Christ and Heaven, as Judas, Demas, and
many others. And who can tell how high and eminent men may be in Office and
Profession, how Sound and Orthodox in Judgment and Opinion, how deep in
Conviction and Contrition, how regular in Conversation, how zealous and warm in
Affection, how forward in Duties of Piety and Charity, and ready to Suffer, how
lifted up with aerie tittillations of Joy, sips and tastes of comfort resulting
from thoughts of Free Grace, and misapplying the Promises, and the superficial
transient Operations of the Spirit, and but have it with God, and fall short of
Heaven: How much alike were these Virgins (to say nothing of their Agreement in
number and name) they were all in Society, they were all Asleep, they were all
awakened and rowsed up, they all went to work and trimmed their Lamps, they all
went out to meet the Bridegroom: and the Foolish came to the door with, Lord,
Lord, open to us: If good words, and wishes, and, O let me die the Death of the
Righteous, will save men, they would all go to Heaven. Many spin small, and
make Hypocrisy seem a good Web, and go through the Market as Saints among men;
and yet steal quietly to Hell without Observation: So easy it is to deceive
men, (said an Eminent Divine) It Is doleful to think, and see such Troops and
Droves of profane, ignorant, presumptuons men and women, go down merrily to
Hell, with a Golden dream and hope of Heaven; Like the Fish that sport and play
in Jordan, and then fall into the Dead Sea; like Haman that went cheerfully to
Hesters Banquet, not knowing his life was the mark that she aimed at: How many
secure Souls asleep in sin go out of the World; and never Awake till they come
to Hell?

Having spoken something in the Negative concerning this fitness and readiness
for Christ. I proceed now to the Positive part of my Answer, wherein it does
consist.

1. There is an initial, or an habitual readiness for Heaven, and there is also
a more actual fitness to go in with Christ.

As soon as a man is taken out of his Natural Soil, and the Seed of God is sown
in his heart, he is habitually ready for his future Happiness. If a Believer
should Die the first Day of his Conversion, he would certainly go to Heaven,
witness the Thief upon the Cross. But truly there are many dear Children of God
not actually prepared, because their Spiritual Estate is not so well settled.
It Is a great Duty for all that are espoused to Christ, to be in a constant and
continual readiness to meet Christ, and have immediate Communion with him: but
sad experience proves it is not so. A Woman may be Espoused to another, and yet
she may be sometimes not ready to meet him her Ornaments may be off, and her
soul Apparel on. To Resolve this I shall show.

First, When the Christian is not Ready.

Secondly, When he is actually Ready.

First, When the Believers Soul, like Hezekiah's Sun, is gone some degrees
backward, i. e. under remarkable declinings; And the best things in him are
ready to die, viz. Grace, Inward Joy, Peace, Old Experiences, Godly Sorrow are
ready to die. If the first warm, burning, flaming Love of the Espousals be
lessened, and much abated toward Christ, so that the man's heart does
vigorously go forth after sensual Objects, and the Dead Child is put in the
place of the Living Child; is he fit to go in with Christ? If Grace be under
remarkable decays and witherings, and the Souls ^auty departed, can a man then
welcome Christ? What cause have thousands to Cry out with the Prophet, My
Leanness! My Leanness! Is it not Autumn or Winter in many a Soul? How little
life and love have you, and much ado to maintain it. I heard a good Woman, in a
despairing condition, complain of want of Natural Affection to her Husband and
Children. And may we not with holy Bradford, weep for want of love to our
dearest Lord and embracing the bosom of a Stranger. If the Wives affection be
withdrawn from her Husbands Person is she fit now to appear before him, when
she has no heart to receive him? Therefore strengthen the things that are
ready to die, blow up the spark of love into a flame, and thou may say, Come,
Lord Jesus.

Secondly, When the poor Christian, being under Desertion, is doubtful of his
Eternal Condition, and cannot tell what will be his place when he leaves the
world, he is unfit. When thick Mists surround us, and black Clouds cover us,
the many sinking fears, jealousies and damping doubts about the love of Christ
renders us Unready. This is the case of many a Soul who has made choice of God
to be his, and wonders at his love to him, yet is ready to speak as the Church,
Zion said, The Lord has forsaken me, my God has forgotten me, Isa. 49.14. My
Soul is cast down, says David, within me, all his billows pass over me; has
God forgotten to be Gracious? I doubt my heart is not upright, that my
foundation is not sound, that I shall be shut out of Heaven, says the
desponding Soul. Hezekiah, though he walked before God with a perfect heart, yet
bitterly complained that he was cut off. A very Holy and Learned Minister
complains thus, I have often disputed, whether or no I knew any thing of
Christianity, except the Letter of the Name.

The Woman in Mr, Bolton said, I have been the Mother of Nine Children, and
have born them with as much Pain as most Women, yet I could be contented to
bear the same Pain every Day, that I have endured with all my Children, to be
assured of my Part in Christ. Another Cried out, He could be contented that his
Body should burn in Hell a Thousand Years, so that he might be assured of the
least Favor from God afterward. And will you not pity me, says Mrs. Drake,
that must burn in Hell for ever? Sirs, in a time of Desertion, when God hides
his Face, and Heaven is out of sight, the Child of Light walks in Darkness, the
Soul is not ready. The thoughts of God are terrible. I remembered God, and was
troubled, says David, I sink, the deep waters are come into my Soul. The
Arrows of the Almighty are within me, the Poison whereof drinks up my spirit:
the Terrors of God do set themselves in array against me, Job 6.4 O pity me my
Friends, Job 19. Another walking in the Field (seeing a Fly) Cried out, This
Fly comes Armed with the Wrath of God against me. Now when the trembling Soul
apprehends it self to hang like an equal balance between two Eternities, and
cannot tell whether he shall go up or down, live or die, be saved or damned; he
is not fit to shoot the Gulf: This made David Pray, Psalm. 39 ult. Spare me a
little before I go hence and be no more.

Here Note, That there is a double Desperation, A Desperation of Infidelity,
and, A Desperation of Extremity; The former, viz. A total and perpetual
Desperation, none of Gods Elect ones shall fall under: but the latter, the
Desperation of Extremity, (which does cure their stupidity, and provoke and
prompt them to the use of the means) they are obnoxious to: They are sometimes
brought very low in their Souls. Luther, by reason of the trouble of his mind,
wished he had never been a man. The Christian sits solitary as a Widow
forsaken, his sighs are many, and his heart is faint, when God covers Himself
with a Cloud. This made a Godly Woman dying (whose Evidences for Heaven could
not be read) Pray, Lord, Let me not go to the Place where the Wicked are, for I
never loved them in my Life.

Thirdly, After some sad Fall, and when a man is under some violent Temptation,
on Passion, he is Unready. A Good Man may be under the power of some sudden,
hot and sinful Passion, and assaulted with an hellish Temptation, he may be
tempted to Curse and Blaspheme God, to Destroy himself; he may be bereaved of
his Reason and Understanding, and be ragingly Mad: Passi^ is the Law of the
Soul, and brevis insania, a short Madness. Job and Jeremiah in their Passion,
did both Curse the Day of their Birth; Jonas told God, He did well to be angry.
Moreover, after a Christian has fallen into some gross foul sin God may frown
and write bitter things against him, fill his Conscience with terror, hang him
over Hell, and threaten to remove him out of his sight: till he has renewed
his Repentance. A foul Fall does so grieve the Spirit, that it may make God
carry himself toward his as if he were an Enemy. God does deal with his for
their great Transgressions, as David with Absalom, who commanded him out of his
sight, 2 Samuel 14.24 In this sad and deplorable Case, Evidences for Heaven are
blurred, and all old Experiences of the Love and Favor of God are under
Ground. David after his fall was as a Dead man, and Prayed, Cast me not away
from thy presence, Psalm. 51.11.

Fourthly, When a man has Omitted known and commanded Duties, let down his
Watch, and neglected his Lords Work: and falls a nodding, or into a Lethargy,
(as these Virgins did) till roused up with the Cry of Midnight, he is not
prepared to go in with Christ. If a Man's Conscience draws up a black Bill of
Indictment against him, for the neglect of the most weighty and important
Duties, he is no more fit to meet Christ, than Adam after he had eaten the
Forbidden Fruit, or a Steward who had much betrusted him to improve for his
Lords use, and let all seasons go wherein he might have Traded and G^in'd
somewhat for him. How can he appear before him when no fair account may be
seen; so the Lord has entrusted thee with many Talents, Grace, Parts, Time,
Strength, Health, Means, etc. And you are not Lords but Stewards of all these*
How can you with comfort and confidence stand before Christ, if that be
neglected? O thus it is with many a Christian, who has lost that vigor, zeal,
activity and forwardness for the Work of God that once he had. Hence come those
sad Alarms, stings and convictions of Conscience, shakings and sinkings of
spirit under the sense of guilt.

And is not this the case of many Virgins? so that if Christ should arrest, and
summon them by death, and call them to reddere rationem, give an Account, how
many must Answer, Not ready Lord, my work is not done. O then betimes do your
work, and set things right in your souls every day.

Secondly, When is a Christian actually ready?

Answ. A Christian is actually ready when he has those rare and gracious
qualifications of the wise Virgins, ( viz.) his Vessel clean, and the Oil in
his Lamp and Vessel, i. e. The Spirit of Christ and the graces of the Spirit:
which are called Rows of Jewels, Chains of Gold, and Rivers of Living Water.
This is the Anointing, 1 Job. 2.27. That Oil upon Aarons Head which ran down to
the Skirts of his Garment: Christ the Head of Influences (of whom Aaron was a
Type) was Anointed above his Fellows, and of his fullness Saints receive grace
for grace, John 1.

But more particularly,

First, When a Christian (being past from nature to grace) can prove by the
Word that infallible truth, that he is in a state of Salvation, and has
therefore good hope, through grace, that his soul is safe.

When Noah was shut up in the Ark he was out of danger, and prepared for the
deluge, and could not be drowned, etc.

When a Believer is gotten into Christ, he has shot the Gulf, and cannot be
damned, Romans 8.1. If thine affection be espoused to the Lord Jesus, and
divorced from all others, so that thou have accepted him for thine Husband, and
given him thine heart, thou can not fall short of heaven, or miss of going in
with Christ. Sinner, do not count upon a Kingdom of Glory and eternal
Salvation, without a sound Conversion. Read what Christ: spoke to his own
Disciples, Mat. 18 3. Verily I say unto you, except you be Converted you shall
not enter into the Kingdom of Heaven: What more plain than the Doctrine Christ
Preached to Nicodemus Except a man be born again he cannot see the Kingdom of
God, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of Heaven Joh. 3.3. Why then should
thou hope, and expect to enter into Life, who do hide and harbor Gods
Enemies, and art yet in thy sin Christian, has thy renewed heaven-born-soul
the Impress of the Divine Image on it? Caesar's Coi^ had Caesar's Image? Is
holiness to the Lord engraven upon thy heart? Have thou that divine dr^ that
can swim against the Stream of corrupt n^^ture? God is resolved that not one
grain of savin^ Grace shall go to Hell: Certainly, thou art a ch^^sen Vessel
and ready, when ever Christ shall ^^ to go in with him to the Marriage. The
rich of Glory are the inheritance of the Saints, and thou have a mind to see
the very Picture of (...) invisible God, look upon a pious, humble, (...) man:
There is a resplendent beauty on the Be^^ver, no Son so much like a Father, no
Daughter like her Mother as the Saint is like God. What is brave Silken habit
upon the body, Earings, Jewels, upon the Neck, Plaited-Hair, Curls, Towers,
Spots, and Paints on the face and forehead, to a Sanctified holy heart? The
Church is glorious within, there is that in the Christian ( viz. the new
Creature) that can call God Father; Holiness is the Arms of heaven, the
Harbinger of heaven; we may see the harvest of glory in the seed of grace.
Grace is glory in its nonage, and glory is grace grown up to its perfect
stature: The time cannot be long between a Christians Conversion and his
Coronation.

Secondly, When a believer is gotten into the suburbs of Glory by Communion
with God, and his heart is sincerely set to please and honor him; when it is
thus, he may say with Jacob, this is no other but the house of God, and this is
the Gate of Heaven. It Is real Acquaintance and Communion with Christ, and
conformity to Christ, must make us ready. Can thou take the greatest
complacency in pleasing God, and say of it as the Martyr, of his prison, This
is better than any Pleasure, than any Paradise, I pronounce thee ready for the
divine Presence. When a man has a single eye to make Gods Glory his mark, and
is sometimes taken into the mount of divine Communion he is certainly prepared
for the vision and eternal fruition of God above. But on the contrary, if thou
art a stranger to God, and unacquainted with Christ, and the fellowship of the
Spirit, he will say to thee at the last day, as to the thready foolish Virgins,
I know you not, Mat. 25.1^. What I shall say more to this question shall be in
the Application.

SECT. IV.
THE fourth Branch of the Doctrine assigns, and shows the Reasons why those
that are ready shall go in with Christ. Upon which the necessity of our
preparing will plainly appear.

The Reasons respect God, the Lord Jesus Christ, the blessed Spirit, and
Believers themselves.

The Reasons that respect God, are, 1. From the eternal purpose of God. 2. From
the pure Love of God. 3. The sure Promise of God.

2. From Christ. 1. His Relation to them. 2. His Obligation to them. 3 His
Prayer for them. 4 The Dignity and honor of Christ.

3. From the Spirit. 1. The Sanctification of the Spirit. 2. The habitation of
the Spirit.

4. From Believers, and the right that they have to heaven. 1. They have a
purchased right. 2. An hereditary right. 3. A right of fitness

1. This divine qualification of Saints for heaven is from the purpose of God,
which is as unalterable as God himself. Immediate Communion with God in heaven
is that happy and sublime End Believers are appointed unto, Faith, Repentance,
and an innocent pious life of conformity to God, is the direct way and means to
come to, and obtain that end. The way to the Temple of Honor, is through the
Temple of Virtue.

He that ascends the holy hill of God must have clean hands. Man by nature is
in a corrupt and cursed State of Damnation: and not only disioyned from God,
but Alienated from God, and there can be no fellowship without friendship. Man
hates God in his heart, and two cannot walk together until the^ be Agreed, Amos
3. God and sin cannot be together if so, the Lapsed Peccant Angels might have
stayed in Heaven: So then, that which cast them out mus^ needs keep us out. The
best part of corrupt man is against God, his mind is enmity in the abstract,
Romans 8 7. which notes an exceeding excessive enmity; and can there be any
familiarity where there is this enmity? Moreover, they that do not prepare for
Heaven do not mind Heaven, Romans 8.5. All their thoughts, projects, designs,
delights, do savor of the flesh; Light and Darkness, Fire and Water, Love and
Enmity are not more contrary than our dispositions to God: Hence results our
misery, to be at odds with our Maker; and can there be any thing more
monstrous, than for a creature to oppugn and hate his Creator? And if Absalom
rise against his father David, no wonder he commands him home to his house. But
who complains of this rooted enmity to God, which we have cause to bewail in
tears of blood. The unholy say to God, Come not near us, stand by thy self. And
it is no wonder if God say to them, Depart from me, ye Workers of Iniquity. But
God has ordained all who shall go in with Christ to Heaven to be holy, Ephesians.
1.4. God has from the beginning chosen you to salvation, through the
sanctification of the Spirit, 2 These. 2.13. 1 Pet 1.2.

Our effectual Calling, Conformity to the Image of his Son, Justification and
Glorification is from Gods Purpose and Predestination, Rom 8.28, 29, 30.
Holiness is, the beaten Road and Highway to our Fathers House: so that it will
not consist with the purpose, honor and holiness of God to admit unholy Men to
Heaven.

2. The prepared soul is infinitely and eternally beloved of God, who has put
his Name in the Book of Life. No heart can conceive or tongue express how dear
and precious these Jewels, i. e. holy Men and Women are to the God of Heaven.
To every wise Virgin it may be said as to Daniel, A Man greatly beloved, or as
the Angel Gabriel said to the blessed Virgin Mary, Thou have found favor with
God, Dan. 10 11. Luke 1.30. If a man were the Darling of all the Angels, and a
Favorite to all the Emperors, Kings and Noble Persons on the Earth; If all
created Beings, viz Heaven, Earth, Sun, Moon and Stars, Fowls, Fishes, Beasts
did love him, and rejoice at his welfare. It Is nothing to the favor of God, to
have a place in his heart: Gods Love was David's life, In thy favor is life,
and thy loving kindness is better than life, Psalm. 63.3. Titus Vespasian was
styled Deliciae humani generis, the delight of Mankind: but the Believer is the
Delight of God, his Jedidiah; Abraham was Gods Friend and Favorite, St. Paul
wrote to all in Rome, beloved of God, Romans 1.7. Christian, trace and follow the
Crystal stream of Divine Grace (which laid the foundation of thine eternal
happiness) and thou shall find it in the heart of God. But we are like men that
look on the River Nilus, and gaze wondrously on the streams, remain still
ignorant of the Head and Original from whence they issue, Since thou wast
precious in my sight, thou have been honorable, and I have loved thee; Thou
have loved them as thou have loved me, Isa. 43.4. John 17.23. And if it be a
Curse to be unready, as those foolish Virgins, who were therefore shut out, it
must needs be infinite mercy to be ready. The Apostle makes it the First Fruits
of glory, to be ready: To be prepared unto glory is the glory of mercy. I know
not which (says a Divine) is the greatest love, to prepare for glory, or to
bring into the actual possession of it. For Divine Grace so to Metamorphize and
transform a Man, as to turn a Lion into a Lamb, Saul a bloody Persecutor into a
zealous Preacher, a Devil into a Saint, to make of poisonous dross a vessel of
Gold, and then to fill it with glory, is love with a witness, Luke 8.2. 1 Cor.
6.10.11. Augustine made one his servant that would have killed him. The great
God has made many such, Romans 5.8. Col. 1.21. Man's heart while unregenerated is
the worst part of him, Jer. 17.9. For hardness it is as a stone, for darkness a
dungeon, for filthiness a dunghill, for abominable wickedness and enmity to God
an Epitome of Hell, so that Grace does precede and prepare for Glory; The
ground of all this, Thou have loved them as thou have loved me.

3. The promise of God, who will perform his truth to Jacob and his mercy to
Abraham, Mic. 7. ult. The Promise has the strength of God. God has put all
Covenant good for his Servants into Promises. The Promises are nothing else but
a Deed of Gift Sealed with the Truth of God; God promised to bring his people
out of Egypt into Canaan, and out of Babylon to Jerusalem, and he performed it:
Heaven is not only a purchased possession, but a promised possession, The
Promises of the Word are either absolute or conditional of grace or to grace;
To all the Believer is heir by virtue of his part in Christ, in whom all the
Promises are Yea and Amen: The Promises of the new Covenant do point at the
prepared soul, and they secure God and heaven to us. The Gospel promises
Eternal Life to every one that Believes, John 16.36. God promised to be the
Believers God, to dwell in them, to walk in them, and that he will never,
never, never leave them nor forsake them, 2 Cor. 6.16. Heb. 13.5. Not one thing
has failed of all that the Lord your God has spoken, said Joshua to the
people, Josh. 23.14. God has made a promise of a glorious Crown to him that
perseveres in grace, Rev. 2.10. Mat. 24.13. Godliness has the Promise of this
life: and that which is to come; Christians, God that cannot lie, has promised
you heaven, whose Truth and Faithfulness Obliges him to the Performance.

THe next Ground and Reason is from Christ why prepared Souls shall go in with
him to the Marriage.

1. His relation to them, which is very near. These ready Virgins are Christ's
Spouse, and must therefore go in with him to the Marriage. Christ the holy
Head, and the Church the holy Bride are one, Heb. 2.11. John 17.23. He that is
joined to the Lord is one Spirit, 1 Cor. 6 17. They are the Lambs Wife. Christ
calls Believers his Sister, his Spouse: And there is none so near by
Consanguinity as a Sister, none so near by affinity as a Spouse. The Church is
the Kings Daughter, and Married to the Kings Son: That which is between Christ
and Believers is Mutual. 1. There is a mutual knowledge and acquaintance, I know
my Sheep, and I am known of mine, Joh. 10.14. These have known me, says
Christ, John 17.25. 2. There is mutual interest and propriety, Cant. 2. 16 3.
There is mutual love and affection, the Church is set on Christ's heart, and
Christ on the Believers heart. 4. There is mutual converse and intimacy. 5.
Mutual resemblance and likeness, they serve as a Glass to see each other. 6.
There is mutual sympathy and compassion. They being thus near and dear to each
other, cannot be long a part. Christ's heart in Heaven is so set upon his
Militant Church on Earth, that he does long for their company to comfort and
cheer them: and this he will do in a little time, behold I come quickly, and my
reward is with me.

2. Reas. Or ground is from his own Obligation and Personal Promises, which
will be accomplished: Christ is the faithful and true witness, and must be as
good as his word; he will sooner destroy and Annihilate the World than suffer
any part of his Word or Promise to fail, Mat. 5. He told his Disciples, He went
to Heaven to prepare a place for them, and he has taken up the possession of
it in their behalf. This is so certain, that believers are said to sit together
in heavenly places in Christ Jesus, Ephesians. 2 6 He has also promised to come
again and receive them unto himself, John 14 3. Where I am (said our dear and
blessed Lord) There shall my Servants be. Every holy man has heaven and glory
in the Promise of the Gospel: and that under Christ's own Hand and Seal. And if
with Peter ye desire to know what you shall have hereafter to requite all your
services, and sufferings for Christ here. He will tell you, Mat. 19.27, 28. And
Jesus said unto them, verily, I say unto you, that ye which have followed me in
the regeneration, when the Son of Man shall sit in the Throne of his Glory, ye
also shall sit upon Twelve Thrones.

3. Reas. Christ's most excellent Mediatory Prayer before his death, does assure
every Christian indeed that he should be with him. Christ the great Favorite
of Heaven was always heard. God could never deny any request that ever Christ
made. Father (said Christ) I know that thou bear me always. I know (said
Martha to Christ) Whatsoever thou will ask of God, God will give it thee. Joh.
11.22. Christians, for the joy of your hearts hear what your dear Lord pray^d
for all his Elect. Father, I will that they whom thou have given me be with me
where I am, that they may behold my Glory. Now, there was the merit of his
blood and passion went along with this Prayer, Joh. 17.24. I have finished the
work which thou gave me to do, said Christ to his Father, Joh. 17.4.
Moreover, Jesus the great Advocate with the Father appears and pleads in heaven
for the same thing every day, and will, till all the Saints come safe to Glory.
He ever lives to make Intercession for us, Heb. 7. 25.

4. Reas. The honor and dignity of Christ calls for this readiness, who is the
Prince of all the Kings of the Earth: the Unregenerated are without God, and
none of Christ. His Servants you are whom ye obey, Romans 6.16 Wicked men are the
Devils Spouse, the men of the Earth are the Worlds Spouse. Justitiaries and the
self Righteous are the Laws Spouse, and it would be a great dishonor for such
to go in with Christ. Will any man invite or suffer Toads, Serpents, Vipers or
Devils, to come and abide with him and Lodge in his bosom? Is it fit a man that
is Leprous, and has Plague-Sores running on him, should come and stand in the
Presence of a Prince? The Lepet under the Law, though a King, was to dwell
alone, the strange Woman in Moses time was to have her Hair cut, and Nails
pared before the was to come into the Congregation of Gods people, or be
Admitted into the Church. Who among the Tents of the Uncircumcised can think of
appearing before the Holy God, and not tremble? It was one of the Articles of
High Treason brought in against Cardinal Woolsey, that he had a stinking
Breath, and durst come into the Kings Presence. It will be a dishonor to
Christ before Angels and Men in the Face of the whole World to own those for
his, who have the Devils mark on them Sinner do thou think to leap into
Heaven, or come into the Presence of God whose Eyes are Pure, being clothed
with filthy Garments? Rebeckah put on her Bracelets and Ornaments, before she
came to Isaac. Our Lord Jesus would have the Chamber, and the Table Furnished,
and made ready, where he and his Disciples met to eat the Passover. Preparation
is necessary when we come into the outward Court of Ordinances, much more when
we are to enter into the Holy of Holies, viz. Heaven it self: Rehoboam did evil
because he prepared not his heart to seek the Lord, 2 Chronicles. 12.14

Soul, prepare to meet thy God in Glory, if thou have any respect to his
Honor, and thine Eternal Welfare. God your Father, Christians, has infinite
respect to the Dignity of his Son, and so must we. Severus never kept in his
Court any ill disposed persons, and will God tolerate them in his Presence?
Alexander the Great inviting Jonathan the High Priest to his Wedding, commanded
that Jonathan should be clothed in Purple, being to sit next to Alexander. It
is a part of a Princes honor to have his Bride ready Atir'd to welcome and
entertain him, when he shall return to her: She owes this honor to him, and he
expects it from her: So the Lord Jesus deserves this honor of all his people
to be in readiness for him. Suppose these Virgins had turned Harlots, and gone
a Whoring from him till his very coming, and then had been taken in, what might
the World think, does he love the company of Harlots? Christian, if thy heart
go a Whoring from God, after the World and Lusts, it is a disgrace to the Lord
Jesus: Whereas it is for the honor of this Great King at the time of
Solemnizing the Marriage, for his Wife to make ready, Rev: 19.7 Be ye also
ready, says Christ.

THE third Ground respects the Spirit.

First, the Sanctification of the Spirit.

Secondly, The Habitation of the Spirit.

1. The Sanctification of the Spirit, which has infused his whole Divine
Nature through the holy soul of the Believer; and though a godly man is not
Sanctified perfectly, yet he is Regenerated and Sanctified in every part, viz.
Spirit, Soul and Body, 2 Cor. 5.17 1 These. 5.23. 2 These. 2.13. Saints are
sanctified by the Holy Ghost, Rom 15.6 And must to Heaven, Tit. 3.5. Acts 26.18.

Secondly, the Habitation of the Spirit: God has his upper house and his lower
house, the highest Heavens and the lowest hearts: Hear a comfortable word from
the Mouth of God, I will dwell among the Children of Israel, 1 King 6. 13.
Believers are a Habitation of God through the Spirit, Ephesians. 2. ult. The Heart of
an unbeliever is the Devils house, Mat. 12.44. And he that has the Purity of a
Dove will not take up the Lodging of a Devil. And if the heart of a wicked man
be a little Hell, the heart of a holy man is a little Heaven. The Believer has
Glory in him, Heaven in him, The Kingdom of Heaven is within you, (says
Christ) ye are the Temple of God, and the Spirit of God dwells in you, 1 Cor.
3.16. Origens father ('it is said) many times uncovered the breast of his son as
he lay asleep, and kissed it, as the Temple wherein the Holy Ghost had taken up
his Residence: Christians, stand and wonder at this mercy, and say as
Elizabeth, Whence is it that the Mother of my Lord should come to me, or rather
my Lord himself? Not many wise men after the flesh, not many Mighty, not many
Noble are called, 1 Cor. 1.26. Under the Law the Lion and the Eagle were passed
by, and the Lamb and the Dove were chosen. That God should come over the heads
of Kings and Queens to visit thee* O wonderful Condescension that God should
dwell with us (said a serious Person) who have not a hole to put our heads in!
Thus it is, God has taken up his residence in many a little house: The
prepared soul may say of the presence of the Living and true God, as one said
of his Idols (who dwelt in a little Cottage) The gods are here with me. But
will God in very deed dwell with men on Earth (says Solomon) 2 Chronicles. 6.18.
Yea, God by his Word and Spirit does dwell with men on Earth, 2 Cor. 6.16 Where
God has recorded his Name, he has promised to meet his people, and bless
them, Exodus 20.24. The Saints who are pure in heart see his outgoings in the
Sanctuary. The King is held in his Galleries, Cant. 7.5. And they who meet God
and Christ in his lower Galleries of Ordinances, shall ere long meet him in the
upper Gallery of glory. For this we groan earnestly, desiring to be clothed
upon with our House, which is from Heaven, 2 Cor. 5.2.

THe fourth Ground respects Gods people, together with the Place into which
they are to go with Christ. Those that are prepared by Grace, have an absolute
and unquestionable right to the Kingdom of glory, into which no unclean thing
shall ever enter. Believers who are holy in heart and life have a threefold
right to Heaven.

First, they have a purchased right, and that by the blood of God. The heavenly
Inheritance of Gods prepared people is bought with a price, so that what the
great Surety, and Captain of our Salvation has purchased, Gods people shall
actually possess: this is most certain, Acts 20.28. 1 Cor. 6.20. Ephesians. 1.14.

Secondly, they have an hereditary right to Heaven, being of the blood royal,
and born to the Kingdom, They are not of the world, as I am not of the world;
He that it born in mine house, said Abraham, is mine heir: every Believer is as
Isaac, a son indeed, an heir of salvation, Romans 1.14. And they have all the
right of Inheritance. Christians, you are all the Children of God, and heirs,
and Joynt-heirs with Christ, Romans 8. 17. This should affect your hearts with
infinite delight. The Kingdom wherein Augustus the Emperor most delighted was
that which he had by Inheritance.

Thirdly, They have an aptitudinary right, viz. a right by way of fitness, and
this is in the Text, Those that were ready went in with him to the Marriage.
The Presence of God and Angels does not become the unclean: Let men's Pretenses
and Profession be never so fair, without grace there is no glory: The Rhodians
and the Lydians had a Law, That those sons which followed not their Fathers in
virtue, but lived vitiously, should be disinherited. Without are Dogs, says
St. John, Rev. 22.15. The Irish Air will not brook a Toad or Serpent to breathe
in it, much less will Heaven suffer wicked men to live there. Those that will
not, cannot please God, are unfit to appear in his Presence. Plants and Trees
may associate and converse with beasts, and beasts with men, as soon as man with
God in Heaven, till they be holy: but believers do please and honor God, and
make it their business to do his Will, They have kept thy Word, I am glorified
in them, says Christ, John 17. And them that honor me will I honor, 1 Samuel
2.30. The well-doers must receive the commendation of Well done, They that have
done good shall come forth to the Resurrection of life, John 5.29. Blessed are
they that do his Commandments, that they may have right to the Tree of Life,
and may enter in through the Gate into the City, Rev. 22.14.

To conclude, all Gods prepared people have now the right of propriety to
Heaven, and when they die they shall have right of possession, This day thou
shall be with me in Paradise, Luke 23.43. This is that the Saints on Earth
breathe and pant after, Phil. 1^.23. I desire to be dissolved, and to be with
Christ, which is best of me.

SECT. V.
1. Use
MUst none go in with Christ but prepared souls, and are Gods people ready to go?

1. Then Divine Grace in the Saints is wonderfully efficacious. The best of us
(like Joshua before the Angel) are clothed with polluted garments, and too much
unready. Now to adorn and beautify souls stained and fullied within (in whom
there is the filthiness of the flesh and spirit, viz. an universal defilement)
is the highest evidence of the Power and Virtue of the glorious Grace of God
When a Man's heart is molded and fashioned for God the Divine Spirit (like the
Sword of the Lord and Gideon) does great things, He that has wrought us for
the self-same thing is God, (says Paul) 2 Cor. 5.5 Thine Hands have made me
and fashioned me, (says David) I will praise thee, for I am fearfully and
wonderfully made, mavelous are thy Works, I am curiously wrought. If David
wondered at the Wisdom, Power and Goodness of God in his well-formed comely
body, consisting of such various parts and members, how should we stand and
wonder at the transforming and renewing man's soul after the Image of God. The
Law was written on the two Tables with the Finger of God, and this upon the
hidden man of the heart, is also the Lords Work, and mavelous in our eyes.
The Work in the Tabernacle and Temple was rare and curious, but yet not to
compare with this of the Holy Ghost; It shall be said of Jacob and Israel, what
has God wrought. We are his workmanship, Ephesians. 2.10. In the great House of God
the Church, all are not Vessels of Gold, and prepared for glory. But we may
know what Vessels are for special use, by their metal and curious engraving on
them. Sinner, if thine eyes were open, thou might see Heaven, God and Glory
engraves upon every such vessel of mercy. Moreover, this supernatural grace in
the heart is not a dead habit, but a living spring, which prompts men to duty,
1 Cor. 15 10.

SEcondly, Faithful Ministers (who are Workers together with God, and watch for
men's souls) must vehemently urge the necessity of Faith, Repentance and
Holiness, without which none are ready, or can possibly be saved; There is a
spiritual Lethargy seized upon the Christian World: they all slumbred and
slept. How stirring in our Ministry must we be to awaken men out of this stupor
and security, and to fit them for Heaven. The Scripture has its sting, and its
honey; there is Mount Ebal and Mount Gerizim, the Rod as well as the Mannah;
the Arrow of Repentance must be levelled at the heart, and we should deliver
the whole Council of God. The Word that I shall speak, that thou shall speak,
said the Angel to Balaam, Numb. 22.35. Christ's Ambassadors have their Authority
and Commission from God and his Word, and therefore they must be plain,
particular and piercing in their Preaching, otherwise the blood of never-dying
souls will lie at their door: The Word of God like a well-drawn Picture, looks
right upon every one: and what we find in Sacred Writ we must preach, please or
displease. Is not this written in the New Testament, that he that believes
shall be saved, and he that believes not shall be damned, Mark 16.16. He that
believes not shall not see life, but the wrath of God abides on him, John 3.
last. Men must be turned from darkness to light, from the Power of Satan to God
(which is the chief end of Preaching) before they can receive the Inheritance
among them that are sanctified by faith in Christ, Acts 26.18. You must turn or
die, repent or perish, be in tears or flames, be holy or never see Gods Face in
Glory, Luke 13.5 Heb 12.14. Happy are they that live under a Ministry who have
will and skill to prepare souls for Heaven. Particular Preaching is penetrating
and profitable, 2 Samuel 12.7. Acts 2.36, 37. General Preaching (said a worthy
Divine) is deceitful and deluding Preaching. He that Preaches to every one
preaches to no one, (says a learned Doctor.) It Is like a loaf of bread set
before a Company of little Children, said Mr. Hildersham. Universaliae non
operantur King James said of a Reverend Prelate of this Land, Methinks this man
Preaches of death, as if death were at my back. John the Baptist, who went
before Christ in the spirit and power of Elias to make ready a people prepared
for the Lord, was called a Crier: and how severe and strict was he in his
Doctrine and Life?

Sinners asleep upon the Mouth of Hell must be awakened, as it were with the
voice of thunder. If a Traveller passing through a Town in the dead of the
night, saw a house burning; Would he whisper out Fire, Fire? no but cry Fire,
Fire, Fire, with a loud voice. It Is the Cry at Midnight that must awake the
slumbring Virgins, and nothing else; Jonah must cry in the streets of Nineveh,
and Jeremy must cry in the streets of Jerusalem. But what must we say or cry to
the secure World? Mercy, Pardon, Peace, Salvation, Heaven? No, Fire, Fire,
Hell, Hell, Damnation, eternal Wrath and Vengeance, without speedy and Hearty
repentance to God: this is the Plough and Harrow of the Law, that must go deep
and break the fallow ground, and turn up the Turf upon the Sinners impenient
obdurate heart. John the Baptist, and Jesus began their Ministry with the
doctrine of repentance, Mat. 3.8.4.17. Soundness, sincerity, zeal, perspicuity
and impartiality in the distribution of the Word, is ordinarily blessed of God,
to make ready a people prepared for him. So did the holy Man preach who was
called the Heaven-driver. Our errand and business is the same with John the
Baptist, to persuade and woo for Christ, and when we have gained Men's consent,
and espoused them to Christ, our work is half done. Ministers are Gods
Builders, Men must be fitted for the Building: The Stones in the Temple were
not rude and unpolished Stones, but hewed, squared and made ready, so also were
the Utensils of the Tabernacle, the Gold, Silver, Brass, and carved Timber.
There are no dead and durty stones fit for Gods great House above, They that
were ready went in with him, etc.

Sinner, is thy state hopeful, who cannot, will not live a life of holiness; It
may be thou have the face, profession, and form of Godliness, so had the
foolish Virgins, so had the Pastor and Members of the Church in Sardis, Rev. 3,
1. There are also many that have not so much as the bark or form of Religion,
and hate the life and power of it. Can thou mock, and scoff at a virtuous
pious life, and think thy self undone to part with thy lusts, and give thy
heart to God, and yet hope well? If Christ does not reign in thine heart, and
make it holy, thou can have no hope here, nor Heaven hereafter; Command
(says God) that every Leper be put out of the Camp, Numb. 5.2. Heaven, that
Crown of Righteousness is called The Inheritance of the Saints. The Crown of
heavenly glory will not suit with, or be set on a Lepers head, Col. 1.12. 2 Timothy 4.8.

THirdly, If none shall go in with Christ but those which are ready, but a few
then comparatively of this great World shall be Saved, and enter into Glory.
God has said it, whose Word must stand. It Is but one of a City, and two of a
Family, Jer. 3 14 There is but a handful ready for Heaven, but Millions of men
unready. How few of the six hundred thousand that came out of Egypt entered into
the Promised Land? Look into the broad way to death, and hell, and see what
Troops and Droves of men and women are there, and how few there be in the
narrow way: No wonder you hear the Apostle say, Though Israel be as the Sand of
the Sea, but a Remnant shall be saved. And who can read, and hear this, and not
be astonished? Are there not Multitudes, Thousands, and Ten Thousands that have
the Image of Hell on them, and ready to drop into Eternal Flames, and will you
not believe it? Separate the Wheat from, the Tares, the Swine from the Sheep,
the Precious from the Vile, viz. all Profane persons, all Hypocrites, and it
will appear. What thoughts of heart, fear and trembling, should this cause in
every place and among all people? When Christ told his Friends, the Elect,
Tenderhearted Disciples, there was but one bad among them, they were all
afraid. What cares, fears, jealousies should we have about our Souls? All that
concerns the soul is weighty, whether it be good, or whether it be evil. The
evil of the soul is an Eternal evil, and the good of the soul is an Eternal
good: Where then is your caution, and solicitude about this soul affair? If the
Soul miscarry and is lost, all goes with it, Mat. 16.26 What will it profit a
man, to gain the whole World, and to lose his own Soul? Christian, do thou
not see many set out in the Race, that fall short, and lose the Crown? and
shall we not serve the Lord with fear? 1 Cor. 9 24. Psalm. 2 11. Heb. 4 1. Many
shall seek to enter in at the Gate of Glory, and shall not be able, therefore
strive, and strive as in an agony, as for thy life, to pass the strait Gate,
Luke 13.24 Many are Called, few Converted. The Children of the Kingdom shall he
cast out, (said Christ) Oh, how sad is this! Mat. 8 12 Be not deceived, the
heart is a great deep, very deceitful, a most accurate Impostor. Grace is a
Mystery, the Old Serpent is subtle and very busy, and Pirate-like, sets forth
his false Colors, and transforms himself into an Angel of Light. Therefore
take thine heart with thee in Private, and search and try thy state, and
compare thy Heart and Life by the Word, that thou may find whether thou art
ready, Isa. 28.20. 2 Cor. 13.5. Gal. 6.4

FOurthly, If those that are ready shall go in with Christ, then Gods dear
Saints should not fear Death, but rather desire it. Those that are fit to die,
need not fear to die. Death is yours, (says St. Paul to Believers) which though
it dissolve the Union between the Soul and Body, it cannot part God and his
People. It Is more facil and easy to dry up the vast Ocean, or to separate
Light and Heat from the Sun, than to separate Christ from his Church, Romans
8.35. God says, They are his, my Portion my Jewels, not one of which shall be
lost. All Gods holy Ones shall come safe to their Fathers House. Their Names
are written in Heaven, their Head and Husband is in Heaven, John 14 2. And as
St. Paul affirms, That Saints sit there, Ephesians. 2.6. The Righteous, said St.
Peter, are scarcely Saved, 1 Pet. 4.18. But truly saved. Whereas they that are
but almost saved, are never saved. A thing done with difficulty is done; it was
with difficulty and danger the Israelites got into the Land of Canaan, with
danger Paul and his company got safe to shore, and though they were in great
Peril, not one perished. A Babe in Christ is built upon a Rock, and a Child in
the Ark had been as safe as a Giant. Heaven and Happiness is not in our hands,
but in the hands of One mighty to save. None can pluck them out of my Fathers
hands, underneath are everlasting Arms. Who can be too hard for Omnipotency, or
fetch a Believer out of Gods Hand? The Covenant of Grace is an Everlasting
Covenant, and shall stand fast. Death and the Grave could not dissolve the
Hypostatical Union of Christ, He took his humane Body never to be separated
from it; so also his Mystical Body. It Is true, Death and Doomsday must be very
terrible to Vessels of Wrath, fitted to Destruction, God, Christ, Scripture,
and Conscience are against them, and all their Heaven is here, Luke 16. Psalm.
17.14 The Malefactor must needs fear the coming and face of the Judge: When
Paul reasoned of Judgment, Felix trembled, and cause enough, Acts 24.26 But
lift up your Heads and Rejoice, says Christ: Haste, my Beloved, Haste. Amen.
So come Lord Jesus. When the Bride is attired, and her beautiful Ornaments
about her, she expects the coming of the Bridegroom; and when he comes his
Reward is with him: The Martyr could say, It Is well for the present (who had
the First fruits of Glory) and it would be better. Your sorrow (said Christ) to
his disconsolate Disciples, shall be turned into joy, I will not leave you, I
will see you again. Say then, Welcome Death, who must carry me home: The
beloved Wife does not fear, when abroad, to come to her Husband, nor the
dutiful Child to his indulgent Father: Christ called his Death, A going to his
Father: Who died to bring many Sons to Glory. A Godly Gentlewoman had made
Death so familiar to her (by conversing with it, and preparing for it) that she
did look upon it as her Fathers Servant sent to fetch her home, from School,
Death does the Saints more good than all Ordinances or Afflictions, it brings
into fellowship with Christ quickly, immediately, eternally; the certainty of
all Believers coming to Heaven, was Typified in the Israelites passing over the
Red Sea, not one was Drowned, neither was one Egyptian Saved. To note, that all
wicked men will be Damned. The men of the world have a short Heaven, and all in
hand; but the Christians best is yet behind. In this strange Land, Gods People
are not known, being as Princes out of their own Country; But when Christ who
is our life shall appear, we shall be like him, and see him as he is, 1 John
3.2.

FIfthly, It greatly concerns all while they have time and means, to make ready
for Eternity, Two things argues an excellent spirit and great wisdom.

1. To see Evils afar off. 2. To see Time and Opportunity when it is near.
First, To see Evils afar off, especially Soul-evils, an Eternal loss; A
prudent man sees the evil, and hides himself. Secure sinner, look forward,
and see what is before thee, or over thine head, viz. a cloud bigger than a
man's hand, yea, a storm in the clouds* which Noah saw a hundred and twenty
Years before it came. The threatening Word, like Lightning, has ^^asht in thine
eyes, expect a Clack and Thunderbolt of Divine Wrath shortly to follow. The
Lord will come with Fire, to render his anger with fury, and his rebukes with
flames of Fire. The day comes that shall burn as an Oven, and all that do
wickedly shall be stubble, Isa. 66 15. Mal. 4.1. The Coming of the Lord draws
near. James 5.8. Behold the Judge stands before the door; the year of
vengeance and day of recompense is at hand; He has appointed a day in which he
will judge the World in Righteousness, Act. 17.31. He that shall come, will
come, and will not tarry, Heb. 10.37. The day of the Lord so comes as a Thief
in the night, and when they shall say Peace and Safety, sudden destruction
comes upon them, and they shall not escape, 1 These 5. 13.

Secondly, To see time, and opportunity when it is near, for every thing is
beautiful in its Season: God has joined Time and Duty together, so must we.
Hear what advice wise Solomon gives us for our future welfare, Eccl. 9.10.
Whatsoever thy hand finds to do, do it with thy might, for there is no Work,
nor Device, nor Wisdom, nor Knowledge, in the Grave, whither thou go. When
thy breath is gone nothing can be done; what we leave undone here will be
undone for ever: There is no coming back into the World to act another part, to
live a Second life, to mend our work: For as the Tree falls so it lies;
after death there is no means, no Ministry, no mercy, no duty: It will then be
Impossible to repent, the date of Gods long suffering will be out, and the day
of grace over, and no patience, no pity, no pardon on Gods part: There is no
heaven to be found in hell, nor one drop of water to cool the tongue. Then
fear, and seek the Lord, and secure your Souls while he may be found, Isa.
55.6. Go now to the Fountain of Divine Grace, and fill and furnish your hearts
with oil, or it will be too late to buy in a little time. It Is sad and doleful
to think how poor Sinners will cry out for oil and grace, pity and pardon when
it is too late, Give us of your Oil, for our Lamps are gone out, (says the
foolish Virgins.) Is it nothing, Sinner, to slight an offered Savior, will it
not be bitterness in the latter end? This is the Condemnation, for how shall we
escape if we neglest so great Salvation? Heb. 2.3 Now, or never; the Holy God
says, To Day, and Christ says, He is at the Door, Rev. 3.20 Will you open to
him, or keep the door of your Hearts shut? What, shut out, and put off a
Christ, a Christ, who is worth infinite Worlds? God; forbid. Say in the words
of the Psalmist, Be ye lifted up ye everlasting Doors, and the King of Glory
shall come in, Psalm. 24, 7, 9 Sinner, remember this, if thou do Bar and Bolt
thy Door against Christ now, there will be two other Doors shut in a little
time.

First, the Door of Heaven, the Gate of Mercy and Glory, to keep all out that
are out

Secondly, The Gate of Hell will be shut to keep all in that are in. When Noah
that righteous man was shut up in the Ark, there was no Entrance for any more,
all without were left to the deluge, and lost. It Is dreadful to the Malefactor,
when the Jailer turns the Key upon him, and leaves him in his Bolts and close
Prison. If it went so near Moses his heart to be shut out of Canaan, how will thou bear the shutting out of Heaven? There was a doleful Outcry, when the
Earth closed her Mouth, and Korah and his company went down. O what a hideous
shreck and cry will men make when the Mouth of Hell shall be shut upon Sinners
for ever, for ever.

SIxthly, Believers should highly esteem and heartily Love one another, being
to go in together. Christians, Love is of God, and Christ's new Commandment; And
let me tell you, Saints have the greatest Obligation to Love.

First, You are everlastingly and equally belove^ of one God and Father, and
are given to one (...) Redeemer, to whom your hearts are joined as your Head
and Husband. You are renewed and sanctified by one most holy Spirit, whose mark
is set upon you all; You are going to Jerusalem that is above, toward which
your faces are, being Fellow-Citizens with the Saints and Household of God. And
when your Warfare and Peregrination is ended, you shall begin with Christ, and
meet in an everlasting Habitation. Brethren, and Beloved, will you not love
them whom not only the great and good God, but great and good men have loved.
The Righteous is more excellent than his Neighbor; and such were David's
excellent ones, and his companions, Psalm. 16.3. and 119.63. It Is a Character of
a Citizen of Zion to contemn a vile person, but he honors them that fear the
Lord, Psalm 15.4. And by this we know, said the beloved Disciple, that we are
passed from Death to life. It Is storied of an ancient King who made a Feast,
and invited a company of poor Christians, and he bade his Nobles also. Now when
the Nobles came, he set them in his Hall; when the Christians came, he had them
up into his Presence Chamber: One asked him the Reason; He answered, I do not
this as I am their King here, for I respect you more than them: but as I am
King of another World, I must needs honor them, because God does most honor
them, and they be Kings and Princes with me. Moreover, it is said, that
Constantine the Great, kept many Godly Ministers about him, and though they were
but meanly habited, he not considering their outside, but honoring the Image
of God in them, set them at his Table, and took them with him whithe^ soever he
went. Maud the Wife to Henry the First, King of England, to show her Piety, did
wash, dress, wipe and kiss the Ulcers, Sores and Feet of poor people; which her
Brother seeing and disliking, said, If the King your Husband knew this, you
should never kiss his (...); She replied, The Feet of the King of Heaven are to
be preferred before the Lips of a King (...) Lar^h. Mr. John Fox that wrote our
Book of Martyrs, being asked (upon his return into England, after the Death of
Queen Mary) whether he did remember such poor Christians of his former
acquaintance? Answered, I forget Lords and Ladies to remember them:

SEventhly, See the Reason why Gods People (being in the pursuit of Christ and
Heaven) are and must be very Serious, Diligent and Constant in holy
Performances. David's soul longed for Gods Courts, to see his Power and his
Glory in his Sanctuary, Psalm. ^3. 2. Christian, art resolved to secure thy
Soul, and make sure for Heaven, go to the Ordinances of God as Christ's Mother
went into the Temple to find her Son, Divine Ordinances are the ways and walks
of the Lord in which the Spirit works: The Bed wherein Christ and the Spouse
meet and solace themselves. Here the North and South Wind blow upon Christ's
Garden, and cause the Spices to flow forth The Honey-dews and Showers of
Blessings under the Spouts of the Sanctuary, make their souls like Gideons
Fleece, moist when others are dry and dead. Holy David had cause to say, I love
the Habitation of thine House, and the Place where thine Honor dwells; and
he desired not only sometimes to go into Gods House, but to stay there for
ever, Psalm. 26.8. and 27, 4. What a comforting, encouraging, and comely sight
is it to see men going to Heaven, resort to the Word and pure Worship of God,
as Doves to their Windows, Psalm. 122.1 Christians, when and where should holy
men meet, but under the Ordinances of Heaven, and that upon holy Sabbaths, to
hear awakening Sermons, and to receive sealing Sacraments? Shall wicked men who
serve the Devil, and are likely to perish forever, meet in Taverns, Alehouses,
(...) houses, and at other Flesh-pleasing Recreations. (...) will not you meet
at the ^^sts of Wisdoms door. Here are the green and fresh Pastures in which
the Souls of the Righteous flourish. And what makes so many declining
Christians, (who are afraid to die, because unfit to die) but the loss of such
sweet opportunities for their Souls? Now to quicken all to daily Diligence, in
the fear of God consider these things.

1. You that are most remiss and careless would be as well thought of, as the
most Laborious, Lively, Watchful, Thriving Christian, to whom the Word Preached
is sweet as Honey, and preferred above their appoinred food. There are who can
willingly part with a Meals-meat, to hear a Sermon for their souls.

2. You would gladly reap their Sickbed Comforts, Joys, Refreshments, when
dying and going to the everlasting World. How many careless Christians, with
Ephraim, will tread out the Corn, but will not break the Clods, i. e. take
pains for their Souls?

3. You will be willing to go into Heaven with them. There were that would have
gone into the Ark with Noah, who had no mind to build an Ark to save them. To
close this I shall add two things:

1. To live in the Neglect of commanded Duties, and in the Practice of known
sins, will be a sting and stab to thy Soul.

2. To be slight, formal and heartless in Duties, will starve thy Soul.
Christian, this will not make for thy comfortable Account, or prepare thee to
go into Heaven with Christ.

SECT. VI.
SEcond Use of Caution or Dehortation; Must ^ope go in with Christ, but those
that are innocently prepared and fitted?

1. Take heed of leaning upon, and trusting too much to Lamps, Duties, Parts,
common Grace, Baptismal Regeneration, Morality, self Righteousness, legal
Terror, servile fear, or any thing that may leave you short of Christ and
Heaven? Think upon Chorazin and Bethsaida, and the Israelites that came to the
borders of Canaan, and were shut out of that good Land. How many have fallen
from the Pinnacle of the Temple into the place of torment? And if some go to
heaven by the gates of hell, others go to hell by the gates of Heaven.
Self-ignorance, carnal confidence, presumption and a false peace have caused
thousands to perish. The peace and calm in many a Man's conscience, is the
Devils peace, Luke 11.21. It Is sad to see men go singing to hell; whereas true
Peace is grounded upon the Covenant of Grace, the Righteousness of Christ,
union and communion with Christ, likeness and conformity to Christ, and the
witness of the Spirit, Isai. 10. Romans 8 6 Heb 12 14

2. Tremble at the thoughts of being a Sinner in Zion. Take heed of hypocrisy
in the Profession of Religion. An hypocrite is a wicked man under a disguise,
or in a godly man's habit; but the Vizard and Paint on men's faces will fall off
when they shall stand before God, who searches the heart.

3. Do not judge of Men's Preparedness for Heaven by their Agreement with us in
opinion, or by their mild and good Natures, etc. We are very apt to judge of
men's habits and graces, by their natural tempers, and hereby we run upon a
mistake. A Dram of Evangelical Sincerity would have made the young man in the
Gospel seem a great Saint. A little grace makes a great show in some tempers,
and a great deal scarce appears in others. A little Sugar serves for sweet
Wine, but there is more required to sweeten that which is more sharp.

4. Let young Converts not meddle too much with hard and difficult things in
Religion. Opinions and knotty Controversies will soon engross the heart, and
puzzle the head, and waste much time, and hurt your Souls. Read the Word, study
well your Catechisms, and be well acquainted with the Substantials and
Fundamentals of Religion, which are essential to the being and well-being of
your Souls in Grace. Consult with your faithful Pastors, take heed of
Impostors, and be earnest with God in Prayer for the spirit of a sound mind.

5. You that are Sincere must yield to no base Doubts, Fears and Objections of
Satan and your own hearts. Deny not the Grace of God in you, which is great
dishonor to God, and to the Spirit of God. Has God taken thee out of the herd
of Sinners, and converted thine heart, and written thy Name in Heaven, and will thou attempt to raze it out, and write thy Name upon the Doors of Hell?
Christian, do not hearken to the Father of Lies, who works upon thy dark and
melancholy humor, to rob thy soul of comfort.

6. Let all take heed of Neglecting frequent Trial of your selves and state,
left your Hearts and the Old Serpent be too hard for you. It thou would not be
deceived about thy Soul and Heaven, and Undone for ever, reflect and cast thine
Eve^ upon thy self. Let thine Eyes be as the Faces of the Cherubims, inward. A
timely, diligent and plain-hearted Examination of a man's self, is a most
weighty and important Day. If the Merchant or Shopkeeper does not take an
account of his Wares, and cast up his Books, how can he judge of his Estate?
How can we understand how matters go between God and us, if we never look
within? This leads the way to the next thing in order.

SECT. VII.
THE third Use. By way of enquiry, They that were ready went in with him to the
Marriage. Enquire, is all well within me, have I the white Stone, and new Name?
viz. The things that accompany Salvation? Some are curious in diffecting of
Bodies to understand the Anatomy, viz. The inward parts and contexture of it:
But see that thou art skilful in the Souls Anatomy. Dive into the secrets of
thy soul, and closet of thine heart, and be critical in this disquisition.
Self-Examination is a serious and busy work of the soul, whereby it takes a
true Prospect and Estimate of its spiritual Estate. But how few are well read
in the Book of their own (...)? The foolish Virgins, had they searched their
Vest (...) have found the want of Oil. Soul, a (...) not ready? This is a great
question, a (...) to be resolved. It Is much (...) that of (...) the man that
came to the (...) without a (...)-Garment: When Christ asked him, How (...)
thither, he was speechless. Sirs, if the thing here enquired after were about
fecular and worldly Affairs, I might expect a ready Answer. Ask the skilful
Husband (...), whether the Corn and Grass be ripe and ready for the Sithe or
Sickle? he will soon answer. Ask the Heir whether he be ready for the
Inheritance? and he will tell you. Ask the Student, whether he be ready to
ascend the Pulpit? or the Apprentice, when his time is out, whether he is ready
to set up for himself? and ask young Men and Maids that are grown to their ripe
and flourishing Age, whether they are ready for Marriage? and they can answer,
We are ready. But are you fit for Christ, and prepared for Death and Judgment?
Who can or dare say, Ready, ready, Lord? There are who please themselves to
think or say, they have so many bags ready for a Mortgage or Pu^^, such
Portions, so many hundreds, such (...), Livings, Farms or Manors ready for
their Children; and it may be their souls are so (...) being prepared for
Christ and Heaven, that they are ready for the Devil and Damnation. Remember
here only, that they which were ready were received in, and the Door was shut.
Five did lie so long asleep, that did little think they were unready, till the
Bridegroom came, and it was too late. There are who deceive themselves with a
Golden flattering dream of Glory, and are ready to drop down into eternal
flames. Whereas many tenderhearted gracious souls that are ready, fear to step
in at the Passage, or over the narrow Bridge, between life and death, the End
of Time and the Beginning of Eternity. O how accurate, curious and serious
should all be in enquiring about signs and marks of readiness for Christ. Now
before I come to the Solution of the Question, I must let you know (by the way)
whom I intend not in this use of Trial.

1. I intend no ignorant or impious Person.

2. No Heretic or wretched Apostate, who is departed from the faith and form
of sound words, and denies the Lord that bought him

3. No Hypocrite, or washed-Swine, whose Conscience and the Word of Truth will
tell him, his heart is not right in the sight of God. These may have Evidences
for Hell, they have none for Heaven. And that very man may prove his own works,
here are added marks of Readiness for Christ and Heaven.

First, When a Beliver by Faith, Repentance, and new Obedience, has made his
Calling, Election, and love of ^^rist sure to him, he is ready for the
Marriage. And (...) enjoy Eternal Fellowship with Christ in Heaven. Christian,
if thou art Christ's Garden, (...) the Branch in the true Vine, thou can not
miss of glory. It was not hanging on the outside of the Ark did save, but
being in the Ark. So when a poor Christian has good hope that he is one of the
Sinners Christ came to save, and can say as St. Paul, Gal. 2. 20. Christ loved
me, and gave himself for me. I know in whom I have believed, he is ready, I
shall but change my place, I shall not change my company, said one dying. I
know I believe, as I know I live, said an Eminent Minister. It Is no more for me
to die (said another) than to close my eyes. I see all Heaven; O what a blessed
fight is the face of God, said a famous Minister, when going out of the World!
I see Heaven-gate stand wide open, said a Christian when departing this life.
When Mr. Bolton came to dye, and some of his Parish being at the Bedside,
desired him to express what he felt in his soul of the Comforts of Christ; He
answered, I am by the wonderful mercy of God as full of comfort as my heart can
hold; I feel nothing in my Soul but Christ, with whom I heartily desire to be.
When a Believer has tasted the sweetness of the Pardon of Sin, and inward
Peace, his Conscience being calm and quiet, he is ready for a dying-hour, and
to step into Heaven. He may say. Now let thy Servant depart in peace: for mine
eyes have seen thy Salvation Haste, my Beloved, make no tarrying, O my God; I
desire to be dissolved, and to be with Christ. Which is far, far the better,
Phil. 1.

SEcondly, When the King of Glory does bring in his rich Ornaments and
Hangings, and beautify the Soul, and dwells in it, the Saint is ready to go in
with Christ. Our own righteousness is a filthy Garment that must be cast off.
Whereas when the Kings Daughter and Spouse of Christ is made lovely by the
change of Raiment or Wedding Garment, the glorious Robe of Christ, pure,
perfect, personal righteousness, she is ready. We are complete in him, yea, all
fair, and without spot. Though Christ finds his Church speckled, sullied and
polluted, he does not leave her so. I put a beautiful Crown upon thy head, and
thou were perfect through my comeliness, Ezekiel. 16.8, 13, 14. Ephesians. 5.25, 26.
This Righteousness of God does reconcile and pacify God. It Is said, that
Pilate wearing Christ's Coat without a Seam, pacified the wrath of angry Caesar.
Christian, if by the Hand of Faith thou have put on Christ, thou art as a Queen
prepared for the Presence of the King of Glory. Whereas without this
Righteousness, there is nothing but shameful nakedness in the best, so that you
will be ready to cry out, as the Israelites to Moses, (when God appeared upon
Mount Sinai) Let not the Lord come near us lest we die: Or you will (with Adam)
rather seek to hide your selves from God than appear before him. Now soul, look
in and examine thy state; the time was thou were without God and Christ in the
world, and could commit evil with both hands earnestly; the time was, when
thy Conscience was seared, and Sin was no burden or shame to thee, though thou
did lick up this vomit, and wallow in the mire, and livedst in it as thy
trade; but now God has broken thy conscience, and brought thee under a sense
and sentance of death, and made thee poor in spirit, and to lie down ashamed
and confounded, because of all thy sins before him: And the Lord has endeared
Christ to thee, and caused thee to see a glorious rising Sun in his
Righteousness, which the Gospel has brought to light: though thou were the
greatest Sinner, a poor, naked, condemned, vile, cursed Creature; thou have
that which renders thee like an Angel in the pure eyes of God, and which will
quiet thy conscience, and answer to all the demands of Law and Justice.
Therefore be not discouraged to die and stand before God, if he should send for
thee this day or to night; Thou have a Christ to carry with thee, and the
Angels will bid All welcome to the Quire of heavenly Glory that are clad with
Christ's Righteousness.

THirdly, When the Bias, Inclination, and Streem of the Heart, that was wont to
run downward toward Sin, and the World, does now run upward toward Christ and
Heaven, the Believer is actually ready If there be a Supreme and Conquering
affection in thy soul to Christ, and there is none above him in thine heart, so
that thou can not, wilt not be quiet, or satisfied without him, thou art fit
to go in with him. The soul of the Believer does follow so hard after God, that
ye may as soon nourish and satiate a lively child with dry Breasts, and a
craving Appetite with Air and Words, as a Christian without a Christ. Can say
as the Church in her Pathetical Suit. Cant 8.6, 7. Set me as a Seal upon thine
heart. No Place but the heart of Savior, for a panting soul. It Is as if she
had said, carry me in thy mind, in thy eyes, and in thine hands as a Jewel on
the Breast, as a Ring on the Finger; Let me be near thine heart, and carried up
and down in thy heart for ever. The Churches Love to Christ was so vehement and
strong, and of that Conquering Nature, that she could no more resist it, or
stand before it, than Death Fire, or the Grave could be resisted. Sinner, is
Christ so lifted up in thy esteem, as to attract and draw thy soul after him.
Moreover, when Christ comes in, the World must give place and go out. Is thine
heart in a good measure dead to the World? Does it appear to be (as our calls
it, a great Nothing) dust and shadow* It Is said of the Israelites, Acts 7.39.
Their heart ^^ed back again into Egypt; They carried Egypt into the Wilderness
with them. It Is said of Queen Mary if she had been ripped up after her death,
Calice, might have been found in her heart. Lot's Wife was commanded to make
have out of Sodom, but she left her heart behind. But how is it with thee? Art
thou risen with Christ, and is the World crucified to thee, and thine heart
above it? Do look upon the World as the Jews on Babylon, as a strange Land?
Can say as David, 1 Chronicles. 29.15. We are strangers before thee. I am a
stranger in the Earth, Psalm 119. When the things of the World draw our
affections strongly after them; Christ and Heaven cannot be so precious and
desirable; but Believers know the things of the World are not worthy of their
Love. They are common to good and bad, they are uncertain, they cannot save nor
satisfy, they cannot keep us from sickness, nor from death, nor save our souls
from hell. They are no carriage for another world. I am going to the Place
(said the Martyr) where Money is no current coin. It Is said of Gods Worthies,
They did seek a better Country, that is an heavenly; and conffessed, They were
Strangers and Pilgrims in the Earth, Heb. 11.13, 14 Now if your Treasures be in
Heaven, your Affections in Heaven, and your Conversations heavenly, you may be
assured of being there in a little time. Again, do conflict with sin, and get
some conquest over it day by day? Is thy soul estranged from all kinds of sin?
sinner, can thou be fit to go in with Christ, and hide and harbor his
Enemies, and hold a truce with some secret sins?

The Use is for Enquiry, therefore ask thy self these Queries, Do thou spare
no Agag, a ruling sin? Withdraw no wedge of Gold or Babylonish Garment, a
gainful sin? Do make a League with no Gibeonite? Can with Joshua destroy
every Canaanite, even that sin which for sweetness thou rollest under thy
tongue, the stumbling block of thine own iniquity, the Pecatum in deliciis?
Do batter the Tower of Jericho? Can break down the Bulwark of the Flesh?
and say of every sin, as the Jews of Christ, Away with him, let him be
crucified? thou art a prepared Soul. When Christ that glorious Sun is risen and
enthroned in the hearts that a man can say, Come and see the place where the
Lord reigns; He is ready for Heaven.

4. WHen the Believer has so increased his Talent, that the Grain of
Mustard Seed is become a great Tree, ( viz) He has gotten such a stock of
grace, that he can say as the rich man of his Ground, I have much laid up, he
is ready. Three things Saints do ardently desire in order to this Fitness: 1.
Grace in the reality of it. 2. Grace in the fullness of it. 3. The gracious
Presence, Let my Beloved come into his Garden, said the Church.


Christians, you must not only have Grace habitually, but actually, in its most
lively and vigorous exercise, to prepare you for Heaven. Grace is a Talent sent
down from Heaven, and put into our hands to trade with. When the Oil is in the
Vessel, and the Lamps burn bright, i. e. divine Grace shines in the Soul like
Stars in the Night; the Christian is in a fit posture to meet Christ.
Christian^* Why should you take up your stand in Religion and not go on to
Perfection. Even as Apelles upon all his Pictures would write, Faciebat, non
facit, You must not suffer your Lamps to wax dim, and your Oil to wast. A Dwarf
is a monster in Nature. As there are some decayed in their Trades and Estates,
and others grow poor and consumptive in their Bodies, so are there withered and
decayed Professors in every Society, the new man is very weak and feeble in
very many. What are become of the graces, comforts, and delights of the Spirit?
This streem does not run, Rivers of Living Water do not flow out of our
Bellies: Where is the old stock, and the new increase? That plenty and fullness
of the Spirit, that must ripen our Souls and make us ready? If grace like the
house of David did revive, and wax stronger and stronger in you, it would cure
your Stupor and Security: and give you (bear with the expression) a fresh
Start, or new Alarm for Heaven. That grace is not in the gaining hand, is most
apparent by your letting down your Watch, and falling asleep. By your
Listlessness to Duties, and want of Life, and affection in them, by them, by
the prevalency of corruption, and decay of Godly sorrow for sin, and inward
peace, by the blotting of your Evidences for heaven, and want of communion with
Christ, who stands aloof off from the withered and decayed Christian. Friend,
do then not hear the Lord say, I have something against thee because thou
have lost thy first Love? We read of the first days of David, and of the first
Ripe Fruits; The first Fruits of the Spirit; the love of the Espousals. But
where shall we find it? What is become of the sweet Incense of Prayer and
Praise, thou wast wont to send up to heaven? The time was, thou could be
early and late with God by solemn and secret Prayer, and direct, and dart up
thy soul to heaven often in a day, by occasional ejaculatory Prayers, Is not
this golden Lamp gone out? Was there never a Spirit of Prayer among Gods People
in this Nation? What is become of that inward affection in Prayer, where shall
we find it? Is all our Religion resolved into forms and formality? How little
spiritual Worship has God by the best of us, who will accept of no other
Worship? Where are those frequent Visits from Christ in his Ordinances you have
found? Where are the choice fruits in Christ's Garden? You that, are planted in
the House of the Lord, must flourish in the Courts of our God, and cast forth
your Roots like Lebanon. Grow in Grace, and you shall come into glory, 2 Pet.
1.11.

Question. Do all Gods People (who shall go in with Christ) die in a
comfortable condition, and with Moses see the Promised Land: or have they a
Prospect of their heavenly Country? Answ. No: Scripture and Experience prove
the contrary. And here I shall lay down some Particulars, both to quicken and
support Gods people, whose souls seem to be at the very point of despair.

1. The state of a godly man, and his future felicity is not to be adjudged by
the manner of his death, or his sensible comforts at the end of his days, but
by the general course and tendency of his life. A Ship that comes home richly
laden may meet with a storm at the Harbors mouth. It matters not much (says
Dr. Harris to his holy disconsolate wife,) whether comfort comes an hour before
death, or an hour after death. A godly man may die mourning; God may give him
the Garment of gladness in Heaven, for his spirit of heaviness in Earth. A holy
Minister of this Nation was wont to say (...) never tasted the sweet of
Religion all his Life, the ^^ng Assurance of Heaven.

Secondly, Believing does precede sea^^g* the direct act of Faith goes before
the reflect act of Faith, the Faith of Adherence before the Faith of Evidence,
Ephesians. 1.13.

Thirdly, The Kingdom of Glory is not promised to Assurance, but to Faith and
Repentance. There are many now in heaven that were not assured of it till they
come thither. And how many tender serious souls are there who prize none in the
World like a Christ, who love him with all the regards of the Lord, who hate
the Enemies of his Scepter with a perfect hatred, who would not willingly
offend or grieve him in the least measure, who cleave unto him as the only Rock
of Salvation, who would not relinquish their interest in him for Millions of
Worlds. And yet they weep with Mary, because they cannot see their Lord. They
conflict with fears and doubts day and night, and have not that reflective
Evidence and Assurance that he is their Christ their God. The hour (said one)
in which Assurance comes is seldom, and its stay is short. Those that have it,
have it not at all times; as there are degrees of Grace, so there are different
measures of Assurance. The Jewels of Grace may lie hid in the close and dark
Cabinet of the heart, until the Spirit shine upon its own Grace, The choicest
Flowers have their Roots out of sight. There are who be as truly in the favor
of God, as the Angels themselves, but they are very doubtful of it. It Is
reported that two Ministers came to visit a godly woman, who was weeping over
her Child in the Cradle: and being asked by one of the Ministers the cause of
griefs, she said, Because I have professed Religion more than twenty years, and
am not Assured of my Salvation. One of the Ministers asked the woman, Whose
child is this in the Cradle? she answered, Mine, but said he, Does the Christ
know you are the Mother of it? She replied, No: which question was a
consolation to this de^ected (...) woman. The Lord knows those that are his.

Fourthly, A man may come safe to heaven without Assurance, but not without
Grace and inherent* Holiness. But remember this, the more careless and
indifferent a man or woman is about the assurance of Heaven, the further off he
is from it. Therefore prize it highly, press after it vehemently, if thou
would attain it.

Fifthly, Great castings down, and soul-distresses, do often usher in much joy
and inward peace. As a dark misty Night goes before a bright Morning, and a
cold long Winter before a Fruitful Spring. Some that have been brought down to
the Valley of the shadow of Death, have also been carried up to the Mount of
Transfiguration. The Spirit of Bondage does lead the way to the Spirit of
Adoption, Romans 8. A Christian that is poor and contrite in his own sense, may
have his Soul in a prosperous condition. And it is a great Faith to cleave to
Christ and the Promises, when man has little comfort. The time may come (says
a great Divine) when the Faith of Adherence may be all in all. Though thy soul is
cast down, assurance may be at the door. When Mary Magdelen was weeping, and
thought her Lord was risen and gone, Christ was behind her, Joh. 20.

Sixthly, Saints do not usually die in a Swoon or Spiritual Consumption. If
Eutichus fall down dead, he must rise up again. So God will one way or other
recover his declining people, and revive his work in them, and make them ready.
Consider, it greatly concerns all that will live and die comfortably, and enjoy
Christ and Heaven Eternally, to press after certainty, and to make ready. Are
all our desirable and best things in the world uncertain, and shall our Souls
and Heaven be so too? In things of infinite less value, men are for certainty,
and why not in this? The Usurer would have Money told twice, who was wont to
say to his man, It is good to be sure. In case of Money lent, men will have
double Security, by Bond and Land In London, there is an Ensuring-Office for
Merchandise. And will you have no care to preserve your Souls; If certainty of
Salvation were to be bought, God knows, if I had ten Earths (said a very Holy
and Learned Divine) I would part with (...) for it.

SECT. VIII.
THE 4. Use. is to persuade all who have any regard to God and their dear
souls, to be in readiness. Awake out of sleep, and get your Garments on, Oil in
the Vessel, Loins girt, your Lamps burning, that you may be ready, and the Lord
find you so, as well as men think you so.

This plain Use of Exhortation is directed to two sorts of Persons.

1. Those who are wholly unready for Death and Judgment.

2. To those who are in part ready, but not so ready as they should be, who
must stand before the Lord: And as they themselves another day will wish they
had been.

1. Those who are wholly unready to go in with Christ.

Quest. Are there any such? yea, more then a few. How many here, and now read
these Sermons, do know themselves unready, and will not prepare: whose
Conscience tell them if they should die, and stand before God in their present
condition, they are undone for ever? If they should receive a Summons to come
to Gods Bar this day, or this night, we might here them cry, out, Spare me a
little longer, Lord, spare me the Prince, and me the Priest* Spare me the
Father, and me the Son; Spare me the Mother, and me the Daughter; Spare me the
rich man, and me the poor man* Spare me the Master, and and me the Servant;
Spare me the young man, and me the old man; Spare me the Mistress, and me the
Maid; Spare me the Learned, and me the Unlearned man; me the sickly man, and me
the healthy man; Lord for one month, or year more, before I go to the place
from whence I shall never return.

To open and Illustrate, viz. that there are abundance unready. Let me ask you,
What think you of the Infidel World, the Uncircumcised in heart and flesh? How
many Kingdoms and Nations are there, who know not the way to a life of
Immortality by a Mediator? These are the Devils Freehold, without hope, and
stumble down to Hell in the dark. But to leave the poor Pagans, (who perish for
want of vision) and to come nearer to our selves: What, vast multitudes are
there in the Christian World, and that among baptized Persons, who enjoy the
means of Salvation, and are altogether unready, for Christ and Heaven.

To descend to Particulars.

1. Those that are grossly ignorant of God and Jesus Christ, viz. Ignorant of
his Nature, Person, Offices, they have neither a head or hearty knowledge of
Christ. Their minds are blind and understandings darkened. The first Work God
does to prepare sinners for Heaven, is to open their eyes, and to bring them
into the Light of Life. But to these, God, Christ, Faith, Repentance is a
mystery. A woman being asked by a Minister, Whether Christ by whom she expected
Salvation, was a Man or a Woman? Answered, She could not tell. Are such ready?
shall they be saved who are under the power of the Prince of Darkness?
Righteous Father (said Christ) the World has not known thee, John 17.25. And
truly Heaven is no more in Hell than preparation for it is in an ignorant
Person. Those who are made fit for Heaven, are delivered from the Power of
Darkness, Col. 1, 12, 13. Under the Law God would not accept of blind
Sacrifices, Deuteronomy. 15.21. Psalm. 11.27. 2 Cor. 4 3. O then, cry after Knowledge,
and lift up thy voice for Understanding; Take hold of Instruction, and let her
not go, for she is thy Life, Prove. 2.2. Without knowledge the heart cannot be
good, nor fit for God and Heaven.

2. What shall we think of those that rest only in outward Privileges, who
being born of Blood, and of the will of the Flesh! And by timely Education have
attained the knowledge of sound principles and way of Salvation, but were never
awakened, convinced, and under any distress about their souls; are these ready
for Christ and Heaven? Jo. 8.39. Romans 7.9. Rev. 3.17. The whole need not the
Physician, said Christ. Those who are strangers to the Spirit of Bondage, and
Pangs of the new Birth, who never saw those treasures of wrath due to sin, he
that was never heard to say, I am unclean, I am cast down, I am heavy Laden, I
am lost, I am undone, I die, I I am damned, if Christ and Mercy come not
speedily. Without conviction there can be no conversion. A woman travels and
then brings forth a Child, Acts 2.36.16 30. Many steal quietly to Hell, few or
none go smoothly to Heaven. Men commonly pass through the straits before they
enter into the Harbor or Haven of Rest. The Lash of the Law is our
Schoolmaster to bring^ to Christ, Gal. 3.24 But alas, thou (...) deluded with
a cheap conversion, that never had a sick night or a pained-soul for sin,
Indeed all are not converted with a voice of Thunder, are brought to Christ
with a mighty Rushing Wind, and terrible Tempest and Consternation of Spirit.
Christ may steal secretly into the heart, as into Lydia, but it is very seldom.
Security sends many to Hell, whereas a sore Conscience is better then a seared
Conscience, and a burning-Ague is more hopeful than a Lethargy.

3. What think you of the Belialists and Damme's, who curse Jacob and defy
Israel? viz that deride holiness, and make a sport of sin, and fly in the face
of their Creator, and dare God to kill and damn them every day. There are who
live as if they were sent into the World to do nothing but sin, serve the
Devil, and ruin themselves. What droves and multitudes of libidinous profane
persons are there in every place? How is the broad way crowded with men of
corrupt Minds and cursed Practices, who drop poison as they go, and ride post
to Hell? These scarlet-sinners will break through all dangers to have their
lusts satisfied. As Nero's Mother said, Let him kill me so he may Reign.

Occidat modo imperet. Let the Devil damn us, so we may have the sweet of Sin.
These do not believe a day of Eternal Retribution after death. And are they
prepared for Christ and Heaven, who are ready for the Devil and Hell?

4.What are the Spiritually Barren under all the Dressings and Dews of Heaven,
and the abundance of Apostates in heart and practice? We may take up (...)
Lamentation upon the Death of Saul and Jonathan, and say with grief, How are
the mighty fallen? The Falling Sickness has been very rife, and an Epidemical
Disease among us. These are days of as many instances of Apostasy and
Backsliding, and that from as high and glorious pitches as any Age since the
Apostles days can parallel. How many Stars have been cast from Heaven? How many
Trees plucked up by the Roots? Many seeming Stars are discovered to be but
Meteors* and now gone down in obscurity. Are these ready for Christ? The Penny
will not be paid until the Evening; the End crowns the Action. He that presses
on, and runs to the end of the Race shall have the Prize, Ezekiel 3.20. Mat.
24.12, 13. Heb 6.4.11, 38, 39. 2 Pet. 2.20. 1 Cor. 9.24. Rev. 2.10.

5. What think you of those Millions of Unholy Worldlings, who trade altogether
for the Earth, and lay up no Treasure in Heaven? Their Gold, Silver, Houses,
Lands, Wives, Children, are their god. They desire no better heaven than to be
perpetuated in the Honors* Profits and Pleasures of the World. I would not
leave my part in Paris, for my part in Paridise, said a profane Wretch. A
Nobleman of Vienna, at his great Feast, and in the midst of his Jollity, said,
If God would leave me my Riches, and suffer me to live but a Thousand Years to
take my Pleasure, I would willingly leave God his Heaven. The Children of
Reuben and Gad, being enriched with the spoil of their Enemies, and come into a
good Land, desired to have it for their Inheritance, and not to go into the
Promised Land, Numb. 31.1, 2, 3, 4. Are they prepared for Heaven, who can take
the World for their Portion? Mat. 19.23.

6. What are the Thousands and Ten Thousands of Christ and Mercy-sleighting
Sinners, many of which will not come within the sound of the Silver* Trumpets,
( viz.) to wait upon God in the Use of Means. There are who seem to be resolved
to throw their Souls to Hell. God commands to do no Murder, and Self-Murder is
wondered at, because the care of Life, and fear of Death is planted in man's
Nature; but Self-Destruction. Self-Damnation, is very common. There are who
will say, We are no Thieves, nor Murderers nor Adulterers, or Drunkards, but to
be Christ-sleighters is worse, and more Damnable. This made Christ grieve,
sigh, weep, in a melting manner over Jerusalem, and his compassionate bewailing
of them, was enough to turn Stones into Tears, nevertheless, they wilfully
refused him, Mat. 23.37. This will be sad, like the impenitent Thief to perish,
and a Savior by his side. We read of a whole City, upon the loss of their
Swine, entreated Christ to be gone out of their Coasts, Mat. 8 ult. Are these
ready to wear the Crown of Glory?

7. Add to these, those, (and not a few) who hold not the head, but Execrable,
and Abominable opinions, which they pertinaciously defend. If (...) make not
the Person of the Mediator the object of their faith and hope, and with the
Sadduces deny the Resurrection of the Body, Are they prepared to go in with
Christ? Heresy is reckoned among the worst of the sins of the Flesh: it is a
Spiritual Witchcraft, and a covert, close way to hell. Not only wicked
practices, but corrupt opinions will damn men's souls, 2 Pet. 2 Paul told the
erroneous Galations they were bewitched; when men's Cattle, or the bodies of
their Children are bewitched, how sad is it, but it is more dreadful to have
souls bewitched. There are an abundance of Virtiginous Leprous heads in this
Nation. Head-diseases are hardly cured, they do often kill. Ye therefore
Beloved, seeing ye know these things before, beware lest ye also being led away
with the error of the wicked, fall from your own stedfastness, 2 Pet. 3.17.

8. Join to these your sinners in Zion, and Tar^^ among the Wheat, the
false-hearted professors, and those who think their good Intentions and own
Righteousness will save them. This Golden Idol of Self-Righteousness has shut
many out of heaven, Mat. 5.20. Luke 18 11, 12, 13 Romans 10.3.

9. What are those that say they are too Young, and it is too soon to part with
Sin, and prepare for Heaven? Are such ready for the Bridegrooms coming? These
do not consider that more die Young, than live Long; and how little Graves,
small Bones, and Skulls of all sizes are in our Burial-places? Our Proverb is,
That the Lambs-skin many times come to the Market, before the Sheeps-skin. The
Young men are Dead; it is said of Jobs Sons, Job 1.17. Again, Enquire about the
time of men's Conversion, and you will find few Converted in Old Age. It Is
almost a Prodigy to see an Old Man or Woman convert and turn to God. Moreover,
those who put off their Preparation for Heaven, do not know what a life of Joy
and Pleasure they live, who have tasted the sweet of Religion, and gotten
Evidence for Heaven early. And who can tell what an abundance of Young men and
women are now in Flames? The Sins of Youth David Prayed for the Pardon of,
Psalm. 25.

10. And Lastly, What will you say of Foolish Virgins? Are they prepared for
the Eternal World? Here are Virgins unready, suppose they represent Particular
Churches, half had not Oil in their Vessels. What if you should be such? St.
Paul tells the Church of Corinth, He had Espoused them as a chaste Virgin to
Christ, and yet there were bad Members among them. They were convinced Virgins,
that made a Profession, and kept themselves from gross Pollution, Mat. 25.1.
They were sound in their Principles, no Heriticks; they expected Christ's
coming. They were in high Esteem, and did shine as Lights, their Lamps did
burn, and they went (...) in Religion for a time. How many are pleased with the
Name or Reputation of being Religious: they would be thought good, Is thy heart
right (said Jehu) as my ^art is? The wise Virgins thought well of them, and
that they had been prepared. The Disciples thought well of Judas, and Paul of
Demas; they were in a complaining condition, and sensible of the want of Grace,
and came for a supply to the Wise Virgins, but ^twas too late. Lastly, their
expectation was high, and their confidence held out to the last. They came
Boldly to the Door, and prayed for admission.

You have heard there is a numberless number unready, and truly you may as soon
find sweet Flowers growing upon the Sea, and Fish upon the Mountains, yea,
^earls upon the tops of Trees, as preparation for Heaven in Carnal Hearts. Now
to fasten this Truth as a Nail in a sure place, ask thy self these Questions,
that thou may know to which sort thou belongest.

1. Quest. Am not I the poor blind Soul, whom the Gospel says is Lost?

2 Quest. Have I been savingly sensible of Sin, and the want of a Savior? Did
I ever taste of Spiritual Grief or Godly Sorrow? Is Sin as a Talent of Lead, or
as light as a Feather to me?

3. Quest. Is not my Name among the Dead in Jerusalem, and in the List of
prodigious Sinners, who look like Hell it self?

Read over the Catalogue of the Sins of the Flesh, ^al. 5.19, 20, 21. 1 Cor.
6.9, 10. And say, are not ^ese my Sins?

(...) Quest. Am not I the man went out of Babylon to (...) that set Sail for
Heaven, and once seemed a bright ^r, viz. a forward, active, zealous Christian,
and dili^nt in Duties, now become a Comet? Where is my ser^^ and affection? Is
not my latter end likely to be worse (...) the beginning? What is profession,
without progression?

(...) Quest. Am not I an Adolatrous Worldling, whose Name ^atten in Earth, and
whose Portion is in this Life, Psalm. (...) 4. Luke 16, 24. Col. 3.5. Jam. 5.^^*

6 Quest. May not I be ranked among the Desperate Christ rejecting Sinners,
over whose Head Gods wrath hangs?

7. Quest. Do I hold no Corrupt, Dangerous, Damna^ Opinion, contrary to the
Form of Sound Words, and t^ Doctrine of the Apostles and Martyrs? 2 Timothy 1 14

8. Quest. Do I not build upon the Rotten Sandy Foundation of mine own
Righteousness? What beside my g^ Purposes, my Baptism, and some imperfect
Performances, a^ vain hopes have I to satisfy God, and to entitle me (...)
Heaven? Mat 7.22.

9. Quest. Do I not think it too soon to Believe, Love God, and Live a Strict,
Pious Life? Should I be a looser to part with my Lusts, and give my Heart to
Christ?

10. Quest. Am not I a Foolish Virgin?

Let GOD and all your Consciences Judge in this case. Sinner, may I not say to
thee, as Nathan to David, Thou art the Man, not ready for Christ and Heaven.
When God Created the first man, he gave him a Name that answered to his
Original; do the^ know thy Name when thou Read it, or Hear it? Then
thus it is.

If thou belongest to the first of these, Ignoramus is thy Name. If to the
second sort, Senseless-secure Sleeper is thy Name. If to the third, Sensualist,
or Flesh-Indulger is thy Name. If to the fourth, Backslider is thy Name. If to
the fifth, Mammonist, or Man of the Earth is thy Name. If thou belongest to the
sixth, Self-Murderer is thy Name. If to the seventh, Heretic is thy Name. If
to the eighth, Justiciary is thy (...) If to the Ninth sort,
Trifling-time-delayer is thy (...) If to the last, Counterfeit-Christian, or
Silly-Soul (...) is thy Name. Poor wretched man, thy Name (...) ^minous, and
does presage Evil to come upon the in the latter end. Nabal is his Name, and
(...) so is he. But is there no remedy? Yes, (...) thy Cursed Lusts and receive
the Lord Jesus (...) and thou she have a new, most excellent and hon^rable
Name, first given to the Disciples at Antioch; CHRISTIAN, shall be thy Name.

NOw having heard, what an abundance are unready, I shall go on with the most
important Use of Exhortation. If you have any belief of the World to come, or
regard to your Spiritual welfare, as you will stand with joy and boldness in
the Day of Judgment, before the great and terrible God, let it be the present
and great business of your lives to prepare and make ready for your dearest
Lord. Friend, to be kind to thy own soul, is that I do here persuade thee unto.
And I shall begin with you that are Young, who are to be the Seminary and
Plants in Gods Nursery, when those that are Grave and more Aged are laid up in
their Graves. The Lord God of my Master Abraham, send me good speed, was the
Prayer of a Faithful Servant, when going to procure a Wife for Isaac, Genesis 24.
St. Paul, who was a young Persecutor, and soon Converted to be a Preacher,
exhorts young men to fly. Youthful Lusts; there are many of them, 2 Timothy 2.22.
How many strong and perilous Temptations are incident to Youth? There is no
such glassy slippery piece of way between you and Heaven as Youth. Beware,
says a Divine, of this Green Young Devil, the hot and fiery Passions of Youth.
That true Father in God, John, writes to Young men, who were Believers betimes.
Youth and Grace, Christ and a Young man or a Young woman are a sweet Couple
(says the same Author.) Old Ja^ commanded his Sons to carry down (...) Joseph,
the best Fruits of the Land of Canaan, Co^. 43.11. This Primrose or
Spring-flower of Grace and Virtue, will be very grateful to sweet JESUS. Young
Men and Young Women hearken to the advice of him who knew by sweet Experience
how good it was to begin with God early, Eccl. 12.1. Remember thy Creator in
the days of thy Youth. The Kingdom of Heaven (says Christ) is like a man that
is an Householder, which went out early to hire Laborers into his Vineyard,
Mat. 22.1. Will you in the Aurora or Golden-Morning of your Youth, go about
your Masters work, or rather your own? Mine Offering are for a sweet savor
unto me (says the Lord,) ye shall observe to offer in their season. The young
Bullock, and Lambs of the first Year are for the Lord, Numb. 28. The Godly
Child mentioned in the little Book, when it saw the Tokens of Death on it,
Cried out, I am marked, Death was welcome to it, being marked for Christ, and
ready for Heaven. Thou have promised to be the Lords before this day, and a
Free-will-offering vowed was not to be released, Numb. 30. The Daughters of
Zelophehad (being Young Virgins) sued for an Inheritance among their Brethren
(viz.) to have a Lot in the Holy Land. Do you seek for an Inheritance among
Believers in the better Country? Heaven is before you, and God bids you, as
once Abraham and Lot to make your choice; he expects it, who will requite your
Youthful Kindness, Jer. 2.12. No Wife to the Wife of the Youth. In the Morning
resolve to sow the Seed of Virtue, and thou shall Reap. Sanctify to me the
Firstborn, says the Lord. Deal by thy Soul, as Hannah did with her Son, who
gave him to the Lord, It Is the best time for such a designation; and if thou
do intend Heaven, remember who says, My Son give me thy heart, Prove. 2.26.
Be holy and thou shall be accepted. Sinner, thou can not make too much have
to Heaven. When did you hear a Young Woman being Espoused to a Person, Comely,
Rich, Wise and Honorable, say, It was too soon for such an Advantage. Let this
day be thy Marriage-day; Marriage is honorable, especially this Marriage, it
being to the Kings Son, and Heir of Heaven. And if none have been Converted
that heard these Sermons: Oh! that you that read them may be the First Fruits,
Exodus 34.26 Micah 7.1^ Romans 15.5. It has been and is the best sight in
England, and in our Assemblies, to see so many Young Faces toward Heaven,
ready to go in with Christ. To persuade you to bestow the dew of your Youth on
Christ, and that your resolution for Heaven may as a mighty torrent carry down
all before it,

Take these Incentives.

1. The Church is called a Virgin, Christ the Bridegroom, and the flourishing
Age of Youth must be the best time to make this Match. The Birds choose their
Mates in the Spring; the young Bees, when thrust out by the old ones, work in
the Summer for Honey in the Winter. The Marriages of the Aged, when men should
think of a Grave, are wondered at; and somewhat rare. Sinner, the time of Youth
is the choicest and fittest season for thy Soul. Now, thine affections, viz
Desire, Love, Joy, Delight, (the wings and feet of thy Soul, to carry thee to
the arms and bosom of Christ) are ripe and flourish. While thy Love is warm,
strong, and all thy senses and facu^^ quick, lively, active, place them on
sweet (...). or Priority we must have ever respect unto in this grand Affair;
as the Woman came to Christ's Grave early, Luk 24 1 so early must we get Grace.
How excellent is it for a Young Man, or Maid, to have such a spring of Grace as
to invite Christ to come and dwell with him, Cant. 4 ult. The Owner of the
Garden delights to see the young Plants Bud, Blossom, and bear Fruit, Cant.
6.11. To trade with God for the Oil of Grace, and to prepare for Heaven early,
is the richest Trade in the World. Say with him who was pious in his Youth, and
could tell what God had done for his Soul, Whom have I in Heaven but thee? O
God, thou art my God, early will I seek thee, Psalm. 62.1. and 73.25. Do as the
Primitive Christians, who gave themselves to the Lord, 2 Cor. 8.5. It may be
thou art Poor in the world, and have not Gold, Frankincense and Myrrh to offer
unto thy God, nor a thousand Rams, and ten thousand Rivers of Oil, yet thou
have an Heart which is a Present for a Prince, a Gift for the Great God. Lord,
such as I have I give thee: and it is thine own, my body and my soul I resign to
thee, Romans 12.1. This is the Male; do not bring the Blind, the Lame, and the
Maimed; lest he say to thee, as to those sacrilegious Persons, Go offer it to
thy Governor see whether he will accept of it; where thou have spent the best
of thy Flower, bestow thy Bran. Let the World, Flesh and Devil, that have had
thy Youth, have the Snuffs and dregs of Old Age too. Sinner, stay till old Age,
and no thanks to part with thy sins; Sin will leave thee: when the Oil is
wasted the Lamp will go out. Then stand forth Young man, and say to God as Ahab
to Benhadad, I am thine, and all that I have. My head, and my heart is thine,
my feet, and my hands, and all is thine. My heart is thine to love thee, my
head is thine to plot for thee, my hands shall work for thee, my feet shall go
for thee, my tongue shall speak to thee and for thee. If I had a thousand
hearts, Lord, thou should have them all. This is to honor him with thy
First Fruits, Prove. 3.9. Jam 1.16.

2. Break off from the Devil and Sin early, and gather up this heavenly hidden
Mannah of Divine Grace in the Morning, and go forward, and thou will be a
Mother in Israel, or a Father in Gods Family. The new born Babe, will come to
be a young Man, and a young Man a Father. The hot fiery Lust of Youth is the
Devil in his Flowers, (says one) in Youth the Devil finds dry Sticks, and dry
Coals, and an hearth Stone, and how soon can he with his Flint cast fire, and
with his Bellows blow it up and fire the House. Therefore get Grace betimes
into the Garrison of thy heart, that thou may be able to repel his hellish
Temptations. It Is Christ's delight to be early in the Vineyard, Cant. 7.12.
Trees that Blossom in the Spring, are most fruitful and most useful. God made
use of the Almond-Tree ('it is said) because it Blossomed first. When the Image
of Heaven is stamped early upon a man's soul, such ordinarily attain great
Eminency in Grace and Holiness, Moses, Samuel, David, Daniel, Timothy, began
with God betimes, and were in the upper Form in Gods School, and Stars of the
first Magnitude. Obadiah feared the Lord from his Youth, and how useful was he?
First seek (...) Kingdom of Heaven, Mat. 6*33. It Is an honor to be first in
Christ, and first Converted in a Town or Family* But to be the first Drunkard,
the first Adulterer, the first Persecutor, or the first inventer of fantastic,
disguised Fashions, and wicked Practices, deserves to be branded with Infamy
and Reproach. Seniority or Priority in the Faith and true Piety, is a Praise,
Rom 6 5. Salute Andronicus and Junia, who are of Note, (says Paul) and were in
Christ before me. Whereas to be a young Sabbath-breaker, a young Fornicator, a
young Thief, a young Athiest, is a horrible shame and ignominy. On the
contrary, to be first in Gods fear and favor, and to have early experience of
Christ's Love, is both commendable and comfortable.

3. Delay is the sad Character of the wicked Servant, and very deceitful and
dangerous for thy Soul, Mat. 24 48. To linger and procrastinate in a matter of
this moment, is a trick and cheat of the Old Serpent to undo thee for ever. To
day, ^^ day, says the great Landlord and Limiter of our time. Tomorrow,
hereafter, (says the Devil) to whose voice, Sinner, will thou listen, to GOD,
or the Devil? Haste, for thy life, stay not, said the Angel to Lot, if he had
stayed a little longer he had been burned. Will you by delays please the Devil,
and make whips and stings for your selves, treasure up wrath, this is to add to
the heap, and bring fuel to the fire, that must burn upon thee to Eternity.
But what need such Haste? The Thief went from the Cross to the Crown the same
day. Do not trust to that, it was but one Thief, and he a Prodigy, and truly
Penitent. Suppose God should say to thee that art Young, as once Joseph to his
Brethren, Except your younger Brother (...) with you, ye shall not see my Face;
if thou do not serve, fear and obey me in thy Youth, thou shall never obtain
my Favor. Trees that Blossom not till Autumn, afford little Fruit. The
Inhabitants of China Marry their Children very young, to prevent their
Debauchery. I will not say of the Hoary-head, there is no hope, because some
few in the Evening, or seventh hour, have been called and come to Christ: But
with fear and trembling, consider, thou that say to day it is too soon,
tomorrow may with anguish of soul Cry out it is too late. It Is good for a man
to bear the Yoke in his Youth, i. e. Christ's yoke, not the Devils yoke, whose
Slaves and Drudges he will make you, until he Damn you. What a grief is it,
that Youthful-sins and Old-bones should meet in the Grave, Job 28.11.

4 Divine Precepts and Promises are to the present Time, none for Hereafter.
The Imparative Mood has no Future Tense. Seeking out of season has had no
success. While Esau was hunting, he lost the blessing. Many shall seek to enter
in, and shall not be able. While they were to buy, the Bridegroom came, seek
the Lord while he may be found, Isa. 55.7. Prove. 8.17. Are not the shadows of
the Evening stretched out over some of you? Gray hairs are here and there, they
will tell you the Night is near: Look up you Old and Young Loyterers, and see
whether your Morning-Sun is not past its Meridian, yea near its Setting. Do
thou not see many young Men di^, and go before thee to the Grave? Art thou
certain of another day? Will not God reckon with thee for so rich a Talent, and
treasure of time put into thy hand? What meanest thou, O Slugga^^^; O Sleeper,
awake, arise, pray, prepare, that thou Perish not. Thy Lord intends to come,
how will thou fear and tremble to look him in the Face, and thy work not done!
Sinner; go home and mourn over this great and irreparable Loss, the Loss of thy
precious Time. And now before Death draws the black shade over thee, set all
things at rights betwixt God and thy Soul. And if thy Soul and Heaven depend
upon an inch of Time, do not waste it for a World.

5. To know, fear, love and serve God in our Youth, is the best comfort of Old
Age. A young Saint, and an old Angel, is a true saying.

HEre I shall subjoyn Motives for Saints and sinners to prepare; and means and
directions in order to it.

1. Mo. Consider with greatest seriousness the sure passing excellency,
dignity, and glory of the Person, for whose sweet and delightful presence thou
must prepare. Here I am at a loss, and know not how to think, speak, or write
of this infinite, matchless, and transcendent beauty and glory of Christ. Which
will keep all created tongues of Men and Angels in exercise and busy, night
and ^y to speak of it. Now if you would have a Glimpse of this glorious One,
view his Titles, and hear what a true Character they give of him, who have seen
him, not face to face, but through a Glass ^kly. Christians, you are invited to
see this King, and Son of the highest in his Glory, Cant. 3.11. Go ye forth, O
ye Daughters of Zion, and behold King Solomon, with the Crown wherewith his
Mother crowned him in the day of his Espousais. Christ appeared to John in
wonderful Luster and Majesty, clothed with a Garment down to the ground, gi^e
with a golden ^dle, his Head and is Hair white as snow (...) Eyes is a flame of
Fire, his Countenance as the Sun shining in his strength, Rev. 1.13, 14. O what
a fair One, what an only One, what an excellent lovely, ravishing One is
Christ! Put the beauty of ten thousand Worlds of Paradices, like the Garden of
Eden, put all Trees, all Flowers, all Smells, all Colors, all Tastes, all Joys,
all Sweetness, all Loveliness in one. O what a fair excellent thing would it
be! and yet it should be less to the dearest and fairest, beloved, than one
drop of rain to the whole Sea, Lakes, Rivers and Fountains of ten thousand
Earths, (says a famous Divine.) The Church, who had the most acquaintance with
the King of Glory, affirms, He is altogether Lovely, C^. 5 10. And do you
expect his Company and Presence in Heaven, and not prepare? If a man be to eat
with the Ruler, he will make himself ready. Joseph shaved himself, and put off
his Prison-garments when he was to appear in Pharoahs Presence Is it fit Swine
should come into a Kings Presence Chamber? The Maids that went into Ahasu^s
were for six Months to be purified with Oil of Myrrh, and sweet Odors; Art thou
a filthy Swine, or Goat, and durst come before the King of Glory. His Wife has
made her self ready, Rev. 19.7, 8. Friend, do thou love, and look for Christ,
and ple^ thy self with the thoughts of seeing of him, and not cast off thy sins
as a menstruous Cloth? Peter expresses his love to his Lord, by professing he
was not only ready to go to Prison but to die for his sake, Luke 22.33. Was
Peter and Paul ready to suffer and die for Christ, and will you not make ready
to live and reign with Christ, in heaven for ever?

2. MO. The red Dragon and Old Serpent (...) Devil that designs thy Eternal
^oe. (...) i^ his main business to hinder this world, therefore make ready.
Tobiah and Sanballat were not so busy to retard, and hinder the building of
Jerusalem and Temple, as the Devil is to hinder thy preparation for heaven. He
has his Devices, his Wiles, his Depths, and all employed to impede and
obstruct this work. Here I shall endeavor to detect some of the stratagems of
this active and malicious Adversary the Devil.

Q How does Satan hinder this Work?

Answ. 1. By suggesting delays and putting off our duty: and to this end he
will persuade.

1. Though it may and must be done, it is too soon, another season is better
than the present time.

2. That there is no life so sweet as a life of sin and sensuality.

3. That preparation for heaven is a short and easy work, and may be done
hereafter, or when we will. Sinner, if thou do think it easy to repent,
believe, and change thy heart, and secure heaven at any time. Let me ask thee,
Can make an other World, and keep the whole Laws? Can raise the dead, or
live here for ever? Thou may do one as well as the other.

2. By withdrawing men from the use of powerful and awakening means, in which
they may meet with Christ and be converted.

3. By representing the difficulty and impossibility of a strict and pious
life. To insinuate and fasten this temptation, the Devil will make men believe,

1. That there is no absolute necessity of such preciseness.

2. That men may live ill, and die well. Go in the way to Hell, and come to
Heaven.

3. That no man can live such a life, if so, it is (...) sad, pensive life, and
no way Eligible, or to be chosen.

4. By raising prejudice and evil thoughts in men's minds against the Preachers
and Professors of the Gospel: such as these:

1. That the best are not so good toward God, as they seem to the World, but
false and counterfeit.

2. That thy sin is secret, and in corners, though not openly, and in the face
of the Sun: And because of the grosser faults, and miscarriage of some, and the
weaknesses, infirmities, and passions of others, they will think well of none.
Here note, it is a cursed design of Hell, to put bad men upon the profession of
Religion on purpose to disgrace it, and render it odious to the World.

5. By abusing and misapplying the Doctrine of Election and Predestination, so
as to infer and draw from it, wild and desperate conclusions.

6 By suggesting to poor desponding souls, that the day of Grace, and time of
preparation for Heaven is over.

7. By corrupting and poisoning men's Judgments with heretical and damnable
Opinions and Principles. There Is many a man's head has brought him to hell. To
instance,

1. That Scripture is not of Divine Authority; That the World was from
Eternity; That Religion is a mere Fiction; That Regeneration, Faith,
Repentance, Communion with Christ is but moral virtue; That Men may be saved of
any Religion; That Hell is a Bugbear, and Heaven a Fools Paradise. But let God
and his Word be true, and every Blasphemer a Liar.

8 By calming and quieting Men's Conscience with an outside and carnal
Religion, and good purposes.

9. By proposing false Grounds and Evidences for Heaven, viz. That Conviction,
and legal (...) is Conversion, that an honest, civil, sober life, (...) Christ
and Faith in him, will bring men to Heaven These are the Fig Leaves Men sow
together, who walk in the sparks and light of their own fire, Isa. 50.

10. By suggesting the numberless number of non-Professors, and these many of
them honorable, rich, learned, wise men, and that it will be of dangerous
consequence openly to own and practice Religion, and therefore they cannot
prepare for Christ, and purchase Heaven at so dear a rate. Sinner, let me tell
thee, whatever Satan does make thee believe, thou have no cause to take a
Minute rest, while unready.

Mo. 3
THere are multitudes of careless souls (as you have heard) asleep and secure,
who will be sadly disappointed! tremble, lest it should be your case. We to
them that are at ease in Zion. Carnal security, rising from self-ignorance,
self-righteousness, and hope of future repentance, its secret Enemy, like an
Imposthume, never manifesting it self, but when immediately killing. In the
great House of God the Church, are not only Vessels of Gold, but of Wood, Earth
and Stone, some to honor, and some to dishonor, 2 Timothy 2.20. There are who
have not the title or name of Virgins, much less the nature. Some have not so
much love to Christ and his Gospel as to profess it. They loath to be in
company with the sincere Saints of Christ, neither will they take any pains for
their immortal souls, but wholly neglect the performing of those duties, and
gaining those Graces necessary for preparation. The Children of the great King,
and Favorites of Heaven do make ready: let this be as a good in your side to
provoke and quicken you. The Vessels of the Temple for sacred use, were pure
(...) Vessels: Christians, you are designed to (...) in Gods Presence, to see
his Face, and lodge in his bosom to Eternity: therefore you must not love and
follow whom you please. The Kings Daughter is glorious within, and her Clothing
is of wrought Gold, she shall be brought to the King in Raiment of Needle Work,
and the Virgins her Companions follow her, Psalm. 45 13, 14. Sons and Daughters
must be received, when dogs and swine are shut out. Hagar and Ishmael are
turned out, Sarah and Isaac stay in the Family. Now, sensual, secure sinner,
whose example will thou follow? the Devils herd, or those instances and
patterns of Piety that make ready; 1 Cor. 11.1. Phil 3.17. Great Alexander
being asked, Whether he would exercise himself in the Olympian Games? Answered,
Yea, if I may run with Kings. The Saints on the most high are honorable
persons, and prepare and run with them for this Crown and Kingdom. Here is the
Race, above is the Crown, said Ignatius the Martyr. Run and get the Prize, said
Mr. Bradford to his Fellow Sufferers.

Mo. 4.
THink upon the present, future, and unspeakable advantage of Preparation for
Heaven; Get an assurance of going in with Christ to eternal fellowship, and you
need not fear. No Man or Woman can possibly get above the dread of Death and
Hell, without a well-grounded home of Heaven. The thoughts of a sickbed, and
death, the last enemy, will be a stab to the soul unready. What tremblings and
shiverings of heart, and perturbation of spirit, does the thoughts of the
Chambers of Death cause, till a man can say, It Is better for him to die than to
live. When a man in (...) upon the Grace and Image of God in him* and (...) his
title to Heaven clear, it will prevent Armies of fear, and Legions of doubts.
Now it is no more for me to die than to close mine eyes, said a godly Minister.
When a man carries his Evidences for Heaven i^ his heart and hand, he will be
cheerful, and content with a small pittance of the World. A holy poor Woman,
whose Fare was often bread and water, said, She would not change her condition
for the greatest Lady in the Land. Mr. Jordan of Exeter, (to excite his
Neighbors to make sure for Heaven) was wont to say, Brown-bread and
Kennel-water was good Fare, with an Assurance of Heaven. When a Christian
considers what he has is by Covenant with Christ, and be it more or less, it is
for his good and best for him: How refreshing and comfortable is a little? I
might have been wealthy and wicked, and eat the fat, drink the sweet, and enjoy
many outward comforts, and no Christ. I might have had a Farm, a Manor, rich
Apparel, delicate Fare, many Servants, and Attendants, but Sins, Snares, and
the Curse of God on all, and at last have gone to Hell. Moreover, the Assurance
of going in with Christ will deaden the heart to the World, and make a man
willing to leave all for Christ; yea, it will reconcile a godly man to the
sharpest Providence, and severest stroke of Gods Hand. It will make a
Christian suffer willingly, and bear the Cross patiently and comfortably. When
that great Sufferer looked up to his exceeding eternal weight of Glory, his
afflictions seemed light. The hope of Heaven will lighten and sweeten any
Affliction, Heb. 10.34. Latimer rejoiced when his Bishopric was taken from
him, Dr. Tailor leapt for joy when going to be burned, If you lessen or (...)
of any thing of my sufferings, (said the Martyr) it will be to my loss. At
Stratford-Bowe were burned in Queen Mary's days, at one stake, a lame man and a
blind man. The lame man, after he was (...), cast away his Crutch, bade the
blind man, Be of good comfort, for death would heal them both* (...) they
patiently suffered with a calm and sedate (...). Again, Preparation for Heaven
will make a Man go singing in the way of the Lord, and cause our duties to flow
from us like water from a Fountain; and free will offerings are always best and
most grateful to God. In fine, due Preparation for going in with Christ, will
be an effectual means to prevent that active adversary the Devil, who improves
all opportunities and advantages against Gods poor people, especially their
weaknesses, when they are brought low in body and mind too. It Is said of the
natural Serpent, Non nisi moriens in long am producitur, he is never at his
full length till dying. When a godly man is dying, the old Serpent shows
himself, lets out his sting, but an Assurance of Gods favor will quench his
fiery darts.

Mo. 5.
Christ's long absence, Gods unwearied patience, and all the calls, threatenings,
warnings and alarms of the Word are, that men should make ready for him, and
escape the wrath that is to come. Why are means and Ministers continued, and
the offers of Grace by the Gospel renewed, but to bring Souls over unto Christ,
and safe to Heaven? He sent forth other Servants, Matt. 22. The first in the
Morning, others at the sixth, ninth and eleventh hour. Why is the Cry at
midnight, but to raise and rouse up the sleepier Virgins to make Ready? There
are four Cries God makes use on, to startle and awaken men to mind their souls
business.

1. The first is, the cry or voice of the Spirit, which is a more secret and
still voice to excite us unto our duty. The Holy Ghost says, To day, The
Spirit says, Come, Rev. ult.

2. There is the cry of the Word. This is as the Voice of the Trumpet, Isa. 58
1. John the Baptist was a Crier. Go and cry in the Ears of Jerusalem, said the
Lord, Jer. 2.2.

3. There Is the cry of the Rod. The Lords Voice cried unto the City Samaria,
Hos.

4. There is also the cry of Conscience. All which serve to prompt us to our
duty, and prepare us for Eternity. Christ had kindled the fire upon the Earth,
and burnt it, and set up his Tribunal, and sounded the Trumpet of Judgment long
before, but that he is willing to save undone sinners, 2 Pet. 3.9. His
long-suffering to usward, is not willing that any should perish, but that all
should come to Repentance.

Mora sponsi poeditentiae tempus est. The delay of the Bridegroom, is the time
of repentance. There Is not a Sabbath Day, nor a Sacrament-day, nor a
Sermon-day, after the Judgment-day. Now God warns by his Judgments, waits to be
gracious, calls by his Ministers, strives by his Spirit: and you may be welcome
to him. And upon your Repentance, and closing with Christ, you shall be
justified, pardoned, accepted, and taken into the Marriage, and Crowned: But
stay a little longer, and the Door is shut, and then all your prayers, cries,
tears, will be fruitless, O sinner, arise; make haste and return unto the Lord
before it be too late.

Mo. 6.
Christ's coming will be certain, and you know not how soon, his Word is sure.
The ungodly Carnal World will be swallowed up, and drowned in sensuality before
that day, as it was in the days of Noah, and many Professors will be careless
and secure: The Lord is not slack concerning his promise. The promise to Adam
of the Seed of the Woman, was many hundred years before Christ; Incarnation,
who in the fullness of time came It Is now more than sixteen hundred years since
his going in Triumph, from Earth to Heaven: And though he seems long or late
before he comes, he will certainly come at last.

Q. But to whom does the coming of the Lord seem long?

Answ. 1. Christ's coming seems long to Atheistical mockers, who say, Where is
the Promise of his coming? 2 Pet. 3.3, 4.

2. To his suffering Members. Their cry to Vindictive Justice is, Lord, how
long? Psalm. 94.3. Revel. 6.10. If these days of sin and misery should not be
shortened, no Flesh could be saved.

3. Christ's coming is long to passionate Lovers, who prize his Presence, and
long to see his Person: Haste, my Beloved, said the longing Spouse. But count
upon it, he will not fail in coming. It Is the great Article of our Creed, That
Christ shall come to judge the quick and the dead. Moreover, he told his
tenderhearted, and dearly beloved Disciples, (who were sad at the tiding of
his going from them) he would come and see them again. And he has, according
to his Promise, ever since sent another to supply his room, to teach, refresh
and comfort them until he comes, and to keep the recent memory of him in their
minds. He has also once and again presented himself to the view of his
suffering Saints, as ready to come and avenge their cause for them, Acts 7.55.
Rev. 1.13, 18. And he has often met them in his Ordinances, and holy
Appointments, as an Answer of their holy Prayers; He is come, says the Martyr;
Many a token of his love, comforts (...) converse, and sweet meeting with
Christ his Ch^ has had already, all which assures and tells (...) that he will
be with us in a little time, He that (...) come, will come, and will not tarry,
Heb 10.

Quest. 2. But how will he come? and why will he come?

Answ. First* He will come Personally.

Secondly, He will come with Perspicuity.

Thirdly, He will come with Power and infinite Majesty.

Fourthly, He will come suddenly and unexpectedly.

1. Christians, your dear Lord Jesus Christ will come personally. He will not
only employ and send forth his glorious Attendants, their ministering Spirits
the Angels, but come himself: He longed to come to his Cross to redeem us from
Hell, he must needs love to appear with his Crown to fetch us to Heaven, I will
come unto you, etc. It will be said unto you, to the comfort and ravishment of
your souls, Behold, the Bridegroom comes, go ye forth to meet him. The same
that suffered and ascended for you, shall appear the second time without sin
unto salvation, John 14.3. Acts 1.11. Heb. 9.28. Christ's Person laid up in
Heaven is our hope, Col. 1.4. Take the Person of the Mediator out of the holy
Scripture, and it is a Cabinet without a Jewel. Take the Sun out of the
Firmament, and it is a dark Curtain. Christ is all, and in all; and what is
Heaven if Christ were not there? The King makes the Court.

SEcondly, Christ will come with wonderful and amazing Perspicuity, and to the
view of the whole World at once. There were but few (...) saw him in the
Manger, not many saw him in the Garden, in his Agony and bloody Sweat; Or on
the Cross between two Thieves, with his hands nailed, and his side pierced; but
when he comes again, every eye shall see him. Men shall not say (as now) Lo,
here is Christ, or lo, there is Christ, for as the Lightning that comes out of
the East, and shines to the West, so shall the coming of the Son of Man be,
Mat. 24 27. Note, Christ is called the Son of Man, for he has his Humane
Nature still: I am he that was dead, and am now alive, and I live for evermore;
And though few in comparison were Spectators of him at his Crucifixion and
Ascension, when he shall be on the Throne all shall behold him, Rev. 1.7.
Behold, he comes with Clouds, and every eye shall see him, and they also which
pierced him: And all Kindreds of the Earth shall wait because of him: even so,
Amen. Christ's appearance will be a sad sight to two sorts of men:

1. To those who do not believe in his ^^rson.

2. To his bold and audacious Adversaries, that violate his Commands, and
oppose his Regal Authority, Bring forth these mine Enemies, and slay them
before me.

THirdly, Christ will come with Power and infinite Majesty, for he has all
Power both in Heaven and in Earth, Mat. 28 18. Chap. 24. 30. John 17.2. His
first coming and appearance was mean, as a man, in the form of a Servant, (...)
a Root out of a dry ground, and his Countenance more marred than any man's, Isa.
52.14. and (...) 2, 3. Therefore they despised and rejected him, sp^^ (...)
him, reproached him, arraigned condemned him, crowned him with thorns, and
crucified him. In the state (...) humiliation He was attended with poor
despicable Fishermen, and a company of weak contemptible women, not many Wise
or Noble, or of the Rulers believed on him. But when he shall appear the second
time, 'twill be with Power and great Glory, as a King in Triumph or mighty
Monarch; We read that Agrippa and Bernice with great Pomp came to the place of
Judgment, Act. 25.23. So will this great Judge, the Man Christ Jesus come, when
attended with innumerable Company of Angels, and ten thousands of his Saints,
Mat. 25 31, When the Son of Man shall come in his Glory and all the holy Angels
with him, then shall he sit upon the Throne of his Glory: Jude 14. And Enoch
also the Seventh from Adam, Prophesied of these, saying, Behold, the Lord
comes with ten thousand of his Saints. 1 These. 4 16, 17. For the Lord himself
shall descend from Heaven with a shout, with the (...) of the Archangel, and
with the Trumpet of God: And the Dead in Christ shall rise first. Then we which
are alive, and remain, shall be caught up together with them in the Clouds, to
meet the Lord in the Air: and so shall we ever be with the Lord.

FOurthly. He will come Suddenly, as a Thief in the Night. When men are secure,
there will be a Cry at Midnight. When the Son of Man comes, shall he find
Faith in the Earth? Few or none will believe his coming is so near. Of that day
knows no man, but my Father only, says Christ, (...). 24.36. Be ye therefore
ready, for in such an (...) as you think not, the Son of Man comes, Mat. ^ 44.
And if thou art a Carnal Worldling, or (...) ^ormal Sleepy Pretender to Christ,
thou will be Undone, Undone Everlastingly.

Quest. WHy will Christ come?

Answ. 1. By his Fathers Appointment and Designation, he is Ordained Judge of
the World. Christian, thy Lord Jesus is the Lord Judge. The Father has
committed all Judgment to the Son, Joh. 5.22 Act. 17 31. Because he has
appointed a Day in which he will Judge the World in Righteousness, by that Man
whom he has Ordained, whereof he has given Assurance unto all men, in that he
has Raised him from the Dead. God has highly exalted him, viz above the Grave
by his Resurrection, above the Earth by his Ascension, above the Heavens by his
Session at the Fathers Right Hand. He shall be sent of God as Judge: Judgment
has not been fully Executed in any one Age of the World, Eccl. 3 16 and 5 8
That of the Old. World reserved a Cursed Cham in the Ark. But the Last Judgment
is called, The Revelation of the Righteous Judgment of God, Romans 2 5.

2. Christ's Truth, Faithfulness, Affection obliges him to come. He cannot
falsify his Word, I will come, says Christ, nothing of Gods Word ever failed,
Josh. 23 4.14. Christ has an infinite Affection to his little Flock in the
world: Love and Pity brought him from Heaven to Earth at first, and love will
constrain him to return; his going hence, or change of place has made no
change in Christ's heart. When Lazarus was (...) and Dead. Christ must come, and
raise him to life, because he loved him. So also all that are Dead in the Lord,
he will come and raise. Believers are Christ's Brethren, his Sister, his Spouse,
he will come for his own Bride. The Bridegrooms departure was not upon a
difference, or divorce, he did not leave his Bride with a purpose to return no
more. When he went to Heaven he left his heart here, and will come to present
himself a glorious Church. Joseph was sent before into Egypt, to provide for
his Fathers Family, before they came to him: Jesus has made all ready, the
Presence Chamber is prepared, therefore the Marriage must be consummate, and
the Lambs Wi^e put into actual possession of the Everlasting Kingdom. And it is
the true Character of Saints to love, and desire Christ's coming, 2 Timothy 4.8.
Henceforth there is laid up for me a Crown of Righteousness, which the Lord the
Righteous Judge shall give me at that Day: And not to me only, but unto them
also that love his Appearing. O how often should Christians look to that
Princely Palace from whence Christ must come: and speak in the Language of a
singular Saint, O Fairest among the Sons of Men, why starest thou so long away?
O Heaven move fast, Time run away, hasten the Marriage Day; for Love is
Tormented with delay.

^. AGain, The Saints full Redemption, complete and perfect Salvation will not
be till that Day. When your Dearest and Affectionate Lord shall appear, your
Joy shall be full. Here with Paul, they complain of their Body of Death, and
Sigh, and Groan under their (...) then and Bondage. Then their Cry will be,
Redemption, Redemption.

LAstly, Christ will come for the Conviction and Eternal Confutation of the
Devil and his Instruments, who mock at serious Piety, and the Doctrine of
Christ's Coming. When Christ shall appear, their Mouths will be stopped, and Shame
and Contempt will fall upon them for ever. Here the Tares and the Wheat, the
Sheep and the Goats, the Foolish Virgins and the Wise are together.

As the Raven and the Dove, the Lion and the Lamb were in the Ark: then they
shall be separated. The Harvest is the End of the world. The conclusion and end
of each Generation of men, is as a particular Harvest. This will be a huge,
general and ultimate Harvest; the Harvest brings all the fruits in the Fields
of this world to Ripeness and Maturity; bad men will be ripe for Ruin, Saints
for Glory. Then the Reapers, and Grain-gatherers will come forth, and every
Proprietor takes to his own. Beelzebub, and his hellish Train will appear, that
have lain close and convert, and the blessed Angels will come forth also: The
Reapers are the Angels. The Devil will come, glean, and gather in this Field,
and take to his own. And God will take to his own. The Husbandmen have their
Home Harvest. Satan has his Home, his House, his Prison; and all that have the
Devils mark, must be ^ed to his Home. And Gods Jewels and Choice Grain must be
gathered and carried to their Father's House and Garner of Glory. GOD and the
Devil will divide the whole World. O how will the Devils Roar, Cry and Exult,
when they shall have so great a Crop, viz so many Millions of Men and Women,
they will Cry Home, Home; these are mine, and must abide with me in my Prison;
then the Devil and his Retinue shall be sent down, down, down to Hell together.

Mo. 7.
COnsider what Multitudes of Men and Women are going down the swift Torrent of
Time, which emptieth itself into the Lake and Gulf of Eternity. Secure soul,
open thine Eyes wide, and look abroad to see how thick Gods deadly Arrows fly,
and do Execution every day. What various and mortal Diseases are there in the
World? Many are Sick, Weak, Dying, and going to their long Home. We are Posting
daily to the shore of Death, and Bars of the Pit; and most have their Faces
toward the Bottomless Pit, and place of Endless Woe. Wretched and Sleepy Soul,
did thou stand but one Night or Day at Hell gate, and see what Droves of
Ungodly Men the Devils bring in, it would make thine Heart and Flesh to
tremble. And did thou hear what doleful Cries and Shrieks they make as they
go down, and what cutting Acclamations and Triumphs the damned Spirits make,
when the Master Beasts* the mighty Monarchs and Governors of the World come
in, it would be worse than a Fire in thy Bones, or a Sword in thy ^^wels Read
and Dread what the Prophet Isaiah (...) of the King of Babel, Isa. 14 9, 10. H^
(...) beneath is (...) for thee at thy coming, it (...) the Dead for thee. But
blessed be God, some few holy Resolved Souls for Christ and Heaven have escaped
this dreadful danger, and made ready for the Marriage. Sinner, have thou had
the ^ame Means and Opportunities, and done nothing? Know, thou have but a Day
for it; stay till the Day be ended, and thou art Lost for ever. The Servant
went out to invite to the Marriage, told the Guests, All things were Ready. I
have finished the Work (said Christ to his Father) thou gave me to do. All
things on Gods part, on Christ's part are ready: Heaven is ready for thee, if
Christ be formed in thee. Christ is waiting for thee, longing far thee, praying
for thee, O then prepare speedily. Thou have seen the Marks and Messengers of
Death in others Faces, expect thy Turn, who may be next in the Town, City,
Parish, or Family carried to the Grave.

Mo 8.
ANd last of all, with Fear and Astonishment think upon the dismal and dreadful
Case and End of one that Lives and Dies, and goes to Eternity Unready. Sinner,
consider with what Anguish, Horror and Constornation of Spirit men go hence, if
awakened and sensible of their Doleful, Damnable Condition. For a man Dying,
and at the door of Eternity to look backward, and take a view of his Cursed,
Hellish Course and Practice, and to turn his eyes inward upon his Soul, that
is, a polluted Vessel* without the Oil of Grace; and to see nothing but Sin,
Guilt, and all the Beastly and Impure Abomi^^ion of Heart and Life, with his
Secret closet^^ ^^anies. And to look upward to that Christ, Heaven and Glory,
which he has forfeited by his wilful Impenitency, and refusal of Mercy: And to
look downward to the Grave where his Body must rot, and to those Devils and
Reprobates in Hell, who must be his Company and Tormentors. This tremendous,
unless thou art like Judas, who heard Christ say, We be to that man by whom
the Son of Man shall be betrayed, it had been better be had never been Born. O
who can see such a sight, and not pluck off his Hair, and tear his very Bowels
with rage and indignation; and wish he never had a being, and a Soul of such
inestimable worth, that must die and burn for ever Was not this the condition
of Francis Spira, and of another who said, She shall go down to Hell alive: And
it may be the case of some other convinced desperate Soul, whom the Lord leaves
for terror, to the secure world, who be as men hanged up in Irons in the way to
Hell; or as men risen from the Dead, to tell others of the vanity and danger of
their sinful Courses. For a man to look on time past, and see that gone for
over, and look on time present as just come to (...) period, and his account
not ready, hi^ Lamp gone out, his short heaven on earth concluded, his
Conscience biting and tearing like a Lion, and summoning him to the Bar of
Justice, his Body dying his Passing bell tolling, Curtains drawn, Physicians
and Friends taking their leaves of him, Sermons, Counsels, Ministry and all
means of doing good to soul of (...). The Vault* Tomb or Grave read^^ (...)
opened to received the filthy Carcass: The ^^^ned Devils waiting (...) receive
and ca^^ Soul down to the (...) dungeon and fie^^ and never to have any other
company or com^^rts but wicked Devils, and they insulting o^^er thee
everlastingly with hellish spite, and ^inging exprobation, for neglecting so
great Salvation all thy long life, and losing Heaven for ^^ne base Lust, Pride
and Vanity. O the Hor^^r!

Look also to Doomsday, and there they see and hear the Earth burning, the
Elements melting, Stars falling, the Trumpet sounding, Dead rising, Kings and
Captains, Bond and Free, Crying out, O Rocks fall on us, O Fire burn us, O
Water drown us, O wild Beasts devour us, O Graves cover and hide us from the
Wrath of him, whose Blood and Bowels we have slighted. Will not this awaken?

Sinner, is it so? O then come, now Christ calls, and do not cast away Mercy
and (...) thy self miserable. Refuse Christ and his Cra^^, and whilst thou
live thou art a Cursed Creature, and when thou die thou shall be a Damned
Creature.

What say thou to this* thou Time losing and Christ-rejecting wretch? Is
there another World, or is there not? Have thou a Soul, or no Soul? Is there a
Blessed Life of Communion and Fellowship with Christ or no? Is it worth the
seeking after and praying for or no? Will thou resolvedly set about the work of
Preparing, and not give-over till thou art ready for Christ, or will thou sit
still and do nothing* and leave thine eternal Condition at uncertainties? Is it
a ^^i^te to thee, or a thing indifferent whether thou have (...) Christ, or no
Christ? A Heaven or no Heaven? Whether thou have an Eternal Felicity above, or
Eternal Flames below? How will thy spirit fail, and thy heart recoil at the
sight a^ appearance of Eternity?

But if this be a scarecrow, or some invent^ fable, or dream of a melancholy
fancy. Co^ sinner, Let us go down to Tophet, that is, in (...) Valley of the
Son of Hinnom, and look into (...) Chambers of darkness, and lay thine Ear to
t^ door of thine infernal Prison; and hear what the^ say, whose dolourous Cries
and cutting Complaints are enough to rend the hardest Rocks. With one Voice
they roar out and say, What we see and suffer is the woeful and bitter fruit and
effect of the sweet Pleasures of sin where we were in the World. This is the
fire in our bosom, and hot coals that burn us.

If the Spirits in Prison, and Damned in Hell shall tell thee, hear what they
say in their several Complaints, how they Cry out of the principal and
instrumental Causes of their Damnation.

1. My Neglect of Glorious Gospel-Grace^ sleighting and rejecting Salvation
offered in Christ^ and putting off Repentance, has undone my Soul. Christ
called and knocked at the door of my heart often, but I would not open to him*
now he has shut the gate of Mercy on me for ever.

2. My Worldliness, Covetousness, Earthly-mindedness; I was mad upon the World,
this is my Woe, and utter Undoing.

3. My Cursing, Swearing, Lying, Blaspemy Perjury, False-witness, Damned my
Soul, Zec^* 5.4.

4. My Frowardness, Fassion, Ambition, Pride and Haughtiness sent me to Hell.

5. My Unfruitfulness, Barrenness, Unprofitableness under the Means of Grace,
was my Destruction.

6. My indulging the Flesh in Drunken (...) Gluttony, Wantonness, Uncleanness,
^^in't me* This was the Dart that went through my Liver.

7. My uncharitableness, H^^red, Backbiting, Malice, Envy, Revenge, brought me
to Hell.

8. Murder, Theft, False Weights and (...) Cou^^ning Widows, Orphans, E^^ the
^^ead of Wickedness, and Drinking the Wi^ Violence was my Damnation. Murder is
a sin that always bleeds afresh in the Eyes of God.

9. My Stubbornness, Wilfulness, Disobedience to my Parents, not becoming to
their Counsels, Admonitions, Reproofs, caused me to Perish.

10. My Unrighteousness, Injustice, Bribery, Usury, Oppression, Extortion
destroyed my Soul.

11. My Enticing Infectious Companions in sin, and secret Night-wickedness, was
my Ruin.

12. The ill Example of my Tutor, Schoolmaster, Minister, Landlord, whom I
feared and followed for some base Ends was my Undoing.

13. Spending my Precious Time in Vain, Childish Sports, as Hawking, Hunting,
Carding, Dicing, Playing-houses, when I should have been Reading, Praying, was
fatal to my Soul.

14. My Irreligious, Foolish, Fond, Wicked Parents, who delighted in Trimming
and Adorning my Body, and took no care of my Soul, but let me have my Will, and
did not Restrain me, Instruct and Catechize me, were my Destroyers.

15. My Marrying and Living in such a Family, where was no Religion, my being
of such a Calling, where were so many Snares and Temptations, and my Friends
sending me for the gain of the world beyond the Seas, where I had not the Means
of Salvation, but Wickedness and Debauchery winked at, laid the foundation of
my Damnation.

16. My Knowledge, Learning, Parts, (my head being better than my heart) lifted
me up, made me forget God, was the Trap and Gin by which the Devil caught my
Soul.

17. My Idleness, Sloth, Sabbath-breaking, and neglecting the most weighty
Duties, was my Ruin. If I had been as serious and diligent in Duties, as often
under the Ordinances, and on my Knees, as my Wife or Husband, my Child or
Servant, I might have been saved.

18. My Greatness and Prosperity in the world, as Honor, Offices, Riches, were
my Ruin; if I had been Poor, I should have minded Heaven.

19. My erroneous Head and deluded Heart, my Herisie and distractive Opinions,
cast me down to hell. We have a useful Book, called, The Book of Martyrs; and
if a Collection were made of the horrid and prodigious Opinions now in England,
it may be called, A Book of Monsters. Polycarpus called Marcion, the Heretic,
The Firstborn of the Devil.

Novi te esse Primogenitum Satanae. 20. My Cowardice, carnal Complance,
Backsliding, being willing to save my stake, has debauched my Conscience and
undone me.

21. My trusting to Lamps, common Grace, Security, Presumption,
Self-righteousness, secret Hypocrisy, brought me to this place of Burning.

O what Fools and how Mad were we, who were often told of these things, and
this cursed place, and would take no Warning! Oh, what a doleful Prison is
this! Here we be always dying, and never dead. Here are the Chains of Darkness
and no Light. Here is the Biting-worm of Conscience: Here are scorching and
devouring Flames: Here be all the damned Devils, and is it for ever, for ever?
Is there no hope of Mercy, and Deliverance? Are all these Yellings, piercing
Cries, C^^ans, Tears, to no purpose? Who but we in Hell that drink of the wrath
of the Almighty, know the power of his Anger. O what a fearful and grie^ous
thing it is, to fall into the Hands of the Living God* Heb. 10.31. Nah. 1.6.
Who can stand before his Indignation? Who can abide the fierconess of his
Anger? Poor perishing soul, is it nothing to be separated from God, and to be a
Firebrand of Hell for ever? O what a misery is it, that you can (...) nothing
of this, nor fear it till you see it and feel (...)*

What if thou should be deprived of all thy senses and faculties: suppose
thou should be struck Deaf, and never hear more; Dumb, and never speak more,
Blind, and never see mor^^ Lame, and never go more; loose thy Palate, hi^ never
taste more? What if thou should be deprived of all thy Comforts, how could
thou bear it?

If thou should never see the light of the Sun, Moon and Stars more, and
never see Father Mother, Wife, Children, and thy own Land more, or never wear
Clothes, put on thine Ornaments, or eat Bread more, would it not sadden thine
heart?

If the Sun should go down in England, and never shine more; if there should
never be a Seed time, nor Harvest more, what a Woe with a witness would this
be, and pierce a heart of Flint? What Crying would there be to GOD to Command
the Sun to Appear and Shine again?

But O what a misery is it to be shut out from God, In whose Presence is
fullness of Joy, and Pleasures for evermore! Sinner, will thou say, Soul, take
thine ease, and be merry, when the Wrath and Vengeance of God hangs over thy
head, ready to be poured out upon thee; yea, when these is nothing but a little
Breath between thee, and endless, easeless and remediless Misery.

Friend, Thou can bear the hearing, reading, and discourse of Hell and
Doomsday, and be no more frighted than to lock upon a dead Lion, or a
Painted-fire, but what will the thing it self be? Can thine heart endure, or
thine hands be strong, in the day that I shall contend with thee? says the
Lord, Ezekiel. 22.14.

If the giving of the Law, with Thundrings, ^ightning and Tempest, made Moses
and all

^l tremble, O what will the strict Execution, and inflicting the utmost
Penalty of the Law upon Soul and Body for ever be?

If Christ the Babe of Bethlehem was terrible in the Manger to Herod and all
Jerusalem, what will his Bar and Throne of Justice be!

Is a perpetual Banishment out of England, as terrible to some Malefactors as
Death; and do thou think it (O careless Soul) no great matter to be Banished
Eternally from CHRIST? Absalom would rather die than to lose the favor and
presence of his Father David; you can hear, the Sentence will be Depart, and
take no notice of it; but when there shall be a General Conflagration of all
things, and the Earth, Heaven, Sea in a F^ame. And the Lord Judge shall descend
from Heaven with a shout, with the voice of the Archangel and the Trumpet of
God, and the Dead in Christ shall rise, and the Living be caught up to meet the
Lord in the Air, who shall be owned, and honored of Christ in the face of the
whole World, and shall go in with Christ. Then a separation from Christ will be
something: To see all the Elect of God come from the East, and from the West,
and from the North, and from the South, and sit down with Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob, in the Kingdom of Heaven, and your selves shut out. Can you bear such a
fight?

O that you would believe it, and think of it before the day be ended, and the
Gate of Mercy shut. Go home and prostrate thy self before the Lord, that he
will make you ready to go (...). Christ, and if this might work be done (...)
thine heart, O stand and wonder at the infinite Love of God, and do as Christ
bid the man out of whom he had cast the Unclean Spirit: Go home to thi^ House,
and tell how great things the Lord has done for thee, Mark 5.19.

SECT. IX. Means and Directions to make ready to go in with Christ to the
Marriage.
Direction. I.
LOOK as for thy life, that thy beginning in Religion be right: Then are those
beginnings hopeful, when the Spirit of God in the Ministry of the Word, or any
other means of grace works upon us, so that we be sure to lay a good Foundation
at first. An error at the Threshold of the House, or first setting out in the
profession and practice of Religion is very dangerous, like a defect in the
Foundation, that threatens the fall of the whole Fabric, like a leak in the
Ship that indangers the Ship and Men too; or like a flaw in a man's Deed, that
threatens the loss of the whole Estate. There will be a beginning and an end
alike, when Grace is radicated, and the operation of the Spirit enters deep
into the soul: Whereas a child misshapen in the Womb, is ever afterward a
Monster.

Quest. But when is it right?

Answ. This right beginning may include the things, according to which compare
and try your selves:

1. A clear conviction of sin, with an inward conversion to God.

2. A most deliberate, joyful, and cordial Reception of the Lord Jesus Christ.
And that upon such (...) as the Gospel propounds him unto us, viz. ^^th all his
Commands in his Person and Offices.

3. An hearty, total and unreserved resignation, and dedication of a man's self
to God: with an abhorrency of sin, and a constant resolution to love God, and
to live to him for ever, Acts 2 37, 38. 1 Chronicles. 26.18. Luke 19.6. Isa.
26.13.44 4. Prove. 23.26. 2 Cor 4 8. What St. Paul that great Apostle Preached,
we must practice, or no preparation to go in with Christ. Repentance is one of
the principles of the Doctrine of Christ, and called a Foundation, Heb. 6.
Soul, Thou must know the Plague of thy Heart, and be sensible of thine own
iniquity, and look upon him whom thou have pierced, and sit alone, and keep
silent, and put thy mouth in the dust, and mourn like the Doves of the Valley,
or no hopes of Heaven. Moreover, this is not a work for one day only, but upon
every particular failing, you must renew your Repentance, and make the Sword of
godly sorrow to go deep into thy soul: When thou have fallen, think with thy
self, I have done that now which will make me guilty of the whole Law, and
enough to cast me out of Gods favor for ever: Therefore open the Sore, make
confession and give Glory to God; and run to thy Advocate to make peace and
procure thy pardon.

They are all pardoned Penitents, who are prepared to go in with Christ.

Direction II.
WOuld you be ready to go in with Christ, cast off all Encumbrances, and make
have in your way to Heaven: Heaven is a glorious Crown, we must strip and
strain, run and win it: How can a man run with a Burden on his Shoulders, and
Fetters on his Feet? The Snail is very slow in his motion, who carries his
house on his back; Christian, get the bolts off thy hands, and fetters off thy
feet. Cast out the lading, lighten the Vessel of thy Soul, and prevent thy
Shipwreck. The burden of worldly cares, the lime-twigs to our wings and
affections, and (which sticks to us as Pitch and Tar to the sides of the Ship)
are the bane of many a soul. The glittering things of the World which sparkle
in our eyes, and attract our hearts, are but like rotten wood or Glowworms,
which shine in the dark: Set not thine heart upon the Ass^s, said Samuel to
Saul; Regard not your stuff, said Joseph to his Brethren.

Christians, you are going to Mount Sion, value not your movables. We may
carry the World, and the pleasing objects of it, our Children and Relations in
our hands, but not in our hearts. All outward comforts are but like Flowers
that will wither in our hands, or like dead water which will soon putrify.
They are thorns and snares to very many: Licitis perimus omnes:

The World kept the young man out of Heaven, who could (as he thought) easier
keep the whole Law, than part with his Riches. He was sad, it is said; why so?
he had his Estate, but he would have had the World, and Christ too! Thousands
lose Christ and Heaven to gain the Earth* How does the love of the World creep
into our hearts* where there can be but little room for God and Grace*

Christians, startle at gross and scandalous Sins, that look with a black and
ugly Aspect, as Murder, Adultery, Damming, Swearing, Theft: but the World may
be welcome, though the immoderate love of the World is at contrary and
inconsistent with Grace as the forementioned sins. Other sins walk naked, this
must have a covering a cloak of covetousness.

Love not the world keep your hearts above; it is below a Christian to love the
world, who has better objects for his love (...) must not sit on Solomon's
Throne: It Is not for Lions and Master-beasts to prey on Mice, nor for Eagles to
catch at Flies. The Sons of Princes must not live like Beggars and mean persons.

Christian* do not wring thy Hands, nor hang thy Wings, though
Creature Comforts withdraw from thee: when there is no water in the Cistern*
there is enough in the Fountain* In my Fathers house is bread enough, said the
Prodigal Son. Caesar was wont to say, Cogitate Caesarem ess^, think thou art
Caesar: Horses can trample upon Pearls and Mines of Gold, Birds mute upon
Princes Palaces, and shall we set up this Clay-Idol of Bastards in our hearts,
and not the Inheritance of Sons (as one calls the world) Hear what God said to
Baruch, Seek thou great things, seek them not, Jer. 45.5.

Christian, Heaven is thy home, the World is but thy Inn; though a man has
better Diet, better Attendants, better Lodging in his Inn than at Home, yet he
remembers it is but for a night, and he must be gone. 1 Chronicles. 29.15.

Take a view of all your profits, pleasures, treasures and comforts of this
life, viz. husband, wife, children, pearls, rich apparel, silver, gold, great
friends, large possessions, offices, honors, sumptuous buildings, pleasant
walks, upon which thou have lost so much labor, time and care, and upon the
Arrest and stroke of death are gone forever.

One of the Ancients standing at Caesar's Tomb; he wept, and cried out, Where is
now the flourishing beauty of Caesar? what is become of His Magnificence? where
are the Armies, where is the honor of Caesar? where are now the Victories, the
Triumphs and Trophies of Caesar? are they all gone and departed? Christian,
love the ^ut a little, which thou can not love long; Rip* reach not to
Eternity. I am going, said one, where money is no current Coin.

Contemn vivens quae post habere non potes. Direction. III.
BE diligent, constant and serious in the use of every known means and practice
of every commanded duty. If you will go in to heaven hereafter, you must follow
the Lord here. Christian, with greatest care and conscience practice these four
duties to make ready for Christ.

1. With love and delight attend the Ministry of the Word, wait on it, as the
poor man at the Pool for healing, and so hear that thy Soul may live. Mary
attending upon the Word is commended by Christ. The Gospel (says Dr. Sibs) is
a Chariot to carry Christ up and down in the World; resolve to follow this
Chariot, be often under the Influences of Heaven, ^at the Sun of Righteousness
may let down his warm (...) upon you. The Spirit of God in the Ministry of the
Word has converted many a Soul, and prepared them for Heaven.

Secondly, Let the holy Sabbath or Lords day be always welcome to thee. How
glad am I, said one, when I see the first light of the Lords day: Inure thy
self to the strict Observation of that high and holy day of God, keep it as for
thy life, that at the end of every Lords day, thou may be fit to enter upon
an eternal Sabbath: how seasonable and sweet is it when Gods Spirit and our
Hearts meet in the Duties we perform. I was in the Spirit, says John, on the
Lords day.

Three Duties in Religion are very hard, viz. 1. we watch the heart. 2. To pray
without wandering and distraction; and 3. To keep the Lords Day well.

3. Be frequent and affectionate in the celebration of that most useful and
glorious Ordinance the Lords Supper, by which we must show forth the Lords
death till he come. And if you would feed on, and feast with Christ in this
blessed Banquet, of which Christ is both the Master and the Matter, do three
things: First, always come with due Preparation. Secondly, with high
expectation. Thirdly, when come, make application.

4. Be very solemn and serious in thy Closet-Visits, viz. be early and late
with God by secret Prayer. The great Roman Captain Scipio, before he undertook
any business, was wont first to enter the Capital, pretending a consulting with
the gods; several Ministers being at Table where the Question was asked, What
was the best Trade? One answered, Begging, meaning Prayer. Would thou be
prepared to go in with Christ, follow him with unutterable groans from day to
day for Grace, and fitness for Heaven, speak out thine heart before God, as
Hannah did when she obtained a Son. The Voice is not absolutely necessary in
Prayer, but the Heart: It matters not though the door of the Lips be shut, so
the closet of the Heart be open. When thou art going into thy Chamber, or come
into thy Closet to bow before the Lord, observe these Particulars.

1. Search and find out thine heart, and say, I am going about a great work, to
beg Grace to prepare me for Heaven, Where art thou my heart?

2. Summon in thine heart; it is often out of the way, send a word of command
after it, and fetch it in.

3. Stir and lift up thine heart; the heart is like bell that will make no
Music till it be raised up, like green Wood that will not burn without much
blowing.

4. Fix thy Heart on God to whom thou prayest, and on Jesus Christ in whose
Name thou do it. Should a Man make a suit to the King for his life, and not
mind his business? The most High looks upon the heart.

5. Watch thine heart, and look for a return of thy Prayer, otherwise thine
heart will give thee the slip, and thy Prayer is lost. Prayer one compares to a
Chain, one end of which is fastened to the Believers tongue, the other to Gods
Ear, who is called, A God hearing Prayer. Say with Job, I will fill my mouth
with Arguments. When David had taken good order for building the Temple, he
directs his Prayer to God to prepare their hearts.

The Lacedaemonians had a custom to ask nothing of their gods, but things of
weight and moment. Is not this of greatest concernment? Try what Prayer can do,
plead before God by Ardent and Importunate Prayer to make thee ready, render
thy self to God as an undone Creature to new mould, form and fashion thine
Heart for himself; carry thy Heart to him on thy Knees, as Moses brought the
two Tables of Stone after the first were broken and defaced, for God to Write
what he Will. Say Lord, I have heard what a dismal, dark, dreadful place Hell
is, and what a blessed and glorious place Heaven is, and yet I am not prepared
for it. This heart of mine I have had on many a sickbed, and sentence of
Death, and under many a Sermon, and sometimes it has been startled, and
awakned, then I have purposed and promised to repent, pray, leave my sins, to
part with the World, and to become a new man, but I have acted the Hypocrite,
all this is come to nothing; Lord do that in me and for me, which none but a
God can do.

The bloody Child cannot beautify and adorn it self. The Ethiopian cannot
change his Skin, nor the Leopard his Spots. The preparation of the heart in man
is from the Lord. And I have cried day and night before thee, said David: It Is
storied of a Woman in Essex, after the Sentence was past upon her, she cried so
earnestly to the Judge for Mercy, that the Judge and Justices rebuked her, to
whom she replied, I beseech you my Lord, it is for my life. Christian, it is for
Heaven and the Eternal life of thy Soul, therefore be earnest with God for his
Spirit to sanctify, and prepare thine heart, which by Nature, is a filthy
polluted Vessel. God can make thine heart as soft Wax, and stamp his Image on
it, but he will be sought unto. The poor man cried, and the Lord heard him,
Psalm. 34 6. My Prayers (said Jonah) came in unto thee, Chap. 2.^. At that great
and dreadful day, when the Sun shall be turned into darkness, and the Moon into
blood, whosoever shall call upon the Name of the Lord shall be saved, Acts 2.20.

Direction IV
KEEP this eye upon God and thine account, expect every moment the cry at
Midnight, and be often thinking of Heaven and Hell, Death and Judgment: and at
the end of every day, reflect upon the preceding actions and passages of it.
Mine eyes are ever toward the Lord (...) ^ave set the Lord always before me,
said David. (...) meditate daily on these three things

1. Think of the great day of Account

2. The great Account you are to give.

3. The Just and great Judge to wh^^ the Account is to be given. Some have
their Hou^^s situate near Golgotha; and view the Graves of the dead every day,
and do not think of ^^ath and Eternity. Charles the First, that Warlike and
glorious Emperor of Germany, resigned his Empire, and lived two years
retiredly, before his death, in the company of Religious Men, providing for
Eternity. Devout soul, if thou would begin with God every morning, and walk
with God all day, and lie down with God at night in the Evening, ask thy self
these or the like Queries.

1. Quest. How did I awake this Morning, with God on the World?

2. Quest. What has been the constant Frame of my Heart in society, and in my
solitude this day?

3. Quest. Have I bowed twice before the Mercy-Seat this day? and opened my
case to God seriously, or have my Closet-visits been short and slight?

4. Quest. What have I done in order to my great Account this day? Have my
word, and actions tended to Gods Glory?

5. Quest. Have I neglected no opportunity of doing or receiving good this day?
who has been the better for me this day?

6. Quest. How have I behaved my self in Company, in my Calling, and in my
Family this day?

7. Quest. How has my heart been affected and enlarged in holy Performances,
both in secret, or my house? Do I habituate my self to holy Duties? Is Religion
my main business?

8. Quest. What serious and awakening apprehensions and thoughs of God, Christ,
the Spirit, my Soul, Death and Judgment have I had this day?

9. Quest. Have not I by some sin of Omission or Commission made work for
Repentance and Humiliation this day? and is my heart in a melting and mourning
frame? can I offer to God the sacrifice of a broken heart?

10. Quest. Have I met with Christ this day, and have gone one step forward in
my way to Heaven? what Power have I gotten over my corruptions and passions,
what Grace have I exercised?

Direction. V.
LEt it be thy constant and greatest care to keep a good Conscience in all
things. Stand off from iniquity; see that there be no allowed reigning sin in
thine heart and life: God will know it, whose eyes are pure and in every place.
Sinner, it will be bad looking God in the face with a galled, guilty
Conscience, and enemy in thy bosom. If our heart condemn us, God is greater
than our hearts, and knows all things, 1 John 3.19, 20.

Vox Conscientiae est Vox Dei. Conscience is Gods Vicegerent in us, and it
will be a friend or a fury, and cause an Hell within, or a Heaven without. It Is
dreadful for a man to carry Hell about with him, the Evidence of his
Condemnation in his own breast. Whereas the in-witness of a good Conscience
will be as a Wall of Brass to a Believer, 2 Cor. 1.12 For our rejoicing is
this, the testimony of our Conscience, that in simplicity and godly sincerity,
not with fleshly wisdom, but by the Grace of God we have had our conversation
in the World, and more abundantly to you wards. Keep this ^^rd of Paradise
always in thy bosom, that thine ^eart may not reproach and smite thee.

A guilty Conscience represents Death and Judgment dreadful, and terrible to
great men; even to things, the gods of this World. Richard the Third, after the
murder of his own two innocent Nephews, had fearful dreams, insomuch that he
did often leap out of his bed in the dark, and run about the Chamber, even
distracted with horror, as if all the Furies of Hell were hanging about him.
So Charles the Ninth of France, after the bloody Massacre of Paris, was so
inwardly terrified, that he was every right laid to sleep, and awakened with a
set of Musicians. Sins against Conscience, are nearest to the Devils sin. O how
astonishing is this, when a man dying must say, (if he speaks the truth) I have
rebelled against my Creator. I have served the Devil, I have satisfied my
Lusts, and now I go to Eternal torments.

Therefore forsake thy sins, repent, and get thy Conscience sprinkled with the
blood of Christ.

Direction. VI.
Be (...) and for some space continue, that so much neglected Duty of
Consideration, and take the most convenient time and place for it. Do not say
of the Work of Heaven, as the Jews of the Temple; The time is not come, that
time the Lord House should be built. But what said the Lord by the Prophet, Is
this a time to dwell in ceiled houses, and my House is not built. Poor Soul,
will thou ^leep and be secure, indulge thy Flesh, Sin, and pursue the World,
and have made no preparation for thy Eternal Habitation? Thus says the Lord,
Consider your ways. Thus says the Lord of Hosts, consider your ways, Hag. 1.5,
7. This Work through the blessing of God has been very successful. I have
heard a very Religious Father dying, make his prodigal ungodly Son promise him,
after his death to go into his Closet, and set alone for several times; which
being performed, he at last considered, that his Father did it out of love to
his Soul, that he might not perish Everlastingly, and so it was made the means
of his Conversion. There is another Story like unto this, of a Traveller coming
to an Inn, where he found a very Beautiful and Witty young Woman, but very vain
and frothy; when he went from the Inn, he gave her a piece of gold upon
Condition, she would engage, and promise to retire into her Chamber, at several
seasons, and upon her Knees utter such words before the Lord, Lord, thou have
given me these Natural Parts, and comely proportion; Is it not pity that so
Amiable a Creature as thou have made me, should be damned, and burn in Hell for
ever? And after this she became Sober, Religious, and left the Inn. It Is a
Character of a true penitent to sit alone. But if I resolve and promise to go
alone, and consider, what must I think of: Ask thy self these questions.

Quest. 1. What was I when first (...) into this wretched World? Did I bring
any thing that was good with me, to entitle me to, and prepare me for Heaven?
Am I not worse now? Have I answered the glorious end of my Creation?

Quest. 2. O my Soul, have I not often dared God to Damn thee? Is it not a
wonder I am now in the World, that so many of my Acquaintance and Companions in
sin are Dead, and in Hell, and I am not there?

Quest. 3. Where had I been if I had Died when last Sick, or when my Husband,
Wife, Father, Mother, Brother and Sister Died?

Quest. 4 Whom do I resemble, the Holy GOD, or the Black, Devil? Does not my
practice tell me I am unfit to stand before God, and to go in with Christ to
the Marriage?

Quest. 5. What Influence has all the Powerful and Soul searching Sermons of
Death and Judgment I have heard, and all the Sicknesses and Loss of Friends had
upon my Heart? And this I have read about Preparation for Heaven? What hatred
of Sin, what love of Holiness, what desire after Christ and Heaven is there in
my Heart?

Quest. 6. Have I any thing to say or object against Christ and a Holy Life? Is
it not the way to Heaven, and to secure and save my Soul for ever? If it be not
good to live the Life of the Righteous, why did Balaam desire to die the Death
of the Righteous? Why should I not be and do that now, which I will wish I had
been and done at Death and Dooms day? Are there no Resolutions stirred up in me
to a Strict and Pious Course?

Quest. 7. Why are the Company and Prayers of Good Ministers and Christians,
more pleasing to Men Dying, (who have Lived ill) than their Companions in Sin?
Will the Baudy Songs, Jokes and Hellish Oaths of Swearers, Drunkards and
Adulterers Comfort thee in a departing Hour?

Quest. 8. Shall not I have a Thousand times more cause, when I go hence, to
Curse the Day of my Birth, than Job or Jeremiah, and wish I had never had a
Being?

Quest. 9. O my Soul! Who art now in a House of Clay, must not thou have
another Habitation in a little Time? Thou art far in thy way toward the
Eternal World. Why was I Born? What have I Done? Whom have I Served? Whose of
right am I? Where will thou be my Soul, when out of this vile Body? O Death,
where will thou Land and Lodge my Soul, in the Region of Darkness, or in the
Land of Light? In the Rivers of Life and Joy, or in the Lake and Dungeon of
Death? Will thou bring me to the Vision of God, and Bosom of Christ in the New
Jerusalem, among the Glorious Angels and Saints in Eternal Pleasure And
Felicities, or into the Dark Vale and Prison with Devils and Reprobates, to be
Pained, Plagued and Tormented for ever?

Quest. 10. Will the Way and Course I am now in bring me to Heaven, or will it
not? Sit down and consider, O my Soul, thy Time is short, Death is certain,
Eternity is near, thy Work is great, thy Account will be strict, Heaven is
glorious, Hell is intolerable, eternal; I must be Regenerated and Prepared in a
few days, or all is Lost.

Direction VII.
Resolve, Love and Delight to be that toward God, who sees in secret, which
thou would have men think thou art, or speak and write of thee living and
dead. Commune with thine heart, and Enquire, Am I a Jew inwardly, or more
Religious and Serious in show than in sincerity? The most upright cannot be
deceived.

To apply this home to thine Heart, let me ask thee these Questions, 1. What
does thy Conscience say when thou art alone? 2. What does thy Closet say, or
those Duties which none observes but God? 3. What do thy Fellow Christians
say, who are most Judicious, Spiritual, and best Able to discern? 4. What does
thy Conversation say? 5. What do thy Family, viz. Wife, Children, Servants say?
6. What does the Sacred Records of the Word say?


Speak Conscience, speak Closet, speak Christians and Neighbors, speak Life,
speak Wife, Husband, Children, Servants; speak Law and Testimony; Is this Man
or Woman sincere, and fit to go into Heaven with Christ? Why would thou be
thought that thou art not* When thou art in the house of the Grave, would
thou have this written on thy Tomb or Sepulcher?

Here lies an Atheist, who said in his heart there was no God nor Devil,
Heaven nor Hell, till he came into Hell among the Devils.

Here lies a seeming Saint, one that professed and owned Religion, but was
rotten and false-hearted, who deceived himself and the world, and lost Heaven
by his Hypocrisy.

Here lies an Earth-worm, a man that labored all his life for the world, that
would be Rich and raise his Family, though with the ruin of his Soul, and made
no preparation for Eternity. He lived and labored as if Bodies had been
Immortal, and Souls Mortal.

Here lies an Heretic and Blasphemer, whose Opinions caused him to Perish.

Here lies a man that mocked at Holiness, and hated the Preachers, Professors
and Practisers of Religion, whose blood he would have shed with all his heart.

Here lies a Drunkard, a Swearer, a Murderer, a Thief, a False Perjured
Person, a Liar, a Backbiter, who hurt others, and has undone themselves.

Here lies a man that had fair opportunities for Heaven, but would not improve
them; he made no Conscience of hearing Sermons, Reading and Sanctifying the
Lords Day.

Here lies (...) that had holy Parents, and was piously Educated, but he would
not hearken to their Reproofs and Counsels, and tread in their Religious steps,
who walked in the way to Heaven.

Here lies ^ man that lived without God in the world, that neither Prayed in
his Closet nor Family.

Here lies an Apostate, who lost his Soul and Heaven by departing from the
Truth: and his Carnal compliance.

Here lies a Pharisee, a man hot, zealous, and furious for the Form, Bark, and
Suburbs of Religion, and there rested, but never had the Power of it.

Friend, would thou be reputed and counted a good Christian among men, see
thou be such a one before God: or woe be unto thee when Christ shall come. The
Upright shall dwell in his presence, Psalm. 140.13.

Direction VIII.
WOuld you go in with Christ, begin the work of Heaven while in the world, and
drive a great Trade for Heaven. Christian, send and search out the Holy Land,
get a Prospect or Pisgan-sight of Heaven, and having tasted this pleasant
Fruit, press on, possess it. Keep Grace in its most lively and vigorous
exercise, let it not decline for a World.

True Grace is persevering, a spark that will never cease, aspiring till it be
joined with the Flame of Eternal Glory.

The best sight in England, (says a Reverend Divine) is to (...) an Old
Professor to grow better and better. Christian, (...) the stream of thy heart
be Heavenward: Ascend the Mount of Divine Communion every day, and when you
are in your Private Devotions, get your Heart into Heaven. Delight in that
which must be your Heaven, viz in the Face and Favor of God, Mat. 5. 8.
Blessed are the pure in Heart, for they shall see God. Joh. 17.24. Father, I
will that they also whom thou have given me, be with me where I am, that they
may behold my Glory which thou have given me, for thou lovedst me before the
Foundation of the world.

Be much in Praising and Blessing God. Prayer and Thanks are (says one) like
the double motion of the Lungs, the Air sucked in by Prayer, is breathed out in
Thanks. Mercies that come down by Prayer, should be returned and ascend in
Praises.

Moreover, keep a constant, and sensible Communion with Christ: Let thine heart
go forth to meet him every day, and in every duty, Psalm. 63. 8. When Christ and
the Soul meet in his Ordinances, the Believer may say, This is the Gate of
Glory; Communion must prepare us for Fruition. Augustus Caesar died in the
kisse^ of his Wife Livia: The prepared Soul many times Dies in the Kisses of
his dear Lord.

Direction IX.
CArefully discharge your Relative Dutie^ and abound in Acts of Mercy and Cha^^
to all. Follow the Holy Examples of former Saints, viz. Abraham, Genesis 18.19.
For I know him, that be will command his Children, and his Household after him,
and they shall keep the way of the Lord, to do Justice and Judgment, that the
Lord may bring upon him that which he has spoken of him. Josh. 24. 15. And if
it seem evil unto you to serve the LORD, choose you this day whom you will
serve, whether the gods which your Fathers served that were on the other side
of the Flood, or the gods of the Amorites, in whose Land ye dwell, but as for
me and my House, we will serve the LORD. David, Psalm. 101. 2, 3, 6, 7. I will
behave my self wisely in a perfest way, O when will thou come unto me? I will
walk within my house with a perfect heart. I will set no wicked thing before
mine eyes* I hate the work of them that turn aside, it (...) not cleave to me.
Mine eyes shall be upon the Faithful of the Land, that they may dwell with me:
he that walks in a perfect way, he shall serve me. He that works deceit,
shall not dwell within my house: he that tells Lies shall not tarry in my
sight.

Do your utmost to breed and train up your Children and Servants for Christ and
Heaven, and not for the Devil and Hell.

Shall God make Inquisition for the Blood of the Body when murdered, and will
he not for the Blood of a Soul?

Suppose when the beloved Child is in the Cradle, or at the Mothers Breast, the
Devil should come, and say to the Parent, Take this Child and train it up for
me; teach it to be Proud, to Lie, Swear, Steal, Profane Gods Day, to Mock at
Holiness, let it have its Will, and never Restrain or Correct it; do not put it
in mind of God, or Catechize it while you live. Send this Child early to my
Schools, to Alehouses, Taverns, Comedies, teach it to Card and Dice, and all
Fleshly Delights, Sports and Recreations; this would seem dreadful to you: and
you would say, Get thee behind me Satan.

O then let every Father take the same care, as David did of his Son Solomon,
and as Solomon did of his Son Rehoboam. See the Pious and Parental Charge of
David, 1 Chronicles. 21.9. And Solomon, as it is thought, wrote the first eight
Chapters of the Proverbs for the sake of Rehoboam. Let all Parents say, as
Psalm. 34.11. Come, ye Children, hearken unto me, and I will teach you the Fear
of the Lord.

But who can say of his Children, as one said of Austin to his Mother Monica,
That it was impossible a Child of so many Prayers should Perish. Are your
Children the Children of Prayers and Tears?

Job was careful of his Children, who sent and sanctified them after their
Feasting. The study and care of most Parents is to Enrich their Children, to
leave them ample Portions and Estates, to make them Great and Honorable, and
to provide Husbands and Wives for them* but to Sanctify and Save their Souls
is not their care.

Happy is that man, when leaving the world, can say to his Children, as old
Jacob, I die, but the Lord will be with you. When God by Death removes your
near and dear Relations, you are troubled that you were no serviceable to their
Souls.

Again, To your Relative Piety, add your Alms, draw out your Souls to the
hungry. The Poor shall never cease out of the Land. The poor you have always
with you, says Christ. Be Open-hearted and Liberal-handed to Necessitous
persons, but especially to Gods Poor. This Duty is Costly, but it will be
Comfortable. The Apostle calls it, A good Foundation against the time to
come. And Christ will Publicly acknowledge, and take all that is done in his
Name, to his Ministers and Members, as done to himself, Mat. 25. 45. 1 Timothy 6.
18, 19.

Direction X.
LAstly, Would you go into Heaven with Christ, labor to live like him here,
who has left us an example that we should follow his steps. Christians, in all
things imitable we must imitate Christ. His natural actions, his occasional
actions, his miraculous and mediatory actions we are not to imitate, but his
moral actions and religious actions we must imitate. It Is recorded of the
French men, that they are wonderfully pleased with whatsoever is said or done
by their Kings, whom they love to resemble. Their Song is, Mihi placet quicquid
Regi place^,

Whatsoever pleases the King, pleases me. The Disciples and Subjects of
Christ, the King of Saints, must follow him, as Jonathans Armor-bearer did his
Master, as the Jews did the Cloudy-Pillar, as the Israelites did their Captain
Joshua, who led them into Canaan, as the wise men did the Star which brought
them to Christ. The Life of Christ is a Copy without a blot or any uneven
letter in it; And every one that says he abides in him, must so walk even ^^
Christ walked, 1 John 2. 9. The Life of Christ is a Christians Bible to read
in, his Glass to dress himself by, his Compass to (...) by, his Touchstone to
try himself by* And he that that professes Faith in Christ must follow Christ.
God has appointed us to be conformable to the Image of his Son, Romans 8. In
these twenty Particulars I have drawn forth the Life of Christ. Look every day
upon this unparalled Picture for your imitation.

First, You must imitate your dear and blessed Redeemer in his meekness and
patience. Isa. 53.7. He was oppressed, and he was afflicted, yet he opened not
his mouth: he is brought as a Lamb to the slaughter, and as a sheep before her
Shearers is dumb, so he opens not his mouth, Jam. 1. 4. But let Patience have
her perfect work, that ye may be perfect and entire, wanting nothing.

2. Imitate Christ in his Humility and infinite Condescension, who though he
was the highest became the lowest, Mat. 11.29. Take my yoke upon you, and learn
of me, for I am meek and lowly in heart* and ye shall find rest unto your
souls, Phil. 2.3, 4 5, 6, 7. Let nothing be done through strife or vainglory,
but in lowliness of mind let each esteem other better than themselves; Look not
every man on his own things, but every man also on the things of others; Let
this mind be in you, which was also in Christ Jesus: Who being in the form of
God, thought it not robbery to be equal with God. But made himself of no
reputation, and took upon him the form of a servant, and was made in the
likeness if men, Joh. 13.14.15. If then your Lord and Master have washed your
feet, ye ought also to wash one another* feet: for I have given you an example,
that ye shall do as I have done to you. Pri^^, says a Reverend Divine, is the
part of the Devils Image in man. And so filthy a Weed, (says another) that
nothing will thrive near it.

3 Imitate Christ in his universal compliance with his Fathers Will, both in
his Active and Passive Obedience, Joh. 5 30. I can of mine own self do nothing:
as I hear, I judge, and my judgment is just, because I seek not mine own will,
but the will of the Father, which has sent me, Chap. 6.38. For I came down
from heaven, not to do mine own will but the will of him that sent me. Luke 22.
42. Saying, Father if thou be willing, remove this Cup from me: nevertheless,
not my will, but thine be done.

4. Resemble Christ in his kindness unto and prayers for his Enemies, Luke 22.
50, 51. And one of them smote the servant of the High Priest, and cut off his
right Ear. And Jesus answered, and said, Suffer ye thus far. (...) he touched
his Ear, and healed him. Luke 23.34. Then said Jesus, Father, forgive them, for
they know not what they do.

5. Imitate Christ in his conformity to and diligent Attendance upon Gods holy
Ordinances, and Institutions, Luke 4 16. And he came to Nazareth, where he had
been brought up, and as his custom was he went into the Synagogue on the
Sabbath day, and stood up to read. Luke 12.16. Now the first day of the feast
of unleavened bread, the Disciples came to Jesus, saying unto him, Where will thou that we prepare for the^ to eat the Passover?

6 Imitate Christ in his tenderness of sin, whose Innocence was attested by his
Enemies, and he acquitted by his Judge, Joh. 8. 40. Which of you convinces me
of sin? And if I say the truth, why do ye not believe me? Chap. 14 30.
Hereafter I will not talk much with you: for the Prince of this World comes,
and has nothing in me. Chap. 19. 4. Pilate therefore went forth again, and
says unto them, Behold, I bring him forth to you, that ye may know that I find
no fault in him.

7. Imitate the Lord from heaven in his contempt of the World, and the Honors
of it, Mat. 12. 15, 16. But when Jesus knew it, he withdrew (...) and great
multitudes followed him, (...) all. And charged them that they should not make
it known.

8. Imitate your dearest, and sweetest Lord in heavenly-mindness, whose heart
was in Heaven while he was upon the Earth, Joh 16.28 I came forth from the
Father, and am come into the World: again, I have the World, and go to the
Father, Chap. 17.5. A^^ now, O Father, glorify thou me, with thine own self,
with the Glory which I had with thee before the W^^ld was.

9. Imitate your Lord and Master, in his wonderful self-denial, Mat. 16 24.
Then (...) as unto (...) Disciples, If any man will come after (...) him deny
herself, and take up his Cross and follow me.

10 Imitate your blessed Redeemer in his burning Zeal for Gods glory, Joh 2.17.
And his Disciples remembered that it was written, The zeal of thine house has
eaten me up

11 Imitate your holy Lord in his subjection to, and care of his Parents, Luke
2 51. And he went down with them, and come to Nazareth, and was subject unto
them Joh 19 26, 27. When Jesus therefore saw his Mother, and the Disciple
standing by, whom he t^^ed, he says unto his Mother. Woman behold thy Son.
^^en says h^ to the Disciple, behold thy Mother. And from that hour that
Disciple took her unto his own home. Ephesians. 6.1, 2, 3 Children obey your Parents
in the ^^rd: for that is right. Honor thy father and mo^he^, (which is the
first Commandment with promise) that it may (...) with thee, and thou may
live (...) on the Earth

12. Imitate your compassionate Savior in h^s sympath^z^^g with his
di^consolate and afflicted friends and do what you can to relieve and comfort
them, J^^ 11.33 When Jesus therefore saw her weeping, and the Jews also weeping
which (...) with (...) and was troubled. Col. (...) the E^ect of God, Holy and
belov^^ (...) humi^eness of mind, (...).

13 Imita^^ Christ in his carefulness to maintain the Truth, witness his most
strict Exposition of the Law, Mat. 5. his Disputing with the Doctors, and his
confuting of (...), Luke 2.^^. And it came to (...) that (...) they found him
in the Temple, sitting in the m^^st ^f the Doctors, both hearing them, and
asking them Question Matt. 22 ^^* But when the Pharisees had heard, that he had
put the ^adduces to silence, they were gathered together. Contend earnestly for
the Faith.

14. Imitate your Lord Jesus in his Wisdom and Prudence, to avoid the catching,
entrapping, ensnaring Questions of his subtle, malicious enemies, Luke 20.26.
And they could not take hold of his words before the people, and they marvelled
at his Answers and held their pea^e Job 8 34, 5 6. And the (...) and Pharisees
brought unto him a Woman taken (...) Adultery, and when they had (...) her in
the ma^^, they say unto him, Ma^e this Woman was taken in Adultery, in the very
act. Now Moses in the Law commanded us, that such in the Law should be s^oned*
but that say thou? This they said, tempting him, that they might have to
accuse him. But Jesus stooping down, and with his Finger wrote on the ground,
as th^ugh he heard them no^. Psalm. ^9.1. I said I wi^^ (...) to my ways, that I
sin not with my tongue I will keep my mou^h with (...) trial (...) before me.
Prove. 19.^ He that kee^eth (...) keeps his l^f^

15 Imitate Christ i^ his Truth and ^^^ness to God and Man; And see that you
who s^em religious be just and righteous, sp^^ every (...) truth to his
Neighbor Pet. ^ 2. Who did (...), neither was guilt found in his mouth. Ephesians ^.
25. Wherefore putting away (...) sp^ak every man truth with his Neighbor, for
we are member; one of another.

16 Imitate your Lord in secret Duties particularly in Closet-prayer. Ma^^ 1
^5. And in the morning rising up a great while before day, he went out, and
departed into a solitary place, and there prayed He continued all night in
prayer to God. Luke 6.12 Mat. ^.6. But thou when (...) enter into thy Closet,
and (...) thou (...) thy Father wi^ (...) ^n secret, (...) thy (...) sees in
secr^^ (...).

17 Imitate your Lord and Master in his religious ^^re ^are of his Family, his
Disciples, in praying with them, and for them, and teaching them to pray,
affl^cting of them, and expounding the Parable to them. Luke 11.1. And it ^re
(...) that as (...) was praying in a certain place, when (...) me of hi^
Disci^^^ said unto him, Lord teach us to pray, as John also taught his
Disciple^ Mark 14 38. Watch ye and pray lest ye inter into temptation* The
spirit (...) ready, but the flesh is weak Mark 4.34. And when they were alone,
he expanded all things unto his Disciples.

18 Imitate Christ in his Thankfulness to his (...) for mercies of all kinds,
Mat. 15 35, 36. And he ^^^anded the multitude to sit down on the ground. And he
took the seven Loaves and Fis^es, and gave (...), and brake them, and gave to
his Disciples, and the Disciples to the multitude: 1 Thessalonians. 5 18. In every
thing give thanks: for this is the Will of God in Christ Jesus concerning you.

19. Imitate your dear Lord in redeeming the golden opportunity of time, John
9.4. I must work the works of him that sent me while it is day: the night
comes when no man can work. Ephesians. 5.16. Redeeming the time, because the days
are evil.

20. Lastly, Imitate Christ in his public spiritedness in his whole course,
who went about doing good to all with whom he had to do, Mat 4.23. And Jesus
went about all Galilee, teaching in their Synagogues, and Preaching the Gospel
of the Kingdom, and healing all manner of sickness, and all manner of diseases
among the people. Acts 10.38. How God anointed Jesus of Nazareth with the Holy
Ghost, and with Power, who went about doing good, and healing all that were
oppressed of the Devil: for God was with him.

O what rare and singular Saints should we be, if we did every day write after
this Copy! Christians, is Christ your Head, and you his mystical Body, how
monstrous and incongruous is it to see a deformed, Leprous body, joined to a
most beautiful comely Head. You hope to go in with Christ, therefore purify
your selves even as he is pure. The Sons of Constantine the great wholly put on
their Father, whom they did exactly resemble, (says Eusebius.) Will you bewail
your unlikeness to Christ, and now look often upon his Picture? 1 Cor. 11.1. Be
ye followers of me, even as I also am of Christ.

A certain Duke of Bavaria, each morning used to call his servant to bring him
water in a Basin, in the bottom whereof was stamped in gold the Picture of Cato
Major, that so he might cause the Impression of his Image to be fixed in his
mind, the imitation of whose virtues he had prudently proposed for his
practice. Do you often look to the Image of Christ, represented in the Glass of
the Scriptures, and let his Virtues, Graces, and exact Conversation be proposed
by you for your imitation. Oh how apt are we to miss the mark, to go down the
stream, and over the hedge daily. Its no less a miracle to be kept from the
sins of the world whilst we live in it, than for those three Worthies not to be
burned when in the fiery Furnance. We among the Tents of the Uncircumcised are
as in the infected Pesthouse, we cannot live not breath, but must suck in this
Pestilential Air. Egypt was not fuller of Frogs and Lice in every Chamber, in
every hole, than the world is of sins, snares, and temptations; for prevention
whereof, furnish your selves with divine Precepts, and set before you the best
Paterns of Piety: Methinks I hear the Lord Jesus from heaven, say to every
Christian and Professor in the World, as Gideon to his Soldiers, Look on me,
and do likewise, Judge 17 Go in Christ's steps, and you shall certainly partake
of his grace, and glory, John 13.15.

SECT. X.
THe fifth Use is of Comfort, to those who are prepared to go in with Christ.

Christian, why weepest thou? Why is thine Heart grieved? Why is thy
Countenance sad? Thou art to go in with Christ, where is fullness of Joy, and
Pleasures for evermore. Say, Why art thou ^^st down, O my Soul? Go thy way, eat
thy Bread, and drink thy Wine with a merry Heart, Col. 9.7. Psalm. 42.5.

Here are four great grounds of Comfort: If We consider, 1. What you shall go
in from, and leave behind. 2. Who you shall go in with. 3. What you shall go
into. 4. The Duration and Perpetuity of it.


First, In general, You shall go in from, and leave behind every thing that is
afflictive and grievous to you. When Elijah went to Heaven, he left his Mantle
behind him. So when Christians go in with Christ, they shall be perfectly and
perpetually exempted from all Sinful and Penal Evils, both of Soul and Body.

Secondly, In particular,

1. You shall be freed from all the Defector Deformities, and Superfluities of
the Body. There will be no Dim or Sore Eyes, no Feeble Knees, Trembling Hands,
Bald Heads, Crooked Backs, Broken Bones; no Wens, Warts, Wounds, Cancers,
Fistulaes, Scars, or any Bodily Blemish.

2. You shall be Perfectly, and for ever free from all your Bodily Toil, Pain,
Labor, with which the Lives of many of Gods People have been made bitter. Some
to get a little bread have been laboring in the very Fire, others grinding at
the Mill, some digging in the Mines, others casting up of Ditches, some
spinning at the Tourn, others weaving at the Loom, and threshing in the Barn,
and carrying heavy Burdens, and many of them have been Servants to cruel hard
Masters, like Israel under their Taskmasters: This will be the Jubilee and
Year of the Lords Release.

3. You shall be freed from all your anxious, vexing and tormenting Cares and
Perplexities, about your carnal and bad Relations, as Husbands, Wives, parents,
Children, Friends, Estates, Lawsuits, Debts, Ill-neighbours, etc.

4. You shall be freed from all your Sighs, Complaints, Groans, Rising from
within or from without. Abraham shall no more complain for the want of an Heir,
nor Rachel of her Barrenness, nor Rebecca of the Daughters of Heth, nor Jacob
of his lost (...)* David shall not complain of his treacherous familiar Friend,
nor of his rebellious Son Absalom, or of being in the Tents of Kedar, the Song
of the Drunkard, There shall be no grieving Thorn, or pricking Briar, or a
Canaanite in the House of the Lord, neither shall they be sensible of Hunger,
or Cold, or Nakedness, any more for ever.

5. You shall be freed from all your Weaknesses, Sicknesses, and all Diseases
whatsoever. There shall be no more Ague, Fever, Gout, Stone, Strangury, Spleen,
Scurvy, Consumption, Dropsies and Lethargies, etc. The cause of all this will
be removed. There will be neither an Aking-head nor Sinful Heart.

6. You shall be freed from all your Pain and Travel, through Cold, Dirt,
Winds, Storms, and other Difficulties, to come at the Word and Ordinances of
God, and from all your Deadness and Weariness in Duties, which is the grief and
sorrow of your Souls.

7. You shall be perfectly freed from all your Fears, Corruptions, Temptations,
Desertions and Doubts, about your Souls and Heaven. The Spouse will never say,
Her Beloved is withdrawn and gone from her. Job shall never feel the poisoned
Arrows within him more. David will never say, Save me, O Lord, for the Waters
are come in upon my Soul: mine Eyes fail, while I wait for my God. The Believer
shall never be heard to say or wish, Oh! That I knew the work of Grace in me
were true and saving, that God's Heart were toward me, and that my Heart were
truly set on God. Then all their Desires shall be satisfied, all their Fears
removed, all their Doubts resolved, all their Prayers fully answered, and all
their Graces perfected: and each Saint shall come to the fullness of the Stature
of the Gift of Christ. When Moses was in the Mount, he came shining down.
Surely, the prepared Christian shall go shining in, when clad with the Robe of
Christ's Glorious Righteousness. The Bodies and Souls of Believers shall be as
Adam, when the Crown of Original Righteousness was set upon his head: The Body
will be in its perfect strength, and (as some think) as it was between Thirty
and Forty Years; and the Colors so rare, fresh, bright and transparent, that
all the veins and nerves will be discerned, and so full of strength and
agility, as it shall be able (says Luther) to Toss the greatest Mountain as a
Ball. The Apostle speaking of the Glory of the Bodies of the Saints at the
Resurrection, says, It is sown in Corruption, it is raised in Incorruption; it
is sown in Dishonor, it is raised in Glory; it is sown in weakness, it is
raised in Power, 1 Cor. 15.42, 43. The same Apostle affirms, That their vile
Bodies shall be made like unto Christ's Glorious Body. Then shall each Saint
shine brighter than the Sun in the Kingdom of their Father, for ever and ever.

2. IT is very comfortable to reflect upon the Persons that shall be Copartners
with you of this Glory, who shall go in with Christ to the Marriage. We read,
Psalm. 45. of the Queen in Gold of Ophir, the Kings Daughters, and honorable
Women, the Virgins thy Companions, which with gladness and rejoicing shall be
bro't, they shall enter the Kings Palace. That numberless number of Sealed
Ones, Rev. 7 9. and great Assembly, at Firstborn, which are written in Heaven,
many of which you have known, shall go in with you. Those that have gone to the
House of God with you, Fasted, Mourned, Prayed with you, those that have
Suffered with you, and who have heard the Word, and received the Lords Supper
with you, and all that have Died in the Lord, and gone to Heaven before you.

All the Holy Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs, Ministers, ( viz.) your
Godly Pastors, Godly Parents, Godly Husbands, Godly Wives, Godly Children,
Godly Servants, Godly Neighbors, whom ye have not seen many Years, shall go in
with you.

Is not this comfortable? Christian, thou shall see Adam the first man, that
God made, and Abel the first Martyr, Enoch that walked with God, and was
Translated: Thou shall see Noah that was in the Ark, and saved from the Flood,
and Lot who lived in Sodom, whose righteous Soul was vexed with their
Uncleanness. Thou shall have the sight of Abraham, who offered up his Son, and
Joseph who was sold into Egypt: Thou shall see Jacob who wrestled with the
Angel, and got the blessing. Thou shall see Moses the great Prophet that was in
the Mount, and brought down the Law to the People, and Aaron the High Priest,
and Joshua who went with the People into Canaan, and Samuel who Ministered to
the Lord when he was but a Child: Thou shall see Sampson who pulled down the
House upon the Philistines, and David the man after Gods own Heart, who slew
Goliath; and Solomon that built the Temple, and the rest of the Godly Kings of
Judah: Thou shall also see the Three Children that were cast into the fiery
Furnace, and Daniel that was cast into the Den of Lions. Thou shall see John
the Baptist, ^^at was the forerunner of Christ, and Paul that was beheaded for
Christ, and Peter that was Crucified for Christ, and the good Women that
ministered to him, and stood by him in his Sufferings, and Joseph of Arimathea,
who begged his sacred Body, and put it in his Sepulcher. Thou shall see the
Blessed Virgin in whose Womb he was conceived; Thou shall see Cranmer, Ridley,
Latimer, and many faithful Ministers and Christians, who were Burned and Died
for the Truth in the Marian Days. Here is a blessed time indeed, to go in with
all those, and who can tell how many more, who shall be caught up to meet the
Lord in the Air, 1 These. 4.

3. WHat they shall go into, is unspeakable Joy to reflect upon.

To the Public Consummation of the Marri^^ that is to be between the Kings Son
and the (...) Daughter, Christ and the Church, Rev. 19. What a comfort will
this be to the Daughters of Zion to behold King Solomon, i. e. Christ, in the
day of his Espousals, and in the day of the gladness of his heart. Here we see
but at a distance, and through a Glass darkly, then face to face; we shall see
him as he is, and behold his Glory, 1 Cor. 13.9, 10, 11, 12. 1. John 3.2. Joh
17.24. The Queen of Sheba, took a great Journey to behold the Glory of Solomon,
which did transport her with wonder, what will the sight of Christ's Person and
Glory do?

Secondly, They shall be openly Owned and Acknowledged by Christ, when he is
exalted above all. For a King to manifest signal Respect to some of his
Subjects and Favorites on his Marriage or Coronation-day, is an high Honor.

Thirdly, They shall be Enthroned and Crowned with Christ, yea, sit down with
him in his Throne, Rev. 3.21. And if there were such Shouts, Joy, Singing and
Triumphs, when Solomon was on the Throne, that the very Earth did rent with the
sound of them, 1 King. 1.39, 40. O what will there be when the Saints shall be
on the Throne-Royal, to Judge the world! And if there is joy among the Angels
at the Conversion of one Sinner, what Acclamations and Triumphs will be among
the Angels at the Coronation of so many Saints. There was great Joy when Joseph
and his Brethren met in Pharaohs Court, what Joy will there be when JESUS and
Believers shall meet above the Clouds, and in their Fathers House!

Fourthly, They shall go into the very Presence of God, and have the full
Vision of him, to see his Eternal Records, Counsels and Decrees that have been
concealed so long. Then it will appear what they shall be. Believers* Christ
Spouse will never ^^lly understand her Dignity and Greatness till she ^ome to
God.

Candala Queen of Fanema sometime said to the Venetians, for her Royal
Entertainment, That she never knew her self to be a Queen, till she came to
their Territories. The same may Saints say, when they come to the upper Regions
and Mansions of Glory.

LAstly, it is strong Consolation to consider the Duration of the Joys and
Happiness of the Saints in Heaven, which will be without any Intermission,
Succession, or Conclusion. To go into the New Jerusalem, that needs no Light
of the Sun, Moon nor Stars, and to be with God, Christ, Angels and Saints for
ever, will be incomparable Joy, St. Paul affirms, That Believers shall be
ever with the Lord, 1 Th^^ 4.17, 18. It Is said of that Holy Man Mr. Ward, That
being in the midst of a Dinner, and the People wondering what he was musing
about, he presently brake out, For ever, for ever, for ever, for almost a
Quarter of an Hour he could not be stilled, but Cried out, For ever, for ever,
for ever.

TO Conclude, Christian speedily get an Assurance of Faith, that thou may
come to a Victorious Conclusion against the strength of Doubts, whereby thy
pure mind may be ascertained, persuaded, and upon good ground settled in the
belief of going in with Christ.

I shall shut up all in a few Queries.

1. Q. Sinner, Can thou believe that those only who are Prepared, shall be
for ever with Christ, and not one more?

2. Q Have thou done as God Commanded Hezekiah at his Summons for Death? Set
thy House in Order, disposed of thine Estate, and laid no Foundation for thy
Wife, children, Friends, Relations, to quarrel when thou art Dead, and laid in
thy Grave?

3. Q. Shall thou leave a good Savor behind thee when ever thou go hence?
And is there any just cause of any Shimei to Curse, or Dog to Bark at thee?

4 Q. Dare thou own all that thou have gotten before the Great and Dreadful
Judge, and say as Samuel, 1 Samuel 12.3, 5. Whose Ox have I taken? Whose Ass have
I taken? Or whom have I Defrauded? And he said, the Lord is witness that you
have not found ought in my Hand. Is there no Man, Orphan, or Widow wronged, or
Debts contracted, and not Paid?

5. Q Have thou carried thy self like a Christian in thy Calling, Office and
Relation, and Entailed a Blessing upon thy Estate and Family? Where is the Man
or Woman's Child or Servant, that can rise up and call thee Blessed, or
Cordially Bless God for thy Example, Company, Counsel?

6 Q What have thou done for the Church of Christ, his Honor, Interest,
Ministers and afflicted Members? Have they been the better for thee or thine
Estate? Great Receipts will have a great Account.

Lastly, If the Cry at Midnight should now sound in thine Ears, art thou ready
for the Marriage?

Mr. Bolton Dying told his Children, That none of them should dare to meet him
at Gods Tribunal in an Unregenerate Estate: The Reason is in the Text. Oh! Let
it never, never be forgotten, That those that were Ready went in with him to
the Marriage, and the Door was Shut.

FINIS.

