THE Call of CHRIST, UNTO Thirsty Sinners, To Come to HIM and Drink of the
Waters of Life.

As it was Preached by that Holy Man of GOD, and Faithful Servant of CHRIST.
Mr. THOMAS ALLEN, ^ate Pastor of a Church in the City of Norwich, and sometimes
Teacher of the Church of Christ at Charlstown in New England.

Upon this Text. Joh. 7.37.

Boston, in N. E. Reprinted by T. Green, for Nicholas Buttolph. 1705.

To the READER.
BEING importuned by a Friend to write a short Epistle before this ensuing
Sermon, (he himself being much Affected with it, desired the Printing of it,
for the use of his Friends I could not refuse the motion; ^^nceivin^ the
Subject Matter of it may be very Acceptable, ^^^^^onable, and Profitable to
many Souls, into whose hands by the Providence of God it may come.

The Author of it, Mr. Thomas Allen, was sometimes Teacher of the Church at
Charlstown; He was much Beloved, and his Ministry highly Pri^ed by the People
there; from thence he removed to the City of Norwich, in Old England, where he
fulfilled his Ministry for many Years. After his Decease, diverse of his Sermons
were Printed, amongst which this was one; which was not intended nor prepared
for the Press by himself, but taken in short Hand from the mouth of the
Preacher; in which case (we know) there is much allowance to be given, as to
the Manner of Expressing: But as to the Matter or Scope of it, it will be found
upon trial to be a word in Season, (...) the Direction and Encouragement of
Thirsty Souls in their coming to jesus Christ, that they may drink and be
satisfied with the Water of Life.

Only add one Remarkable passage out of^ir. Shephards Sound Believer. Page 250.
O the wrath of God upon this God-glutted, Christ-glutted, Gospel-glutted Age,
unless it be amongst a very few poor Believers, whose Souls are kept Empty,
Poor, and Hungry, by some continual Temptations or Afflictions, and they are
indeed glad of any thing, if it be any thing of Christ! Verily, I am afraid
such a dismal Night is toward of Spiritual Desertions, and of Outward, but
sore Afflictions of Famine, War, Blood, Mortality and Death of G^^^ Precious
Servants; Especially, that the Lord will fill the Hearts of all Churches,
Families, and Christians that shall be Saved in those Times, with such
R^^dings, Tearings, Shakings, and Angui^^ of Spirit, as scarce never more in
the worst Days of our Forefathers, and thi^ shall continue till the Remnant
that ^sca^^^ shall say, Blessed be he that come^h (...) the Name of the Lord;
B^ (...) Face and Feet of the Minister th^^ (...) come unto us in Christ's Name,
and (...) that there is a Savior for Sinners, and that He calls us for to come.

Reader, Who ever thou art, consider whether this Prophetical Speech be not in
a great measure fulfilled upon New England, in these Days, and whether in this
Ensuing Sermon, there be not such a Call of Christ, as greatly concerns thee,
(if thou love thy own Soul) to give a consenting answer unto, that thy Heart
and Soul is continually going out ^or getting away from Sin, and Self, and
World, and constantly coming to Jesus Christ for Himself, or for all that
Soul-satisfying, Saving Good which is to be had in Him, and from Him, who is
unto all True Believers our ALL in ALL. I commend thee to the Grace of God in
Christ Jesus.

July 20. 1678. John Higginson.

THIRSTY SINNERS Invited to Christ.
Joh. 7.37. In the Last Day, that Great Day ^^ the Feast, Jesus Stood, and
Cried, saying, If any Man Thirst, let him come unto me and Drink.


THE words that I have read, contain the sum and substance of one of the
Sermons that our Savior Christ Preached in the Temple, wherein we may take
notice of Three things.

1. Here is set forth the Time when it was that Christ Preached this Sermon;
It Is said, The Last Day, that Great Day of the Fea^t. What Feast? Why the Feast
of Tabernacles, that Christ did Preach this Sermon* and it is said, The Last Day,
and Great Day of the Feast.

Observe it, The Feast of Tabernacles was not kept only One Day, but Many
Days, even Seven Days together. Lev. 23.34. And the Lord spoke unto Moses
saying, Speak unto t^^ Children of Israel, the Fifteenth Day of the Seven^h
Month shall be a Feast of Tabernacles for Seven Days unto the Lord. The
Fifteenth Day of the Seventh Month, which is our September. Now for these seven
Days, the first and the last were kept i^ a solemn manner; in the other Day^
they did Servile work, but not on the first and last Day: And so in Nehemiahs
time, they kept the last Day of the Feast very solemnly: Neh. 8 8 And they kept
the Feast Seven days, and on the Eighth day was a solemn Assembly, according
to the manner. The last day, then the People came generally into the Temple to
hear the Law read unto them, and therefore that last Day was called, The Great
Day of the Feast: For the People on the morrow were to depart into all parts of
the Country, as they came from all parts: So here on the las^ Day, the great
Day of the Feast, Christ Preached unto them on this Subject.

2. It Is set forth by the Manner of (...), in what manner Christ did Preach
this ^ermon to them. There is a double Circumstance in the Preaching of this
Sermon; It Is said, Christ stood, but ordinarily Christ is sai^ to sit down: As
He sat down in the Ship, but here it is said He stood, that He might be better
heard and seen of the multitude. And another thing about the manner of it is,
He stood and cried with a mighty Voice; He did Extend His Voice so as all might
hear, there being a great Concourse of People; and likewise intimating that He
was not afraid of the People, He goes up into the Temple, and there He Cries
it, intimating also that the matter was a weighty matter, which He had then to
speak unto them; As if He had said, Now take this word with you, it is a matter
of great Concernment. And that is the Second thing here in the Text.

3. The matter of His Sermon when He stood and cried so, what He did speak or
say? Why this it was, If any man Thirst, let him come unto me and Drink. This
was the sum of His Sermon that He stood up and Cried or Preached unto the
People. Where^^ we have these two particulars.

1. A graci^u^ ^nvitation to all that (...) A-t^^rst And,

2. A graci^us Promise, that if they (...) come they shall Drink.

The Rabbis among the Jews recorded of this Feast, that in this last Day,
(...) were wont to go and (...) abundance of Water and Wine (^n a way of
re^oycing) upon the Altar; and therefore Christ in allusion to that (speaking
to them) says, If any man be A-thirst, let him come unto me and Drink. Briefly
to take up what I conceive to be Christ's meaning in this place. There is a
great deal of the Gospel here in ^hese Words, in this general Pro^lamation, If
any man be Athirst, le^ (...) and Drink. Then (...)

DOCT. That such as being Athirst do come unto Christ, they shall certainly be
supplied into the full, and that most freely. Whoever being Athirst does come
unto Christ, he shall have a supply, he shall have a full supply; he shall not
only taste and sip, but drink a full Draught, his belly (...) so filled, that
as the Word says, Out of his belly shall flow Rivers of Living Water; and not
only so, but he shall have a full supply most freely, drink most freely; He
does not desire Money or Price, but according to that Proclamation, which you
have to this purpose, Isa. 55.1. He every one that Thirsts, Come ye to the
Waters, and he that has no Money, Come Buy and Eat, yea, Come buy Wine and
Milk without Money and without Price. Come and ye shall Drink freely, and that
for nothing, without Money and without Price. And so, Rev. 22.17. And the
Spirit an^ the Bride say, Come, and let him that ^eareth ^ay, Come, and let him
that is (...) come, and whosoever will, let him take of the water of Life
freely. And the Spirit and the Bride say, Come* this is held forth freely, to
drink freely, and it shall cost you nothing. As now a man that should hold
forth Proclamation to all that would come to him and drink what they would,
they might come, and might drink freely without charge to them: So here, Our
Savior Christ clearly holds forth Grace and Salvation freely; whosoever comes
they shall have it freely. Briefly, to open the point and show;

1. What manner of Thirst it is that Christ speaks of? What Thirst is it?

2. What is that same coming? Or, How may one that is Athirst come to Christ?
You will say, Suppose it be Athirst after the Water of Life, how may I come, or
in what way may I come? Or in what way man I come to Christ? And then;

3. Show you, That th^se who being thirsty do come unto Christ, they shall
certainly be supplied to the full: They shall have drink given them freely,
most freely. I shall desire to have respect to the season, and apply my self
accordingly, to show you what we are to understand by this same Thirst: If any
man be athirst, let him come and drink: What manner of thirst is it?

We are not here to understand it to be a Bodily Thirst, but we are to
understand it of a Spiritual Thirst, a thirsting of the Soul, as David faith,
My Soul thirsts for thee, O God, for the living God, Psalm. 42.2. There Is a
thirst of the Soul, as well as a thirst of the Body, and a t^i^st of the Soul
is set forth by the similitude or resemblance of the Body; and so by what this
thirst of the Body is, we may better understand the resemblance of the thirst
of the Soul.

There are two things in a Bodily Thirst.

1. There is a sense that the Body feels of want; there is not only a want of
moisture, but the Body is sensible of it, it is such a want as is an afflictive
want, in the want of it the Body stands in need of a supply: And so you may
read concerning Hagar, the water being out, she did not know what to do for
water, and away* ^^e goes Crying for her Child* and her Child Cries too, and
even ready to pe^i^h for want of water. And so Sam^, after he had made a great
slaughter of the Philistines, says he, What shall this victory do me good* if I
want water? So that it is the sense of the want of something that is needful;
and as there is a sense of something, so an ardent and vehement desire, and
longing after the fullness of that desire: As you read of S^sera, Judge. 4. that
great General begged a draught of water being very thirsty.

2. In the Thirst of the Body, there are not only longing desires, vehement
earnest desires for a supply, but it is altogether unsatisfied till it have
something of water or moisture to supply its thirst. As the Israelites they
must have water whatever comes of it, they must have water, and Moses smites
the Rock and fetched water out of it for them. Why;

1. First of all, In the Thirst of the Soul, the Soul is sensible of some
Spiritual good thing, he is not only wanting (...) and without it, but he is
sensible of it: In this thirst of the Soul, there is a deep sense of the want
of some spiritual Good thing. Psalm 63.1, 2, 3 David being banished from the
Tabernacle, from the Public Worship, Oh! says he, A^^ Soul thi^steth for God:
He wanted the Ordinances, as he used to have had the^; That I may see thy Glory
in thy Sanctuary In Isa. 41* 17. Whe^^ the poor and needy seek water, and (...)
is none, and their tongue fails for thi^st^ (a gracious Promise,) s^e what
w^nt there is when the Soul^^ (...) such a case, being so sensible that (...)
is even faint and failing, I the Lord will hear them, I the God of Israel will
not forsake them. And th^^ ag^in^*

2. As with the Body when it (...) athirst* it does vehemently and strongly
desire; so now in this thirst of the Soul there is an ^rdent, ^n earnest and
strong desire after that which it finds it stand in need of, Psalm. ^2.1, 2.
David does express the thirst of his Soul, as the H^^t that is wearied, and
tired, and just spent in hunting: O it l^ngs and thirsts after ^he Waterbrooks
for its refreshment, So does my Soul after thee, O God; O when shall I come and
appear before God! So, Psalm. 63.8. My Soul follows hard after God; it was
when his Soul was thirsty: In the beginning of the Psalm, his Soul was thirsty
for God, and ver. 8. My Soul follows hard after God; more than a man that is
athirst, follows hard for the satisfying his desire of thirst. So when the Soul
that has wanted some Spiritual Good thing, (being athirst) has longed
vehemently, and ^^rongly, and been very earnest for it. And then, again;

3. When the (...) ^itually Thirsty, it is not satisfied with any thing short
of that which it finds it stands in need of, of that Spiritual Good Thing, of
that Spiritual Mercy. As Abraham, he was athirst, his Soul was athirst for the
accomplishment of the Promise; well, Abraham goes a long while before the
accomplishment of the Promise, Twenty Years or better, and in the mean while
God gives Abraham other Promises, but yet he is not satisfied; says God to
Abraham, Behold, Abraham, I am thy Shield and thine exceeding great^Reward:
What could Abraham desire more than God to be his great Reward, even all* and
yet says Abraham, Lord, what will thou give me, and I go Childless* Nothing
else but what God promised him will satisfy him. When the Soul is athirst,
nothing will satisfy but what it is a^thirsting after* One thing have I
desired, and that will I seek, it is that which I have thirsted after, and
longed for, and nothing shall satisfy me till I have my longing, I have made
it the main of my desires, and I will still desir^ it. Even as the Woman of
Canaan, she desired mercy for her Daughter that was possessed of a Devil, she
had other mercies, yet she would not be satisfied without she had that Mercy.
And this is the nature of a Thirst. Why now says Christ, if any man be
athirst, let him come to me.

Object* But you will say, What is the Object of this Thirst that he Thirsts
after, or for? What is it? For the Thirst of the Body, Water, or some Moisture
for the Body? But now what is the Object of this Thirst? Must Christ supply a
man with whatsoever he Thirsts for? Suppose he Thirsts for a great deal of the
World, suppose he Thirsts for Health, and Strength, or the Life of Relations,
or suppose it may be for some Spiritual Mercy, the Performance of Spiritual
Duties, and the ^^ke; whatsoever a man Thirsts for must it be given him?

Answ. It is true indeed, it is not here expressed for whatsoever a man does
Thirst: I suppose Christ does not mean whosoever Thirsts for the World, or
worldly Comforts, or for Spiritual Gifts, etc. for Carnal ends; but Christ
means such Mercies and Blessings as do accompany and necessarily tend to the
Salvation of the Soul; if any man Thirst for such a Mercy, for that which he
calls in the next verse, The Water of Life, out of his belly shall flow Rivers
of Living Water, who Thirsts so: And He does more plainly Express it, ver. 39.
This He spoke of the Spirit; Out of his belly shall flow Rivers of Living
Water: That is, whosoever is athi^st for Spiritu^l Saving Sanctifying Grace, he
that is athirst for the Comforts of the Spirit, for the Saving Graces thereof,
as Faith, Meekness, Humility, and Patience* as the Apostle reckons diverse
Fruits of the Spirit; Gal. 5.22, 23. Whosoever does long, and is sensible of
the want of these saving Blessings, and Mercies, Pardon of Sin, and Assurance,
etc. whosoever is sensible of these Wants, and longs for a supply of them, and
is unsatisfied without them; whosoever he is that is thus, Let him come to me!
Now, I say, this same Thirst of the Soul is very necessary, else the Soul will
hardly ever come to Christ for to be supplied. Like as it is wi^h a man that
has no ailment at all, at least no sense of it, tell him of a Physician, he
will not stir a step after him for Cure. Those that are truly Thirsty and have
not wherewithal to supply themselves, they are they that will come to Christ.
And hence it is that when Christ would stir up those of Laodicea to come unto
Him, He does it by showing them their Spiritual wants; Thou say, says He,
that thou Stand in need of ^n thing, that thou art full, and stand in
need of nothing; But I say, says Christ, that thou art Blind, Miserable, and
Naked. First, Christ does convince them (as it were) of their need of a Thirst,
and then holds forth the Water of Life. Here Is the first thing opened, what we
are to understand by this Thirst: They who are truly Thirsty let them come to
Christ. But,

2. What is this coming to Christ? Or, how may the Soul come to drink of the
Water of Life? As I said before concerning Thirst, it is not a Thirst of the
Body, but a Thirst of the Soul: In what way may the Soul be said to come unto
Christ* Briefly, Three ways the Soul th^^ is athirst may be said to come unto
Christ.

1. We are to come to Christ in the way of His Ordinances, attending upon His
Word, to hearken to Christ there. Let him come to me in the way of mine
Ordinances; as in Scripture phrase, in that place before mentioned, Isa. 55.2,
3. Coming is an hearkening diligently, enclining the Ear; Come unto me by
enclining of your Ear: Jesus Christ is usually to be found in His own way in
His Ordinances, Mat. 28.20. Lo I am with you always, even to the end of the
world: Yea, in His Ordinances, in the Administration of the Gospel* I am with
you. Then come to the place where Christ is, or where He may meet with you.
Received you the Spirit by the Hearing of the Law, or by the Preaching (...)
Faith? That is the Gospel. Ye ^eived the Spirit, says the Apostle Paul, by
having the Gospel Preached. He compares the Preaching of the Law, and the
Preaching of the Gospel; and calls the Preaching of the Law the Letter, and the
Preaching of the Gospel the Spirit. To come to Christ, to wait upon Christ in
His own way, where He gives out this Water of Life: he that rec^ives of this
Water of Life, must be found in the way where Christ comes; as Zacheus was when
Christ said to him, This Day is Salvation come to thy House. This was beyond
his Desire, and beyond his Thirst. Would you come to Christ, come into His
Galleries; Come into my Garden my Sister, my Spouse. Would you come to Christ,
come where He is, and see; He walks in the midst of His Golden Candlesticks;
there wait upon (...) in the way of His Ordinances; (...) hear what He will say
unto you for a supply of your wants.

2. Come unto Christ in a way of Asking: By asking of Him the waters of Life.
So we are to come, and this is called a coming to the Lord in the Hebrews,
Chap. 11. ver. 6. He that comes to God must believe that He is, and that He is
a Rewarder of them that diligently seek Him. He that comes to God, how? In a
way of Prayer; and so to seek Grace to help in time of need: Come in a way of
Prayer. And see how He directed the Woman of Samaria; Christ asked her a little
Water, and she denied Him; well says Christ, If thou had asked of me, I
would have given thee Living Water. How would He have given her Living Water?
Why in a way of Asking.

3. We are to come in a way of Faith. (...) so says Christ here in this ^ext,
If any man Thirst, let him come and Drink: That is, he that Believes in me;
and so this coming to Christ is Expounded to be believeing. Joh. 6^35. He that
comes (...) me shall never Hunger, and he that bebelieveth in me shall never
Thirst. Look now as Unbelieving is a departing from the Lord: Heb. 10.38, 39.
Take heed, if any man draw back, my Soul shall have no pleasure in him: But we
are not of those that draw back, but of them that believe to the saving of the
Soul. O an Evil heart of Unbelief is a departing from God* and so then by
Believing, the Soul is said to come to God, to draw near to God. But what is
that coming unto Christ, or believing in Christ, whereby the Soul shall be
fully satisfied? Is it a believing that Jesus Christ is the Messiah, the
Savior of the world? The very Devils do believe this; No: but briefly, This
believing is, namely, The Souls rest, and relying and trusting upon Christ for
acceptance in the sight of God, for Remission of Sins, for Salvation and
Eternal Life. Trusting and Relying upon Christ and His Merits for Salvation, a
putting Confidence in the Lord. Now when the Soul does rely and venture through
a word of invitation in the Gospel through Christ's invitation, does adventure to
rely upon His Merits, to be wholly accepted in the sight of God; This now is a
coming to Christ. And now says Christ, If any man Thirst, let him come unto me
and he shall Drink. Let not any here move Contention, and say, what do you bid
us come to Christ, why this holds forth Free Will? Why, know that such
Exhortations usually and frequently are in all the Duties that the Holy Ghost
requires of us, which He knows we have no strength to do: The Lord calls us to
Pray, and it is our Duty so to do; and to Believe, but we have no strength and
power of our selves; but we must not stand upon Cavelling and say, it is but
Folly for us to be striving, seeing we can do nothing, but it is our Duty to be
doing what lies in us to the performance, and wait upon the Lord for His coming
in with Power. to enable us to perform. As Lazarus, when he was in the Grave,
Christ called, and with His word Power was given forth and he came out. So now
we should endeavor to rely and trust upon Christ in His Grace* and in His
Promise to have a supply of this same Water of Life, and not to give over and
cavil. That is a Second, to show what way the Soul that is truly Athirst should
come to Christ. Then,

3. Such as being Athirst and do come to Christ, they shall certainly be
supplied. They shall certainly have a full supply, and it freely given them:
For so says Christ, If any man Thirst, let him come and Drink freely. He does
not expect any thing, or hold forth any Price, but they, whoever come, shall
Drink freely, they shall certainly have a ^^ll supply, and be supplied freely.
Christ speaking it, spoke it in the Hearing and Audience of many Thousands. I
shall speak a word of Application.

APPLICATION.
This may help us to discern, whether e^^r we have be^n made to Drink out of
the Wells of Salvation. Whether ever we have been made to Drink of the Waters
which Jesus Christ has given forth? And to go no further than the Text, there
are Two Things that may help us to discern it, and One is this;

First, That if ever the Soul has drank of the Waters of Life that are held
forth, then it was once a Thirst for Christ. For here the offer that Christ
makes is to Thirsty Souls, and those who Thirst no^ will not care for coming.
And,

Secondly, Not only Thirsty, but they must also come to Christ. And therefore
briefly to hint what I have spoken before.

1. Consider whether ever you have been truly Thirsty. And by that you may see
and know whether you have truly Drank of this Water of Life. Consider it every
one, Has my Soul been truly Thirsty? The Soul that is truly Thirsty is really
sensible of some Spiritual want, that he wants some Spiritual mercy; so
sensible as to be Spiritually affected, yea afflicted with the sense of it. As
a man that is Thirsty for water, ^e is so sensible that if he have it not be is
afflicted for it; why so let every Soul consider, Well, has my Soul ever been
really sensible of the ^nt of some Saving Mercy, or Truth? Has my Soul been
ever sensible of it? I pray consider it with your own Souls; What saving Grace
is it that your Souls have been sensible for the want of? Even afflicted for
the want of it? IN ever you have been greatly Thirsty in your Bodies, you have
been very sensible. I pray consider, Can you remember that ever your Souls were
really sensible so as to be afflicted for the want of some Spiritual Saving
Mercy from God?

2. Again; Consider, if you have been Thirsty, whether you have ever found that
same strong, ardent, and longing desire after a supply of that spiritual want
you are in? As Pardon of Sin, or Saving Grace: Have your Souls not only been
affected, but afflicted from the sense of the want of Grace, being ardently,
vehemently, and earnestly longing after it i^ ^n you remember at such a time
(...) Body was Thirsty, and you (...) for Water, and could have drank puddle
water, by a good token, and cannot you remember that your Souls have been
longing vehemently longing, most earnestly longing after, and panting after
this Spiritual Water of Life, and to have been altogether unsatisfied, without
you might have that Spiritual Grace and Mercy, which you have longed for? If a
man be Thirsty, he will not be satisfied with a Song, you may sing him a Song,
but that will not satisfy him, and give him what you will, he must have that
which he longs for, and that which he desires, or nothing. And has it been
thus with your Souls? Consider what I say; Can you say, you have longed for
this Grace and the other, for Saving Grace, and the lik^* Well, but have you
not been s^fied with something else? For (...) if we had not had in some m^
(...) a supply, our Souls would still have been Thirsty, and never satisfied
without that we have found a need of. And then then take that along with all,
viz.

3. Conside^ whether ever you have truly come to Christ? Suppose you have
longed for this and that Mercy, and have been unsatisfied for want of this
Mercy, consider of it, Did you ever truly come to Christ? Have you ever been
Athirst? Have you ever come to Christ in His Ordinances for a supply? Why, Yes
you will say, you have come to the Ordinances to hear the Word Preached: Ay
Brethren, you may come to hear, and yet not come to Christ. Have you ever come
to hear the (...) from the sense of the want (...) Spiritual Saving Grace, that
(...) ^uld supply to you? It is or^ for every one to come, except they are such
as are desperately wicked and profane, but thus are we to come, and have we
ever come thus to Christ, even as the Saints have been won^ to come to the
Ordinances, with a sense of their Spiritual wants? I will hearken and hear what
God the Lord will speak to me for He will speak Peace. He wanted peace, and he
had the sense of the want of peace upon him, now says he, God will speak
peace. So Psalm. 23. the good man was under a great Temptation, and it was even
too hard for him, and he was even ready to Cry out of the Temptation, and
Murmur and Repine against God, well he now goes unto the Lord in the way of His
Ordinances, and hearkens what God will give unto him, to answer his Temptation,
and then his Temptation was answered in his waiting upon God in the sense of
his Spiritual wants for a supply And so have you even come thus to the Lord in
the way of His Ordinances? When you came this day before the Lord, can you say
(between the Lord and your own Souls,) that you came upon the sense of some
Spiritual want for your Souls unto the Lord in this Ordinance? Why Brethren, it
is a rare thing for to come to Christ in the way of His Ordinances, in the
sense of the want of some Spiritual mercy. But,

4. Again, Consider, have you ever come to Christ in a way of Prayer to ask a
Spiritual Mercy and Blessing? It is true indeed, you will say, you go to God
every day for the pardon of sin, and assurance of it; but now have you come to
the Lord and asked this Spiritual Mercy and the other, as a Thirsty man that is
even ready to perish for want of Drink, and to take nothing in a way of
satisfaction, (whatsoever you have besides,) without you have that you are so
sensible of*

5. And then, Consider whether you have ever come to Christ in a way of Faith?
There is the coming to Christ indeed: If ever you would drink of the waters of
Life, you must come in a way of Faith. Though you have come to the Word, and come
in a way of Prayer, yet have you come in a way of Faith, relying and resting
and rolling upon Christ in a way of Faith, to be accepted of the Father through
Him, and so for remission of sins, and whatever saving Benefits you stand in
need of? Have you ever came to Christ thus, relying upon Him in his Word, in
the invitation He makes there, and in His Promise? This is the way to come to
CHRIST. He that believes on me, out of his belly shall flow Rivers of living
water. Let us consider of it between the Lord and our own Souls, whether ever
we have come to Christ, and so drank of the waters of Life? If we have not been
thirsty, though we may have seemed to be so, yet we have not really come to
Christ, we fall short of what we might have expected to have met with.

3. The third particular in Explication of the Doctrine is to show you th^^
su^^ as do come to Christ shall have a full supply. Every Soul that does come
to Christ shall be filled; He that comes to me shall not only have a taste, but
shall have a full supply. Let him come unto me and Drink. He shall not only
have a full supply, but a free supply. Christ does not require any thing at
all. Whosoever he be that comes unto me, he shall Drink, he shall be freely
supplied, Rev. 2^* 17. Let him that is athirst come (...) whosoever will let
him come, and take of the waters of Li^e freely. And, Isa. 55.1. He every one
that is athirst, come ye to the waters. He shall be made to drink, and be
supplied with all Spiritual, Heavenly, and Eternal Blessings. Jesus Christ is a
full supply, and though we may have a notion that in Jesus Christ their is a full
supply, yet we have a principle and notion in us, that we have some supply in
our selves. A Popish principle, Christ may supply us in part, but some from our
selves: and therefore we have a notion as if we should go unto Christ with
Money in our hands to buy it of Him. Therefore a little to clear these things,
viz. to Demonstrate,

1. That Jesus Christ will certainly give a full supply.

2. That there is a full supply that Christ will give out, not a part only, but
a full supply to all that come to Him.

1. That Jesus Christ will give out a full supply of all spiri^ual Blessings.
Whatsoever good things the Soul can stand i^ need of, or can possibly desire,
Jesus Christ will give out a full supply unto all them, even every of them that
comes to Him.

1. The First Demonstration is taken from the incomprehensible Fullness that ^s
in Jesus Christ. He is a full Foun^ain; not as a Pail or a Bucket drawn from a
Well, but He is a full Fountain; now from out of a Fountain there is a full
supply to be had; a man may drink as much as ever he will, as much as ever he
can hold: Now Christ is a full Fountain; see what is said concerning Christ,
Zec. 13.1. In that day, there shall be a Fountain set open to the House of
David, and to the Inhabitants of Jerusalem* for sin and for uncleanness. And
so, Col. 1.19. It pleased the Father, that in Him all Fullness should dwell:
Even all Fullness* Now if Christ be a Fountain, a full Fountain, there is
fullness of supply to be ^ad in Him. Now all fullness of Blessings are in Jesus
Christ; He is a Fountain of all Spiritual things that are needful for the
Salvation of a poor soul: and there is a fullness of Spirit in Christ. Joh. 3
34. For God gives not the Spirit by measure to Him* And so, Col. 2.9. it is
said, It pleas^^ the Father that the fullness of the Godhead dwelt in him as
Mediator: The fullness of the Deity, the fullness of the Spirit.

2. And then, as there is a Fullness of the Godhead dwelling in Him as
Mediator, and a fullness of the Spirit, so there is also a Fullness of all Gifts,
and of all Graces in Jesus Christ. Joh. 1.^4. He is the only begotten Son of
the Father full of Grace and Truth. And so ^n Him are hid the Treasures of
Wisdom and Knowledge; they are hid in Christ, He is the Fountain of them. The
Apostle has another full Expression, Ephesians. 3.8. Unto me who am less than the
least of all Saints is th^^ Grace given, that I should Preach among the
Gentiles the Unsearchable Riches of Christ. Unsearchable Riches that can never
be drawn dry. The fullness of the Spirit, the fullness of all ^race dwells in
Him.

3. There is a Fullness of Righteousness and Satisfaction in Jesus Christ, so as
to make a poor sinner to be accepted as Righteous before God, and discharge it
of all Sins. As the Angel told Daniel, Chap. 9. ver. 24. To make an end of
sins, and to bring in an everlasting Righteousness. A Righteousness that will
serve to all Eternity, for all, from the beginning to the end of the world; and
though the Saints are striving after a measure and fullness daily, yet
notwithstanding there is a Fullness in Jesus Christ. The Blood of Jesus Christ
cleanses from all Sin. There is Merit enough, and Virtue enough in Christ. 1 John 2.1, 2. If any man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ
the Righteous, and He is the Propitiation for our Sins, and not for ours only,
but for the Sins of the whole World. There is Righteousness, and Satisfaction,
and Merit enoug^ for all. And,

4 Then there is a fullness of Power to give out, and to communicate unto
others. Joh. 5.26, 27. For as the Father has Life in Himself, so has He given
to the Son to have Life in Himself, and has given Him authority to Execute
Judgment also, because He is the Son of Man. As the Father has Life in
Himself, so there is fullness of Power and Authority given out unto Jesus
Christ, to give out to whom He will, and He gives and communicates as being
full of the Spirit.

1. He communicates of the Spirit and Holy Ghost to whom He will. He gives the
Spirit, and therefore promises it to His Disciples, Joh. 16.7. When they heard
of His departure from them, that Night He should be Betrayed, Christ having
given them a hint of it, they were troubled, and says Christ, Because I tell
you the Truth you are grieved, yet nevertheless, it is expedient for you that I
go away, and that you be deprived of my presence, for when I go away, I will
send the Holy Ghost, the Comforter unto you. And so the Apostle Peter, Act. ^.
when the Holy Ghost fell upon the Twelve with fiery Tongues, the people
marvelled at it, and thought they were Drunk with new Wine, no says Peter,
These are not Drunken with New Wine, as you suppose, this is an effect of the
Promise as to the latter Days, according to Joels Prophecy. And,

2. Again, He communicates of the Gifts and Graces of the Spirit. The Graces of
the Spirit are given out by Jesus Christ, Ephesians. 4.8. When He asc^^ded on high,
He led Captivity Ca^tive, and gave Gi^ts unto men. And so the Apostle says,
Grace and Peace from God our Father, and from the Lord Jesus Christ. He gives
Gif^s and Graces. And so again;

3. Christ does communica^e and give our Forgiveness and Remissi^n of Sin. He
has power and authority to give (...) that. As Mat. 9. when they brought the
Palsy man, and Christ saw their Faith, says He, Son be of good cheer, thy
Sins are forgiven thee. But some of them thought He had blasphemed; Well says
He, That I may show unto you, that I have power on Earth to forgive Sins, I say
unto thee, Son, take up thy Bed and walk. And so, Act. 5 31. Him has ^od
Exalted with His own R^ght hand, to be a Prince and a Savior, for to give unto
Israel Repentance and Forgiveness of Sins. And,

4. Again, Jesus Christ does communicate Peace and Consolation, Peace with God
and true Comfort* ^eing Justified by Faith we have Peace with God through our
Lord Jesus Christ. And so (...) another place, If there be any Con^^^a^ion in
Christ Jesus? Taken it for granted there is Consolation in Jesus Christ; all
true Consolation comes from Him. And so as our Sufferings abound, so do our
Consolations abound much more through Jesus Christ our Lord. Again,

5. It is Jesus Christ, also that ^d^^l^ communicate and give out Eternal Life,
to whom He will. Says He, My sheep hear my voice and they follow me, and I
give unto them Eternal Life. Brethren, Christ has power and authority to give
out all Spiritual Blessings, a Fountain having all Fullness; so they that come
to Christ for a supply come to a full Fountain. Breth^^n, if so be that Jesus
Christ were full of the Spirit, and full of Grace, -- yet if He were not full
as a Fountain, He could not communicate; look now as it is with a Bucket, though
it may be full of water yet notwithstanding i^ has not the fullness of a
Fountain^ as it does supply any it has so much the less; but Christ now being
a Fountain-fulness, though he communicate never so much, yet still there is the
same fullness. As now go to the Sea, all the Rivers in the world are filled with
the Sea, and yet the Sea has never a whit the less. And so the (...) has
given out its light day by day, Four Thousand Years together, and yet the Sun
has never the less Light in it, because it is the Fountain of Light. So Christ
(now) being a Fountain has never the less in communicating, still as much
Grace is ^uch Holiness, as much Righteousness as before. And so the Saints some
of them have been full of the Holy Ghost, (as Stephen,) though yet
notwithstanding, their fullness is not the fullness of a Fountain, and so ^hey
cannot supply the want of others: As the Wise Virgins, when the Foolish Virgins
wanted Oil, and their Lamps were out, they would have had Oil of the Wise, but
say they, We have none to spare, none to communicate: Why? Because they have
not a Fountain. But still now in Jesus Christ there is a fullness, as a Fountain
of all Grace whatsoever. That is the First Demonstration.

2. Take another withal, and that is this, To show that there is a full supply
in Him, Because all that come to Jesus Christ are Near to Him, nay, they are
United to Him. They are made near unto God, being Uni^^d unto Christ, and
thereupon they have a Communication of His fullness from Union, for Union is the
cause of Communication. As now, if the Branches of a Tree be United to the
Tree, they Communicate an^ Partake o^ the Trees Root, Sap, and Nature of it.
Says Christ, I am the Vine, y^ are the Branches. Why now the branches of the
Vine partake of the Vine. Look now as it with the Members of a Natural Body,
being joined, they do Communica^^ and Participate with all the Members. As the
Head, it is the seat of all the Sensitive and Animal Spirits, and the Head
being united to the Body, there is a communication of all the Senses, from the
Head to every Member, according to its capacity. Why now, Jesus Christ He is
the Head, we are His Members, Flesh of His Flesh, Bone of His Bone; we are
Members of Him being joined to him, and they that are joined to the Lord are
one Spirit: we are by Faith joined to the Lord; and Jesus Christ is said to
dwell in (...) by Faith. There is a nearer Upon that the believing Soul has
with Jesus Christ, than any Member has to the Natural Body, than any Branch
has to a Natural Tree, yea, than our Souls and Bodies have to each other, Joh.
6.56. He that eats my Flesh, and drinks my Blood, dwells in me, and I in
him. Now the nearer we be to a Fountain, the nearer a supply. Suppose one were
in a Fountain of Water, he must needs have enough; Suppose a man were in the
Body of the Sun, he must needs be supplied with Light. Now the Soul that comes
unto Christ, and is in Christ, it is in the Fountain of Living Water, and being
in the Fountain, it must needs receive a f^ll supply unto all its wants. That
is a Second Demonstration. To take up one more.

3. I say we shall have a full supply, Because this same Fullness is
Com^municated and Given to Christ by (...) Father as Mediator, for this end
(...) purpose, to give out and communicate to us. For Brethren, this fullness
that is in Christ is communicated unto Christ as the fullness of the Godhead:
For it seems to be an improper speech to say, that the Father is (...) ^outain
of the Deity, but the Fath^^ ^^^municates to the Son in regard of the
Personality: Now Jesus Christ has all fullness as Mediator to communicate and
give out, not to keep it to Himself, and h^ld it to his own proper use only.
But look now as it is with the Fountain, the Sea has not its water for its
self, but to communicate unto Rivers; so God has made the Sun to be Light, not
to be Light to its self only, but to communicate and give Light to the World.
Why now, there is a full supply in Jesus Christ, He being filled with all
fullness, (from the Father,) for this end, to give out to others, to
communicate. From His Fullness we have all received Grace for Grace. He is full
of Grace and Truth; Ay, but to what end is He full of Grace and Truth? That we
might receive from His Fullness Grace for Grace. And therefore says the
Psalmist, When He ascended on High, He led captivity captive, and received
Gifts for (...), even for the Rebellious. He re^^ired them for Men, for
Rebellious Men, for Enemies unto God, to give ^^t and communicate of Grace, as
He was Mediator; and therefore now Jesus Christ gives out Grace freely and*
largely, because it is for that very end He had all fullness given to Him; so
that now there is a full supply to be had for all that come to Christ: Christ
will fully supply all that come to Him to Drink of the Water (...) Life, and He
has never a whi^ t^ less. O Brethren, that you were fully persuaded of this
Truth, that He is the fullness of all Grace, that so we might know whether to go
to be supplied in all our Spiritual wants: for we are ready to go to other
things, rather than unto Christ, to our (...), and Duties* and the like, but
these are to be used only as Conduits, to convey supply to us, but not as the
supply; but to look unto Christ who has all supplies, that we may go unto Him
to supply us, who only is able to supply us, and fill us to the full with all
Grace, whatsoever we stand in need of. And then again, We shall not only have a
full supply, but we shall have a supply f^e^ly; Christ will not ask any thing
at all of any that comes to Him, but they shall be suppl^ed freely from ^s
fullness. As if you should go to (...) F^^^tain of Water, and be filled, here is
none will require or demand any thing of you. So the Sun it communicates its
Light without Money or without Price; so it is here, when we are sensible of
our own unworthiness, and have nothing to c^rry, and nothing to give, no money,
nor no price to carry in our hands, yet may we come to Christ, for He is a full
Fountain, and gives out the water of Life freely. I shall Demonstrate that
Jesus Christ does give out freely as well as fully, not only fully, but also
freely, to all that do come unto Him for this water of Life, that so we may be
Established in this Truth*

1. Because if it were not so, there is no Creature, neither Man nor Woman,
could ever come to Drink of this Water, if (...) it were not free as well as
full* For no sinful Creature has any thi^ to give, that is worth one Drop (...)
this Water of Life; it has no ability to give any thing, and therefore if it
were not Free none should partake of it. Who has first given to the Lord and
it shall be Recompensed him? Who? He means none: For of Him, and through Him, and
from Him are all things, to whom be Glory for ever And you (...) the Prophet
David encouraging his People to be Liberal in Contributing toward the building
of the Temple, and they were so, insomuch as David's heart was refreshed
therewithal; says David, All that we do g^ve or can communicate, (though the
People have given very liberally) yet says he, All is thine own: All that Gold
and Silver that we gave for the Building of the Temple, is all the Lords own;
they had nothing of their own, it was the ^ords. And so when the Lord gives ^ut
any spiritual good thing, why, what ha^^ thou to give unto the Lord? Nothing at
all* For what have thou that thou have not received? Not the least drop of
Good, but it is from the Lord. If my Life shouldly on it for a drop of Living
Water to be fetched in of my self, it could not be; or if it were to be had wi^^
a good wish, says the Apostle, I can neither do nor will^ any thing; Nay says
he, I am not able to think a good thought: Therefore if my Life didly on it,
for one good thought, I should not obtain it. 2 Cor. 3.5 Not that we are
sufficient of our selves, to think any thing as of our selves, but our
sufficiency is of God. Yea when we have done all that we are commanded to do or
suffer, yet this will not purchase one drop of it, Luke 17.10. So Rom 8 18. For
I reckon that (...) Sufferings of this present time are (...) worthy to be
compared with the G^ that shall be revealed in us. And therefore I say, that it
must needs be free, else never a man or woman could be able to partake of one
draught or dram of this Water o^ Life, if it were not free. Again,

2. Because of that deligh^, pleasure, and complacency, that Jesus Christ does
take in gi^ing out this water of Life. There is never an hungry man takes more
delight in Eating of his Meat, than Jesus Christ does in Communicating of this
water of Life. An hungry man he shall not need to be ^idden to Eat his meat;
and says Jesus Christ, My meat is to do the will of Him that sent me. And so
He invites all to come unto Him. And you Women, who know how to give ^^ck to
your Children, they being ^^ught to you and making means, (...) Mother having a
full Breast, shall ^e need to be hired to Suckle her Children? Yea, she is
pained till she be delivered of her fullness, Isa. 66.11. So it is with Jesus
Christ, He has full Breasts always, and it is delighti^^ to him to
Communicate. Indeed, I t^ld you before the Head is the Fountain of the Animal
parts, and the Head freely gives out to (...) Senses, and if there be an
obstruction to any of the rest of the Members, then it causes pain in the Head.
Why Jesus Christ he is the Head of the Body, and he does as freely, and with as
much desire and delight, and readiness, communicate unto any of His Members,
even as the head is ready to communicate unto the body And so you that keep
Shops, wh^t keep you Shop for? Is it not that you desire to part with your
Commodities freely for a Price? Never any Shopkeeper is more free, and ready
to part with his Commodities for a Price, than Jesus Christ is to give out his
Water of Life, without Price. I counted thee to come and buy of me, Rev. 3.18.
(To buy is to receive of him) To come and buy Wine and Milk without Money and
without Price. Isa. 55.1. Again,

3. Because of His free Invitation to all comers to Drink He comes among
Thousands to Proclaim this his readiness, and freeness to give out of this
water of Life. Suppose you should be at a Dinner or Supper at a Friends house,
and being there should offer for your Dinner or Supper, would not he take it as
a Disparagement to him? Why so I say, if Jesus Christ should require any thing
for what He gives out, as a Price, and should not give out freely, might not
^h^se many Thousands that heard of ^s kind proffer, Cry out against him? Why
all those Texts that you read of, wherein He invites poor sinners to come unto
him, and that freely, if he were not now free to Communicate, would not these
Words and Scriptures witness against him? O my People witness against me, says
the Lord, in Mi^ah. 6.3. Jesus Christ does challenge any man to Testify against
him for his Unfaithfulness toward him or them; and therefore hence it appears
that Jesus Christ is ready and free to give out a full and free supply unto all
that come unto him, He will give out freely without Money or without Price.

Object. Do we say there is such a fullness in Jesus Christ? And will he give
out a large and full supply unto all that come to him, and that freely? How can
this stand with the experience of them that are true Believers, that truly come
unto Jesus Christ? They are so sensible of their own wants, weaknesses, and
their own defects of Grace, as what more frequent complaints, and who do more
frequently complain than true Believers? And there is never a true believing
Soul that comes to Jesus Christ, but is sensible of some defect or want or
other, and has not attained to Perfection; and the more and nearer he comes to
Christ, still the more sensible of his defects and wants. Oh! None so weak as I
am, None so poor in Grace as I am! None so weak in Faith! So wanting in Love,
in Humility, in Patience, and in Meekness as I! And, Oh! None has such a cold
Heart, such a dead He^rt, such an unfruitful Heart as I have! You will say,
where is this same fu^l supply then? Shall all that come to Christ have a full
supply? How can these things be? What shall we say then, that those that make
such complaints as these are not true Believers? No, God forbid. Or shall we
say that this Truth that Jesus Christ has spoken is not Truth? Why, where is
then this same full supply? How can this stand to be a Truth, that all that
come to Jesus Christ shall have a full supply, and shall drink abundantly, and
shall drink freely; when He says, Every one that comes unto me shall drink of
the water of Life, and that freely? Do not many Believers fear that their sins
will be their ruin, and fear Condemnation sometimes? Now how does this stand
with this full supply which is to be had in Christ? I shall Clear this by
Answering to Two or Three things.

Answ. 1. Every Be^ieving Soul that comes to Jesus Christ has drank such (...)
Draught of this Water of Life, tha^ he is freed for ever from Condemnation. He
shall never Dye or Perish, or be Condemned for Sin: No, he is freed from all
Condemnation. The poorest, the weakest, the meanest has drunk a full supply,
that it shall never perish by its sins; it is passed from Death to Life: there
is no Condemnation, none unto them now that they are in Christ Jesus: No
Condemnation to the poorest and meanest Believer; and now all their sins are
forgiven; there is a full forgiveness, their sins shall never be laid to their
charge. And as the Holy Ghost says, I will be merci^ul to their
Vnright^^usness, their Sins and Iniquities I will remember no more: And the
Blood of ^e^us Christ is able to cl^an^e us from all our Si^^. It is true
indeed, a Believer that has drunk of this same Water of Life* and that is
^reed from all his Sins, he may possibly be exercised with Fears, and possibly
his Assurance, and his apprehensions of his Justification to himself may have
some Cloud upon it; he may be exercised with Clouds, may fear his going down
into the Pit, though there is no real ground of it; for indeed he is freed from
the guilt of all these, for he is now passed from Death to Life. Joh. 11.26. He
that Believes in me shall never Dye. That is, his very Temporal Death shall be
but as a Sleep to him; the Sting is taken out, and he shall never Die Eternally.
And so therefore to clear this Objection, There is never a Believing Soul that
is come to Christ* but has drunk such a draught of the Water of Life, that he
is passed from Death to Life, and shall never see Death and Condemnation That
is one.

Answ. 2. Every Soul that is com^ to Christ, though (in respect of his
Sanctification, of Sanctifying and Saving Grace) he is not perfect, he has not
drunk such a draught but he desires more, and may desire more, yet
notwithstanding, that draught that he has drunk is such a draught, as he shall
never be th^rs^y more, so as to be wholly destitute of this same Water of Life,
as he was before. Christ says, Joh. 6.35. He that comes to me shall never
Hunger, he that (...) on me shall never Thirst. He shall be carried on as he
shall never decrease, so as to be destitute, but shall grow up, as the grain of
mustard Seed, Christ makes use of by way of Parable, likening the Kingdom of
Heaven to a grain of mustard Seed, and to a little ^eaven which never le^ves
spreading, till it has spread all over; and the grain of mustard Seed, it
grows and springs up further and further, till it become a Tree for the Fowls
in the Air to lodge in. So our inward man is renewed day by day, as it will
spring up, increase and grow more and more; though yet he that has drunk of the
Spirit, has not the full Perfection of it at once, but may desire more yet
notwithstanding he has so much as he shall never be dry again, that is, wholly
destitute, but shall grow up, and increase, and spring* And let me add only a
Third thing.

Answ. 3. You will say, The Saints have not a full draught and full supply,
because they complain, I answer, that though here they be in a state of
Imperfection, and stand in need of a daily supply, (being sensible of their own
defects and weaknesses,) yet every believing Soul has drunk so much of the
Water of Life, as now he has (...) and title unto the Inheritance of Glory,
where there is such fullness of Joy, a^ he shall be satisfied, and shall not be
able to desire any more. Psalm. 16.11. ^h^u wilt show we the path of Life; in
thy Presence is fullness of Joy, and at thy Right Hand are Pleasures for
ever^^r^. They shall have joy as much as they can hold; Every Vessel shall be
filled with Glory, so full as it can hold no more, they shall enjoy as much as
ever they are able to hold (...) contain, every Vessel shall be full of Glory.
The beginnings of Eternal Life are here, and though possibly they may be made to
drink Tears here in abundance, yet notwithstanding they have the beginnings of
Eternal Life and Glory* and when they come once to enjoy the consummation of
it, they shall not be able to desire one draught, one ^^t more. So, he that
believes ^n me, out of his belly shall flow ^ivers of Living Water, springing
up unto Eternal Life. So much for that Objection. Now for the Application of
the Point.

USE I. You see what Christ says in the Text, That man that comes unto me
shall Drink. My drift in this Application shall be to press this Invitation of
Jesus Christ* Be it known unto you Men and Women, Young Men and Old, and
Children that are capable of ^nowledge, Know it, that Jesus Christ does invite
every one of you that stands before him in this Ordinance, to come unto Him and
draw water out of this Well of Salvation. I^ is a strong invitation that
whosoever comes unto Him shall drink of this Water of Life Let me say unto you
as M^ses said unto the Children of Israel, Deuteronomy. 32 46. And he said unto them,
Set your (...) into all the words that I testify among you this Day. Set your
Hearts to this invitation of Jesus Christ, to the Word that is now sounding in
your Ears, for it is your Life: Jesus Christ does bring Eternal Life to your
Doors, to your Hearts, do not look upon them as if they were words of course
and wind, as if there were no truth or reality in them.

Brethren, I suppose now, if a Friend should invite you to a Dinner or Supper,
you would believe that he were real, and you are ready to accept of his
invitation, because you think he means as he says. Why so now, Be it known
unto you, that Jesus Christ does make an Invitation to all here, every one in
the Congregation this day, to come unto Him, and you shall have a supply of
this Water of Life. Suppose now, that Jesus Christ were here present speaking
these words, as He ^id with His own mouth in the hear^ (...) of Thousands; and
suppose now, that if Jesus Christ were here in His Bodily Presence, do not you
think you should Believe, and give Entertainment to what He spoke? Behold,
Jesus Christ now speaks in His Word to all that are here present, (as He spoke
to all that were present then,) and makes Proclamation, saying, Is any man
Athirst? Is there any that do desire this Water of Life? That do desire to have
their Sins Pardoned and Forgiven them? That do desire to be freed from
Condemnation? That do desire to be Adopted Sons and Daughters of God? To have
Peace with God, to have Comfort and Consolation in Life and Death, and to have
Everlasting, Eternal Glory, when Life shall be no more? Know, Jesus Christ
holds forth all this, whatsoever is requisite to Eternal Life; Jesus Christ
does invite you to this and holds forth and promises to give a full draught of
it to all that ever will come to Him. Therefore let no poor Soul lay
impediments and blocks in its own way, to hinder him from coming to Jesus
Christ.

Object. But may one say, I am afraid that I should presume, if I should come
unto Christ, and therefore I dare not venture.

Answ. Oh! Let not any Soul think so, nor say so, to hinder any of your Souls
from coming. Know it, that if Jesus Christ had made no invitation to you to
come, then you might very well say, it is Presumption indeed for me to come,
but Jesus Christ invites thee Himself] in His Word and Promises, that if y^u d^
come you shall have of this Water o^ Life, and that freely Sup^ose a great Rich
man should invite (...) Poor man to his Table, and he comes being invited, will
ye say this is Presumption, when he spoke to him himself? And if he should not
come, it is rather a slighting and despising his favor and love. Why Jesus
Christ holds forth a free invitation tenders it, and promises it to any one
Soul, that will come unto Him upon His invitation, and therefore let nothing
stave thee off, seeing He has made a full and free invitation unto every one
to come indeed.

Object. But alas, I do not know that I am invited. Christ invite me! What me?
I am altogether unworthy to be invited to partake of this Water of Life. Alas,
so poor a Creature, so ignorant and so blind, and so without strength as I am;
Unable to perform any Duty, n^ strength, and nothing at all to com^mend me to
the Lord, or why the Lord should give me the least drop of the Water of Life,
and therefore certainly it is not to me, Jesus Christ does not invite me?

Answ. I say, Let not this impediment ly in thy way, because we have no
strength, or ability to do, or to please, or to serve Him in any way* Why,
alas, do you think now that Jesus Christ calls for any Price? Invites People,
and then they must bring Money in their hands? No Brethren, you are much
mistaken Jesus Christ does invite to com^ without Money, or without any Price*
Whoever you be, though you be never so weak and unable to perform any Duty or
Service, and never did any thing for the Lord, yet You should come. And
Brethren, the more (...) we are in our selves, and the ^ess we have of our
selves, and the more sensible we are of our own unfitness, this should rather
be so far from hindering and discouraging us, as that it should encourage us to
come: Why? Because that having nothing and Christ being the f^lness of all, we
should go unto Christ for all. As Rev 3.18. says Christ, Thou art Poor, and
Naked, Blind and M^serable, and have Nothing, wherefore come to me; I Counsel
thee to come to me for Eye Salve, and for Raiment, C^ld, and Treasure, and
Riches: -- Why, here now is Christ's Argument ^n the contrary. Why Brethren, He
fills the Hungry and the Empty with good things, and They are to come to
Christ. Jesus Christ invites such Poor Souls as h^ve nothing at all, no ability
at (...) Blind Creature; if one ^e (...) Blind and Unable, and more (...) than
another, here is the invit^tion that Jesus Christ does make this day to such a
poor Soul, that he shall if he come, he shall Drink, and he s^^ll have of this
Water of Li^e.

Object. But another Objection is, Alas, I am a poor Old Creature, an Old Man,
or an Old Woman, that have lived without God, and without Christ all this time,
and have ^lighted the offers of Grace, and all the invitations of Christ in the
Gospel; and also a poor Old Sinner! And will Jesus Christ invite me I possibly
have been a Drunkard, (...) an Old Drunkard, and a Swearer, o^ a Blasphemer of
the Name of God* and of the Ways of Christ, and c^ I think that ever Christ
should Entertain me when I come?

Answ. Why now mark what I say unto you, in a word from the Lord. Let not any
one here except himself, and exclude himself, if Jesus Christ do not Except and
Exclude him. Look into the invitation, Does Jesus Christ Exclude, and say, Let
every one come to me, except he be an Old Drunkard, or an Old Swearer? No, He
does not say so, He excludes none. See how the words run, If any man will come
he shall Drink: If any man, without exception. Can you have it spoken more
full, or in plainer terms? If any man will come unto me he shall drink. Joh.
6.35, -- Says Jesus there, I am the Bread of Life, he that comes unto me
shall not hunger, and he that believes on me shall never thirst. But I said
unto you, that ye have seen me, and believe not. All that the (...) gi^eth ^e
shall come to me, and (...) ^^meth to me I will in (...) Let him be what he
will, what (...) he be, never such an Old Sinner. A^ therefore why should a
poor S^ make this Exception in his comin^ to Christ? Now know it, i^ there be
any such a Soul in the Congregation, that has lived so many Years, and all his
Life long has been in Sinful Courses, the invitation is to (...), and to all
others, that if any man come to me, says Christ, I will give him the Water of
Life.

O^^^ct. But to Object further, Alas* I have no strength nor power, and I am
unworthy to come; and therefore it is but a Folly to make such an invitation
unto me, and I have no power?

Answ. You have heard before wha^ it is to come to Christ, viz. to venture and
cast your self upon Christ^ (...) in His Promise; and the (...) now venturing
to l^an upon Christ's word, and to trust Christ ^on His word, and to expect what
Christ holds f^^th in His word this (...) a coming unto Ch^i^t. You know what
the P^^di^ I was And when the Lord sees a poor Soul afar off, He meets him, and
leads him by the hand, and upholdeth him.

Object. But you will say, Alas, I am willing to come to Christ, but I have no
word, and a Soul cannot come to Christ unless the Lord gives out some Promise
secre^ly to draw the Heart to Christ, and I cannot remember that ever the Lord
spoke to me, whereby I should ever come?

Answ. Well, Suppose you cannot remember that ever you had any Word or Promise
given out to draw or persuade your heart to cast it self, and to adventure upon
Christ, yet, Behold! Here is a word from the Lord this Day, which He causes to
be Proclaimed in your hearing; Jesus Christ holds forth unto you this day,
whoevever you be that comes, he shall Drink, and shall Drink abundantly, and
most freely Drink of the Waters of Life, and shall never Perish, but shall Live
forever. And therefore from this time forward, let not any Soul say, Well, The
Lord has not this Day holden forth any word to me: Know it, the Lord speaks to
you, even to one and to another this Day, If any man be athirst, let him come
unto me and Drink. Have you any thing more to Object? Think with your selves
what it is.

Object. Ay, You will say, there is one thing more, and that is here in the
Text, If any man be athirst, let him come; and I cannot say I am a^st? There
are Two things in A^ to this*

Answ. 1. The Promise that Christ ma^e ^ere of giving the Water of Life, is not
^o mu^^ to the ^y, as to the ^ome^. Whoever he be that com^s to me shall Drink.
It is true i^deed, He says, Every one that Thirst* let him come to me and
drink. Why, ordinarily Men and Women, poor Sinners are not ready to come to
Christ without they be m^de very thirsty, and see their necessity; Ay, but
notwithstanding says Christ, if any man do but come, whoever he be, if ^e does
but come; and so, W^a^soever will, (whosoever he be) let him come and take o^
the W^^er of life fre^ly. The Promise is made not to* Thirsters only, but to
Comers, and be sure, if you come He will give you to drink fully and freely.
Rev. 22.17. And the Spirit and the Bride say, Come, and let him that hears
say, Come, and let him that is athirst Come, and whosoever will let him come
and drink o^ the Water of Life freely. Remember, the Promise i^ not to the
Thirsty alone, but unto the Comer, therefore venture to come, and you may be
sure Jesus Christ will give you to drink of the water of Life.

Answ. ^. But then again, You say you do not Thirst, can any Soul here before
the Lord say, that you have no N^ed of the water o^ Life, that you have no need
of, nor desire Everlasting Li^e, that you have no need to have (...) Sins
Pardoned? Is there any Soul in the Congregation that can say, that there is no
need, then you may stand off, and say there is no invitation made to me: But I
dare say for every one in the Congregation, that he would willingly Dye the
Death of the Righteous. And therefore let every poor Soul know what is spoken
to one, is spoken to every one. Jesus Christ has made this invitation, If any
man do but come to Christ, do but venture upon Christ, that is the way, he
shall drink of the water of Life. And what shall I say more for the Clearing of
this? Do you not think that Jesus Christ says true? Or that He is to be
believed in what He speaks? Never any one surely, but will say that Jesus
Christ is to be believed, and that they do believe that He speaks Truth. Why
then, Jesus Christ's invitation is to every one in this Congregation to come
unto Him, and therefore why should any stand back and hold off from coming unto
Christ? If the Lord would persuade your Hearts to come unto christ* it would be
the happiest Day, th^^ ever your Eyes saw in this world; if the Lord would
persuade your Hearts hereto, you should find that Jesus Christ would be as good
as His word tha^ you shall drink of this Water of Lif^ and partake of it for
ever and ev^ and shall never see Death, Etern^ Death.

Object. There is one thing more; Possibly you will say, I do not very well
understand how may I come to Christ in a way of Faith and Believing: How, or
which way does the Soul come to Christ in a way of Faith* and Believing, as
that the Soul shall certainly have of the Water of Life, and that Christ will
give of this Water of Life?

Answ. To open this a little. This same coming to Christ, (I would speak it as
plainly as possibly I could, and not as a Riddle or Fancy*) it is an hearkening
to Christ in a word of Promise, and the Soul is therein to venture it self, and
rely on, or upon Him in that Word which He holds forth; and when the Soul does
venture and close with all, this is now (...) coming to Christ: When the Lord
^es out an Invitation, a gracious Promise, which holds out Mercy and Eternal
Life, and in the hearing of it the Lord persuades the Soul of the truth and
reality of it, it is persuaded to trust in it, to rely upon it, and to expect
an accomplishment and performance of it. And because I would not speak it a^
^ine own words alone, I speak it as the Virgin Mary did, when the Angel came to
her, Luke 1.38. Then said Mary, Behold the Servant of the Lord, be it unto me
according to thy word. This was now a Believing, a Trusting, and Relying on the
word of the Lord. She was a Virgin, and the Angel answered her in that, as she
had no more to say, but to rely upon the word of Promise, Behold the Handmaid
of the Lord, be it unto (...) according ^o thy word. Whence was it? It was from
this Speech, the holy Confidence and Expectation of the fulfilling of that
Promise to her. And so, Effectual Calling is an hearkening unto the Lords Call,
the Soul being persuaded to receive the Word, closing with, returning answer to
the Word, then the Soul is Eff^ctually Called. So also there is an Effectual
Call, unto which the Soul does not answer, but looks upon the word of the Lord
by His Servants, as words of wind, and words of course: But as this same
accepting of this gracious Invitation and Promise, which He holds forth, is
Effectu^l Calling; why so, I say, the neglecting of these, is a refusing to
hear Him that speaks from Heaven. Take heed that you do not re^use Him that
speaks from Heaven: That is, Now when the Lord speaks in His Invitation, by
Gifts and Outward Calling. This invitation being propounded and made, and men
make light of it, it is an Effectual Calling; so now when upon the invitation
of the Call of the Lord in His Promise, there is a yielding Obedience unto that
Call in Faith, it is called, The Obedience of Faith* Romans 16.26. When the Soul
does yield unto the Lord in the voice of the Promise, ^^^se withal, and receive
and embrace it, looking upon it as worthy of all acceptance, receiving i^ with
both hands, as it were: When the Soul does thus venture to rely upon the Word,
venturing it self upon the Lord in His Promise, that if I Perish I will Perish
there, I will venture my self upon the Lords Word and Faithfulness; this is
Effectual Calling. 2. Tim 1.12. I know, says Paul, i^ whom I have Believed,
and I am per^swaded that He will keep that good t^ which I have committed unto
Him, against that Day: I have committed my Soul concernments unto Him, and I
trust them in His Arms. When the Soul does venture thus upon His Gracious Word
of invitation, does receive it, and commits it self unto the Lord in it*
this is a closing with Christ, and the answer of the heart unto the Lords call,
and this is a coming unto Christ. So that when you venture upon the Lord in His
word, you close with Him in it; it is soon said* yea soon done, the Soul may
come (...) close with Christ in the Promise, and that soon too: so pass from
Death unto Life. Therefore ask your own hearts in the presence of the Lord,
seeing Jesus Christ does make such a gracious invitation for to come unto Him,
and venture upon Him in His Word, whether it can be free and ready to say, Now,
Lord let it be according to thy W^rd to me. Say in this manner, as in the
presence of the Lord; Lord, Upon this Gracious invitation of thine in the
Gospel, I desire to rest and hope upon the Faithfulness of thy Word, and to
accept thereof, and trust in it: Can you say it in the presence of the Lord?
You, whosoever you are that seem to be afar off, though you might have had some
glimmering hopes, hoping sometimes that the Lord would be merciful to you, and
presently fearing your Eternal condition. Well I sp^k it to you that are Old
Men and Women, and p^ssibly Old Si^n^rs, that have lived in Sin all your lives
long, and possibly are even hopeless in your s^lves, and ready to cast out
words of Despai^ and so in a hopeless condition in you^ selves; to you the Lord
this Day calls to come unto him, and to hearken to this invitation, and if you
now come unto Him, you shall have of this Water of Life. And you Young Men and
Maids, (I would leave it none, who are capable of partaking of this water of
Life:) Consider the Question again, Are you willing to be Saved? Let your
hearts speak it out between the Lord and your own Souls, upon this word of thy
Grace unto which thou have invited me, this Gracious Promise; I do now commit
my Soul to thee, and rely upon this thy Word of Grace, and rely upon thy
Faithful^ess to accomplis^ it to me; and have your ^ouls thus answering unto
the Lord, Let it be unto me according to thy W^rd: Let me say it in the Name of
the Lord, This Day is Salvation come unto thy Soul; this Day has Jesus Christ
given Eternal Life unto thy Soul: this Day the Lord has taken thee into
Covenant with Himself, and has vouchsafed thee to be His. And I speak it in
the Authority which Jesus Christ has given me in His Word, Even every one that
thus comes to Christ, accepting of this his Gracious Promise, I say it, Thy
Sins are Forgiven thee; Relying upon Him in the Faithfulness of His Word and
Promise, I say, The Lord Jesus Christ has forgiven thy Sins: and you may go
home, and Record it for a Memorial, that this Day, at such a time the Lord has
drawn out my Soul, to make a close with Himself. And now Eternal Life is come
unto thee^ the Lord has forgiven thy Sin^ and now thou art passed from Death
to Life. Let me make the offer again, unto such poor Sinners as have held it
out all this time, and have not laid hold upon this Gracious invitation made by
Jesus Christ, that will yet venture the Lord, persuading your hearts, though
possibly you have been Enemies and Opposers, and possibly might come to oppose
and catch, and though never so far off, and lost in your selves* yet
notwithstanding hearken to this ^nvitation, that if the Lord does persuade your
hearts to say solemnly and seriously, Lord, Upon this word of thy Gracious
Promise and Invitation, I do desire to trust and to venture upon thy Word, and
do expect the performance and accomplishment of thy Word, that now it may be
given (...) to thee, that so you also might be brought in unto Christ, to
partake of this Water of Life.

USE II.
1. A word of Exhortation to you who are come to Christ: Go away now (even as
the Virgin Mary) and say, My Soul does magnify the Lord, and my Spirit
rejoices in God my Savior, for He has regarded the low Estate of His poor
Creature. It is said that the Eunuch went away rejoicing, after that Philip was
caught away by the Spirit, and so has every Believer cause to do.

2. Another word is, That you would go unto God with a holy boldness, as to
your God and Father, for such special Mercies, as you desire to have at the
Lords hand. Now as the Holy Ghost says, Seek the Lord while He may be found,
and draw nigh unto Him while He is near. The Lord is near to you, do you draw
near to Him with a humble and holy Boldness, as to your God and Father, and you
may ask what you will: And now beg that the Lord would Establish His work of
Grace in your hearts; and now ask for this and that mercy, and for your
Relations, even what you will. In Genesis 17. Abraham falls down in a begging
posture (God having made a Covenant with him,) O Lord, now that Ishmael might
live in thy fight! So say I, Go to God, and desire some special mercy this Day,
now while the Lord is nigh.

3. You who are brought near unto God, has the Lord spoken to you? Take he^d
that you do not stop your Ear unto what God speaks, and return again to F^lly.
Look that you do not walk as the Gentiles did, in the Vanity of your minds,
Ephesians. 4.17. Now you must take heed that you do not walk in the same Vanities, in
your Foolish Pastimes, in your Vain Conversations: Take heed that you do not
walk after the course of the World. If the Lord has taken you out of the
world, called you unto Christ, you are now to walk in a diligent performance of
all Duties unto the Lord: Walk ^ose with God in your Particular ^allings from
the heart; Take ^eed that you walk Exactly, and Inoffensively, keeping a Good
Con^^ience.

4. And Lastly That still upon all occasions you would be coming to Christ. We
are not to content our selves with once coming unto Christ, and there is an
end, but we must come Daily, even every Day. When you find your Hearts out of
frame, when you are Straightened, and Dead-hearted, come to Christ; Even every
Day, by Virtue of this Promise, through this Word, Leaning and Resting upon
Christ* And, Oh! Remember this Blesse^ Word* this Blessed Word of the Lord
Jesus Christ, wherein He has said, If any Man Thi^st, let him come unto me and
Drink. --

FINIS.

