A Prospect OF Eternity.

WHEREIN Is Clearly Proved, I. That there is an Eternity into which all Men
must enter, when they go out of Time. II. That we should Eye Eternity, and look
at Eternal Things. III. That this looking ought to have an Influence upon us,
in all that we do.


By THO. DOOLITTLE.

Matt. 25.46. And these shall go away into Everlasting Punishment: But the
Righteous into Life Eternal.

Boston: Printed by T. Fleet and T. Crump, for Nicholas Buttolph, at the lower
End of Cornhill. 1715.

A prospect of Eternity.
2 COR. IV. 18. While we look not at the things which are seen, but at the
things which are not seen: for the things which are see^ are Temporal, but the
things which are not seen are Eternal.


ETERNAL! What a sound does this word Eternal make, in my Ears? what workings
does it cause within my (...)? What casting about of Thoughts, what Word is
next to be added to it? Is it, Eternal World? Where? For this is Temporal! Oh!
that Eternal World is now by us unseen, and as to us is yet to come. But yet my
trembling Heart is still solicitous to what other word, this word Eternal might
be prefixed as to my self, or those that hear me this day, when they and I (who
through the long-sufferance of God are yet in this present and temporal) shall
be in that Eternal World. Shall it be Eternal damnation in that Eternal World?
How? aft^^ so many knockings of Christ? Striving (...) the Spirit? Tenders of
Mercy? (...) of Grace? Calls of Ministers? Warning of Conscience, Admonitions
of Frien^^^ Waitings of Patience? All which put us into a fair probability of
escaping eternal damnation. O dreadful words! can more terror be contained, can
more misery be comprehended in any two words, than in eternal damnation? But we
in time are Praying, Hearing, Repenting, Believing, Conflicting with Devils,
Mortifying Sin, Weaning our Hearts from this World, that when we shall go out
of time, we might find Life or Salvation added to Eternal. Eternal Salvation!
these be words as comfortable, as the other were terrible, as sweet as they
were bitter. What then? This Word Eternal, is the horror of Devils, the
amazement of damned Souls, which causes desperation in all that Hellish Crew,
for it wounds like a Dart, continually sticking in them, that they must
certainly know that they are Damned to all Eternity. Eternal! It is the Joy of
Angels, the Delight of Saints, that while they are made happy in the beat^^ical
Vision, are filled with perfect Love and Joy, they sit and sing, all this will
be Eternal. Eternal! this word is a loud alarm to all that be in time, a
serious caution to make this our grand concern, that when we must go out of
time our Eternal Souls might not be doomed down to Eternal Damnation, but might
obtain Salvation that shall be Eternal, of which we have hope and expectation
while we look not at the things which are seen, but at the things which are not
seen; for the things which are seen are temporal, but the^ things which are not
see^ are Eternal.

The Consideration of these words may be twofold,

1. Relative, As they are a reason of ^^ed^^stness in shaking troubles, ^^ a
Co^dial against fainting under the Cross. v. 16. For which cause we faint not,
but though our outward man perish, yet the inward man is renewed day by day. v.
17. For our light affliction which is but for a moment works for us a far
more exceeding and eternal weight of glory. 18. While we look, etc. Not only
the experience of present spiritual good in the inward, by the pressing
afflictions on the outward man, in weakening of sin, in purging away our dross,
in weaning us from the World, in humbling us for our miscarriages, in reducing
us from wandering, in emptying of us of self-conceit, in trying our Faith, in
exercising our Patience, in confirming our Hope, in awakening of Conscience, in
bringing us to examine our Ways, in renewing our Repentance, in proving our
Love in quickening us to Prayer; but also the clear and certain prospect of
Glory after affliction, of a Weight of Glory, after light Affliction, of
Eternal Glory after short Affliction, of a Weight of Glory, far more exceeding
all our present Sorrows, Burdens, Calamities, than Tongue can express, or Pen
describe, or the mind of Man conceive, being more than Eye has seen, or Ear
has heard, or have entered into the Heart of Man, must needs be an alleviation
of our Sorrows, a lightning of our Burdens, comfort in our Grief, joy in our
Groans, strength in our Weakness; though we are troubled on every side, yet not
distressed: though perplexed, yet not in despair, though under Afflictions both
felt and seen, yet we faint not while we keep our Eye fixed upon the Glorious
things in the other World that are unseen, and Eternal too.

2. Absolute, As they set before us the mark and scope we should have in our
Eye, all the while we are in time, viz. unseen Eternal things; you stand in
time, but you should look into Eternity: you stand tottering upon the very
brink of time, and when by Death thrust out of time, you must into Eternity:
and if in any case the old Proverb should prevail, it should not fail in this,
to look before. you leap. The Analysis of the Text breaks it into these parts.

1. The Objects that are before us,

1. Things seen.

2. Things not seen.

2. The Act exerted on these Objects. Looking expressed.

1. Negatively. Not at things which are seen. The Men of the World stand gazing
at these, till their Eyes are dazzled with them, and their Souls damned for them.

2. Affirmatively. But at the things which are not seen. Men in this World
minding another World stand looking at these, who have an Eye to see those
things that are not seen: There is a Mystery in Godliness.

3. The Persons exerting this Act upon these Objects, We that have the Spirit
of God: Who have our Eyes opened, who consider we are hastening, posting out of
time into Eternity: These things are set before the Men of the World, who have
Eyes, but they do not see.

4. The Property of these Objects.

1. Things seen are Temporal.

2. Things not seen are Eternal.

5. The Reasons moving Believers to keep a steadfast Eye upon Things unseen, and
to look off from things seen is the Eternal duration of the one, and the short
Continuance of the other: While we look -- for, or because the things that are
seen are Temporal -- not seen, Eternal. The good things in this World that are
seen, as Riches, Pleasures, Honors, are things of time, and only for time;
therefore we are not much concerned whether we win or lose them: and the bad
things in this Life, which are seen, as Poverty, Imprisonment, Persecution --
are at longest but for a short space, and therefore we are not much concerned
whether we endure them, or be freed from them: But that which adds Weight to
the things in the other World now not seen by the Men of this World, and draws
our Eyes toward them, and keeps them fixed thereon, is the Eternity of them.

6. The Influence that this looking upon things not seen has upon the
Beholders of them in keeping them from fainting under any Afflictions while we
look, etc.

Three words require a little Explication.

Looking. Temporal. Eternal.
I. While we look Skopountoon. The Verb is used six times in the New Testament,
and is variously translated.

1. To take heed, Luke 11.35. Take heed therefore that the Light in thee be not
^^^kness: have a care, see to it; in this sense it is as if the Apostle had
said, We take not so much heed, nor are we so full of care about these visible
transitory things as we are of the Eternal Joys of Heaven, and the unseen
Happiness of the S^^^ts above.

2. To Consider, Gal. 6.1. Considering thy self, lest thou also be tempted. q.
d. We seriously consider and weigh in our Minds the Vanity, Insufficiency, and
short Continuance of all visible things both good and bad, whether Profit or
Poverty, Honor or Disgrace; and the fullness excellency and everlasting Nature
of things unseen, and therefore prefer these before them.

3. To mark, observe and take notice of. Romans 16.17. Mark them that cause
divisions among you. Phil. 3.17. Be ye followers of me, and mark them that walk
so, as ye have us for an example. It is the Observation that Believers make
that all seen things are Temporal, unseen Eternal, which Worldly men take no
Notice of, to influence them in what they do.

4. To look, Phil. 2.4. Look not every one on your own things: To look with a
diligent Eye, as the Archer to the mark whereat he shoots, to make a thing our
scope and aim; and so the Substantive is used. Phil. 3.14. I press toward the
mark. In this respect the sense is, the thing that we do aim at in all we do,
is to get a Title to, and hereafter the possession of Eternal things, to secure
our Everlasting happy state: to have treasures not for a while, but for ever:
To have Honor, and Glory, and Joy, no^ in hasty time, but in abiding E^erity:
Believers are lowly in Heart, but they look high: The Men of this World are of
an haughty Spirit, but they aim at low Things.

II. Temporal. Proskaira. Used four times in the New Testament; twice
concerning temporary Believers: Matthew. 13.21. but dureth for a while. Mat.
4.17. dureth but for a time: Once concerning the pleasure of sin, Heb. 11.25.
-- then to enjoy the pleasures of Sin for a season; 8^ in the Text
comprehensively of all visible things; take then a summary account of all, that
Wicked, worldly men have and all is but for a while. What the richest among
them have, their grandeur dureth but for a time, and then is past and gone, and
has no more existence. What the merriest among them have, Pleasures, Mirth,
carnal Delights and Joy, and this is but for a season; their merry bouts will
be quickly over, and then succeeds weeping and wailing for ever. What the best
among them have, even their Faith is but for a time, and their Hope but for a
short time; at longest it is Death shall close their Eyes, and then by down in
Everlasting despair; that all their comings in, whether profits from the World,
or pleasures, from their Sin, or supposed happiness from their supposed Graces
have their goings out; that upon all they have, you may write, all is t^^porale
They had Riches, but they are ^one. Honors and Pleasure, but they are gone.
Many good things in time, but at the ^^d of time, all have an end, and then
when their endless misery (...) this will be their doleful tune, all our good
is past and gone.

III. Eternal. Aionia, quas^ ^ei On; always existing: all duration, even time
it self taken metaphysically) is nothing else but the premanency of Essence.
Time Eternal in sensu Physico, is but ens rationis, or nothing. Therefore
according to the manner of Beings, must be the manner of their Abidings. All
Beings may be ranked into three sorts, whence arises three sorts of Duration.

1. Some things have both beginning and end, as Beasts, and other Corruptible
Creatures, and their duration is time, which has both beginning and end.

2. Some things have a beginning, and no end, as Angels, and the Souls of Men,
and the state of both in the other World? and the duration by which these are
measured in Philosophy to distinguish it from Time and Eternity strictly taken
is called Aeviternity; which imports only an Initial defectibility of the
things in themselves, though by the absolute power of God there might be a
period put unto their being once begun, but there is no principal of corruption
in their own Nature, which should cause a cessation of their existing Essence:
nor is it in the verge of any created Power or second Cause to take that Being
from them, which was given to them by the first; and these things because they
have no end, are Eternal.

3. One only Being has neither beginning nor end, nor can have; and that is
God; and his duration is Eternity, properly and most strictly taken, which is a
duration inferring simple interminability of Essence all at once existing
without succession. Eternity in the most proper acceptance does exclude not
only actual beginning and end, but all possibility of both, and denotes
indefectibility of Essence a part ante, and a part post, existing all at once
in one continued immovable instant, without consideration of any thing in it
past or to come, though it always was and will be; plainly to every capacity
might this be thus adapted: if you look backwards, you cannot think of any one
moment, wherein God was not: if you look forwards, you cannot think of any one
moment when God shall not be; for if there had been one moment when God was
not, nothing could ever have been: neither God nor Creature, unless that which
is nothing could make it self something, which is impossible; because Working
supposes Being, a (...) on; because it infers the (...) before it was; for in
(...) Nature, the Cause must (...) Effect: Neither can you (...) one moment
beyond which (...) cease to be; because you can (...) any thing in God, or
Distinct (...) that should be the cause of his (...) be.

The Object then of Believers looking is the unseen, Eternal God, as their
Happiness objectively considered, which is so Eternal as to be without
beginning and end; and the enjoyment of this unseen Eternal God in the
invisible Heavens, which fruition being their happiness formally considered,
has a beginning, but no ending.

Should I follow the signification of the Greek word, as looking at a mark we
aim a^, or an end which we desire to obtain, I should limit my Discourse only
to unseen Eternal good things, but if it be taken in a more extended sense, to
take heed, to mark, and diligently consider, I might bring in the unseen evils
in the World to come: and indeed to (...) upon invisible things, (...) bad,
that make men Eter^^^ (...) or Everlastingly Blessed: (...) powerful influence
upon (...) take in our daily travels (...) Eternal World.

(...) at unseen Eternal evil things, (...) ^ight not fall into them:

(...) at unseen Eternal good things, (...) might not fall short of them: (...)
is the design of the question propounded for this Text, viz.

How we should Eye ETERNITY, that it may have its due influence upon us in all
we do?

Which question will be more distinctly answered by resolving these following
questions contained in it.

Q. 1. Whether there be an Eternity, into which all men must enter, when they
go out of Time. That we might not only suppose what too many deny, and more
doubt of, and some are Tempted to call into question, but have it proved that
no man might rationally deny the Eternity of that state in the unseen World^
for upon this lies the strength of the reason in the Text, why Believers look
at things unsen, because they are Eternal: and the object must be proved,
before we can rationally urge the exerting of the act upon that object.

Q. 2. How we should Eye Eternity? on look at Eternal things? For if they be
unseen, how shall we see them? And if they be to us in this World invisible,
how shall we look at them?

Q. 3. What influence will such a sight of, and looking at Eternity have upon
our Minds, Consciences, Wills and Affections in all we do?

Q. 1. Whether there be an Eternity of Happiness that we should look at to
obtain, and of Misery, to escape?

Does any question this? Look at Men's Conversations, see their neglect of God
and Christ, their frequent, yea^ constant refusals of remedying Grace; their
leading a sensual flesh-pleasing Life, their seldom thoughts of Death and
Judgment, their carelessness to make preparation for another World, their
minding only things Temporal, and then the question may be, who do indeed
believe that these is such an Eternal state: Yet the real existence and
certainty of Eternal things may be evidently manifested by Scripture, and by
Arguments.

1. If you give assent to the Divine Authority of the Scripture, you cannot
deny the certainty of another World, nor the Eternal state of Souls therein,
though this be now unseen to you. Luke 20.34. Jesus said the Children of this
World marry -- 35, but they that shall be accounted worthy of that World, and
the Resurrection from the Dead, neither marry; n^r are given in marriage. 36.
Neither can they dye any more for they are equal to the Angles -- Is not here
plain mention of This and That World? and the different state in both? In this,
Men marry and dye; in that they neither marry nor die; yea Christ himself
affirms, that in That World they cannot die; and whatsoever words the Scripture
borrows from the best things of this World to help our conceptions of the
Glorious state of Holy ones in the other World, some word denoting the Eternal
duration of it, is annexed to them all. It is called a Kingdom? It is an
Everlasting Kingdom, 2 Pet. 1.11. a Crown? It is a Crown incorruptible, 1 Cor.
9.25. that fades not away. 1 Pet. 5.4. is it called Glory? it is Eternal
Glory. 1 Pet. 5.10. 2 Cor. 4.17. an Inheritance? it is incorruptible: 1 Pet.
1.4. Eternal: Heb. 9.15. an House? it is Eternal in the Heavens: 2 Cor. 5 1.
Salvation? it is Eternal Salvation: Heb. 5.9. Life? it is Eternal Life. Mat.
25.46.

No less certain is the Eternity of the state of the Damned, by the Scriptures
adding some note of Everlasting duration to those dreadful things by which
their misery is set forth; is it by a Furnace of fire, Mat. 13.42. by a lake of
fire? Rev. 21.8. it is fire Eternal, and Unquenchable: Mat. 3.12. Mat. 25.41.
by a Prison? 1 Pet. 3.19. from then is no coming forth: Mat. 5.25, 26. by
darkness, and blackness of darkness? it is for ever: Jude ver. 13. by burning?
it is Everlasting burning: Isa. 33.14. by torment? Luke 16.23. the smoke of
their torment ascends for ever and ever: Rev. 14.11. and 20.10. by Damnation?
it is Eternal Damnation: Mar. 3.29. by Destruction? it is Everlasting
Destruction: 2 Thessalonians. 1.9. by Punishment? it is Everlasting Punishment: Mat.
25.46. by the gnawings of the Worm? it is such that never dies: Mar.
9.44.46.48. by wrath that is to come? Mat. 3.7. 1 Thessalonians. 1.10. When it comes,
it will abide: Joh. 3.36. Is any thing more fully and plainly asserted in the
Scripture, than that the things in the other World, (now unseen) are Eternal
things? those that enjoy the one in Heaven, and those that now feel the other
in Hell, do not, cannot doubt of this: And a little while will put all those
that are now in time, quite out of all doubting of the certainty of the
Eternity of the state in the unseen World.

2. The Eternity of the unseen things in ^^eaven and Hell, the Everlasting
Happy, or Everlasting. Miserable state after this Life may be evinced briefly,
yet clearly by these following Arguments.

I. God did from Eternity choose some to be fitted in time to partake of
happiness to all Eternity. Ephesians. 1.^. According as he has chosen us in him
before the Foundation of the World, that we should be holy -- and being matte
(...), shall (...) happy in obtaining that Salvation to which he chose us, 2
These. 2.13. God birth from the Beginning (...) -- ^ Thessalonians. 5. (...) has not
appointed us to Wrath, but to obtain Salvation -- which Salvation does include
absence of all evil, and presence of all good; and this Salvation being
Eternal, Heb. 5.9. infers the absence of all evil for ever, and the presence of
all good for ever, and whosoever is delivered from all private Evils, and
possessed of all positive Everlasting good, and that for ever, cannot be denied
to be happy for ever.

II. Christ has redeemed some to be infallibly brought to Eternal Glory. What
reason can be given of the Incarnation and Death of the Son of God, if there be
no Eternal misery for men to be delivered from, nor any Eternal happiness to be
possessed of? For,

(1.) Did Christ dye to deliver his Followers from Poverty and Prisons? from
Sorrow and Sufferings, from Troubles and Tribulation? What! and yet his Holy,
Humble, and Sincere people lie under these more than other Men that are Wicked
and ungodly; Why was Paul then in stripes and Imprisonments, in hunger and
Thirst, in Cold and Nakedness, in Perils and Jeopardy of his Life continually:
and such as Pilate, Felix and Festus in great worldly Prosperity? Or can it be
imagined, that Men persisting in Sin should be more partakers of the fruits of
Christ's Death, than those that forsake their Sin, repent and turn, and follow
him?

(2.) Did Christ suffer and dye to purchase only Temporal good things, as
Riches, Honors, for his Disciples? Were these worth his precious Blood;
Whatever Christ dyed for, it cost him his most Sacred Blood: Was it then, for
Temporal enjoyments only, which Turks and Pagans may and do possess more than
Thousands of his true and faithful Followers? Did Christ intend the benefits of
his Death for these in a more special manner, than for such as remain finally
impenitent, and yet shall such reap the fruit of all his Sufferings, and those
that believe on him, go without them? Sober reason does abhor it, and all the
Scripture is against it. Would Christ have humbled himself to such a
contemptible Birth, ^^serable Else, lamentable, painful, shameful Death, only
for transitory, temporal f^ding Mercies? If we consider the var^^ty of his
sufferings from God, Men, and Devils, the dignity of the Suffer, I profess I
cannot imagine any reason of all Christ's undertakings and performances, if
there be not an Eternal state of Misery in suffering of evil things, by his
Death, that Believers might be delivered from, and of Glory in enjoying of good
things to be brought unto.

III. The Spirit of God does sanctify some that they might be made meet to be
partakers of the Eternal Inheritance of the Saints in light: As all are not
Godly, so all are not Ungodly: Though most be as they were born, yet many there
be that are born again: there is a wonderful difference betwixt men and men:
the Spirit of God infusing a principle of Spiritual Life, and making some all
over new, working in them Faith in Christ, Holy Fear and Love, Patience and
Hope, longing Desires, renewing in them the Holy Image of God, is as the
earnest and first fruits, assuring of them in due time of a plentiful Harvest
of everlasting Happiness. Faith is in order to Eternal Life and Salvation. Joh.
3.16. Love has the promise of it: 1 Cor. 1.9. Obedience ends in it: Heb. 5.9.
Hope waits for it: Romans 8.25. and because their hope shall never make them
ashamed, Romans 5.5. therefore there must be such an Eternal Blessed state they
hope for.

IV. The Souls of all men are Immortal: though they had a beginning, yet shall
never cease to be, therefore must while they be, be in some state, and because
they be Eternal, must be in some Eternal state. This Eternal state must be
either in the Souls enjoyment of God, or in separation from him; for the Wit of
Man cannot find out a third: for the Soul continuing to be, must be with God,
or not with God; shall enjoy him, or not enjoy him; for to say he shall, and
shall not; or-to say he shall not, and yet shall, is a contradiction; and to
say he neither shall, nor shall not, is as bad: If therefore the Soul be
Eternal, and while it shall be, shall perfectly enjoy God, it shall be
Eternally happy. If it shall for ever be, and that without God, it shall be
Eternally miserable, because God is the chiefest good, the ultimate end, and
perfection of man: The great work in this then is to prove that the Soul is
Eternal, and shall for ever be: For which I offer these things.

1. There is nothing within, nor without the Soul, that can be the cause of its
censing to be: (here except God, who though he can take away the being of
Souls, and Angels too, yet he has abundantly assured us that he will not.)
Nothing within it, because it is a Spiritual Being, and has no Internal
Principle by contrary qualities, causing a cessation of its being; and because
it is simple and indivisible, it is immortal, and incorruptible, for that which
is not compounded of parts, cannot be dissolved into parts, and where there is
no dissolution of a Being, there is no corruption or end of it; there is no
Creature without it; that can cause the soul to cease. Mat. 10.28. Not able to
kill the Soul. Luke 12.4. Fear not them that kill the Body, and after that have
no more that they can do: if they would kill the Soul, they cannot, when they
have killed the Body, they have done their worst, their most, their all.

2. The Soul of man has not dependan^^ upon the Body, as to its Being and
Existence. It has certain actings and operations which do not depend upon the
Body, and if the operations of the Soul be independent from the Body, such must
the principle be from whence such operations do arise: and if it can act
without dependence on the Body, then it can exist, and be without the Body, In
the Body with ^ut dependence on the Body; it has the knowledge of immaterial
Beings as God and Angles, which were never seen by the eye of the Body, nor
can, because there must be some proportion between the object and the faculty;
and the Soul does know it fels, wherein it has no need of the fantasy, for
when it is intimately present to it self, it wants not the ministry of the
fantasy to its own intellection. Besides it can conceive of universals,
abstracted from its singulars, in which it does not depend upon the fantasy,
for phantasmata sunt singulaeium, non universalium; therefore since it can act
in the Body without dependence on the Body, it can exist without the Body, and
not dye when the Body does; which yet is more plain and certain from the
Scripture; which relleth us that the Soul of Lazarus, after death, was carried
by Angels into Abraham's bosom, Luke 16.22. but they did not carry it dead or
alive, but alive, and not dead. Stephen when dying expected the continuance of
his Soul in being, and its entrance into Bliss. Act. 7.59. saying, Lord Jesus
receive my Spirit. The Thief upon the Cross had a promise from Christ, that
that day he should be with him in Paradise: in his body he is not yet,
therefore in his Soul without the Body; therefore the Soul does exist without
the Body. Paul believed the immortality of his Soul, and its existence after
the death of his Body. Phil. 1.23. I am in a strait, having a desire to depart,
and to be with Christ, which is far better. If his Soul had not existed, he had
not been a moment sooner with Christ, nay, his Soul in the Body had some
Communion with Christ, if it dyed with the Body, it had none, and that was not
far better but worse.

3. The original of the Soul by immediate Creation is usually brought as an
argument of the Immortality and Continuance of it to Eternity; to assert the
Creati^^ of the Soul has this difficulty attending on it, how to clear the
propagating of Original Sin: to affirm the Soul is extraduce propagated by
generation, has this knot to be united, how it does consist with the
Immortality of the Soul; when that which is generable is corruptible; but I for
present shall take their arguing which prove it shall exist for ever, because
it is created immediately by God according to the worn Axiom whatsoever is
ingenerable, is also corruptible: The Soul cannot be from the Matter or Bodies
of Parents, because that which is Spiritual and Immaterial cannot be produced
out of that which is a Corporal and Material Substance, for then the effect
would be more noble than its cause, and the cause would give and impart
something to the effect which it self has not, but that which any thing has
not, it cannot give to another; as in a Spiritual also in a Natural sense, that
which is born of the flesh, is flesh; but the Soul is a Spirit.

Nor are the Souls of the Children from the Souls of the Parents, either by
Multiplication, or Division; not by Division; that part of the Souls of the
Parents should be communicated, and pass from the Parents to the Children,
because it is a Spirit, and therefore indivisible into parts because it has
none, being without matter, therefore without quantity, therefore without
divisible parts.

Not by Multiplication, for this must be by participation of something from the
Parents Souls, or not: if not then, it infers Creation, for that which is
brought out of nothing into being is created; if by participation of something
of substance of ^e Parents Soul, this infers Division, which before was showed
cannot be.

4. That the Soul shall never dye, but abide to all Eternity. I argue, either
God nither can, nor will maintain the Soul in Eternal duration, or he would but
cannot, or be could but will not, or he both can and will! If he cannot, then
God is not Omnipotent, for the Soul being a Spirit it no more implies a
contradiction that the Soul should live for ever, than that Angels and Devils
should live for ever. If he can, and any say he will not, I desire a reason of
this assertion: how shall any man know Gods Will, but by what he has revealed;
and God has not revealed that he will not maintain the Souls of men in Eternal
Being, but the contrary It follows then that God both can and wall, and
therefore they must live to all Eternity.

V. The certainty of an Eternal State in the other unseen World is evident from
the innate appetite ununiversally in all men after Eternal happiness. There is
no man but would be happy, and there is no man that would have his happiness
cease: a man might as soon cease to be a man, as cast away all desires of
Happiness, or will to be for ever miserable, though most mistake what their
happiness is. This innate Appetite cannot be filled with all the good things in
this World; for tho the rational appetite be subiectively finite, yet it is
objectively infinite. God therefore and Nature which do nothing in vain, has
put unsatisfied, restless desires after happiness into the hearts of men which
cannot be any thing among things seen and Temporal, there must be something
that must be the object of this Appetite, and able to quiet and fill it in the
other world, though most by folly, blindness, and sloathfulness miss of it.

VI. The absurdities which follow the denial of an Eternal state, of men
(though now unseen) demonstrate the certainty of it:

1. For then the lives of men, even of the best, must needs be uncomfortable,
and the life of reason would (as such) be subject to more fears and terrors
than the life of sense, which is against all sense and reason: for Beasts must
dye, but do not foresee that they must dye; but that rational foresight of
Death would imbitter all his sweetest delights of Life; if there were no reason
to hope for another after this; and the more the Life of Man as Man is more
noble than the Life of Beasts, the more the foresight of the certain loss
thereof without another after this, would affright, afflict, torment: Now it is
not rational to think, that God who made Man the chiefest, and the choicest of
all his visible works, should endue him with such powers and faculties, as
understanding and Will to make his Life (as man) more burdensome, by being
filled with fretting fears, wracking griefs, and tormenting terrors, more than
any Beasts are able to, or capable of Nay and add, that the more any Man did
improve exercise, and use his reason in the frequent Meditations of Death, the
more bitter his Life would be, to consider that all the pleasant good he does
enjoy, must certainly and shortly be lost by Death, and he not capable of any
good after Death in the stead and room thereof.

2. Then the Condition of many wicked, yea, the worst of men would be better
than the condition of the ungodly that are the best; if the Wicked have their
good things here, and no evil hereafter; and the people of God their evil
things here, and no good hereafter; 1 Cor. 15.19.. If in this Life only we had
hope, we were of all men most miserable.

3. Then the chiefest and greatest encouragements to undergo Sufferings and
Losses for Gods sake were taken away. Why did Moses refuse the Honors of
Pharaohs Court: and chose to suffer Afflictions with the people of God; but
because he had his Eye to the recompense of reward. Heb. 11.25, 26. why did
Paul endure such Conflicts, but for the hope of Life and Immortality which the
Gospel had brought to light: 2. Tim. 1.10.12 and well might he ask what it
would advantage him that he fought with Beasts at Ephesius, if the Dead rise
not to Eternal happiness, 1 Cor. 15.32. Might not then the Suffering Saints
repent when they come to dye, that they had been so imprudent and unwise, to
endure so much, and lose so much, and say they have been loosers by obeying
God, and by their holy walking, for there is no happiness after Death to be
hoped for: wherefore I do repent that I did not take my pleasures while I
might; but did you ever hear a serious godly man, when dying, utter such words?
But of (...) contrary on their dying beds do grieve, (...) groan, mourn and
lament, that they have been no more holy and obedient; and in suffering times,
if they had Gold as Dust, they would count it all as Dross; and if they had a
thousand lives, they would lose them all to keep in the favor of God and to
gain the Crown of Everlasting Life.

4. Then would the Floodgates of sin and profaneness be plucked up, to let in
an Inundation of all manner of gross abominations; for if men will not be
affrighted from their sin with all the threatenings of the sorest pains of Hell,
nor allured to leave them with all the promises of the sweetest pleasures of
Heaven; if they were sure there were no torments of Hell to be adjudged to, nor
Glory in Heaven, to be rewarded by, they would run with greater greediness to
the commission of the worst of sins that the Devil should tempt them, or their
wicked hearts incline them to.

Quest. 2. How shall we Eye Eternity? or look at unseen Eternal things?

They are said to be unseen, as they are not objects of (...) external sense?
for in this (...) are not to be seen: but we must look at Eternal things that
are unseen, with an Eye that also is unseen; and the several things denoted by
the Eyes in Scriptures, will give some light to see, with what Eyes we must
look at unseen Eternal things; viz. with an Eye,

Of Knowledge, Faith, Love, Desire, Hope.

Our looking at Eternal things comprehends these acts of the Soul.

1. It includes a sure and certain Knowledge of them: as things not understood
are said to be hid from our eyes; so what we know, we are said to see. Eccl.
2.3. I sought in my heart till I might see what was that good for the sons of
men; taking away of Knowledge is called the putting out of the Eyes, Nunb.
16.14. and the in-lightening the Mind, the opening of the Eyes, Acts. 26.18.
and looking is put for certain Knowing, Job. 13.27. and expressed by seeing;
Acts. 7.34. so that the Looking at, and Eying of Eternal things, with the Eyes
of the Understanding includes,

1. The bending of the mind to study them; as when a man would look at any
Object, he bends his Head, and turns his Eyes that way.

2. The bending the mind to them, as a man when he looks earnestly at any thing
sixeth his Eye upon it.

3. The Exercise of the mind thus bent and bound to Eternal things, that it is
often thinking on the unseen Eternal God, Christ, Heaven, and the life to come.

2. This looking is by an Eye of Faith, Looking is believing, Numb. 21.8. Make
thee a fiery serpent, and set it upon a pole: and it shall come to pass, that
every one that is bitten, when be looks upon it, shall live. The Object and
the Act are both expounded by Christ, Job. 3.34. As Moses lifted up the
Serpent, and in the Wilderness, even so must the Son of man be lifted up. 15.
That whosoever believes in them, shall not perish, but have Eternal Life.

3. This Looking is with an Eye of Love. Though in Philosoph^ the Affections as
well as the will are blind Powers; yet in Divinity the eyes are put for the
Affections. Prove. 23.5. Will thou set thine eyes upon that which is not? and
the Eye of then Lord denotes his Love. Psalm. 33.18. and believers that love the
coming of the unseen Savior. 1. Tim, 4.8. are said to look for it. Phil. 3.20
ubi amor, ibi oculus. We love to look at what we love.

4. This Looking is with an Eye of Desire, which is expressed by the Eye. Numb.
15.39. That ye seek not after your own Heart, and your own Eyes. 1 King. 20.6.
every thing desirable in thine eyes. Job. 31.16. If I have witheld the poor
from their desire, or have caused the eyes of the Widow to fail.

The Eye is an Index of the desires of the Heart.

5. This Looking is with an Eye of Hope. The Eye is put for Hope, Job. 11.20.
and things not seen are looked for by Hope. Romans 8.24.25. and things hoped for
are the Objects of our Looking. Tit. 2.13. Looking for the blessed Hope. In
short the sum is, as if it had been said, while we have a certain knowledge of
unseen Eternal things, a firm belief of them, for vent love unto (...), ardent
desires after them, lively hope, and patient expectation of them, we faint not
in all our tribulations.

Having opened the Eyes with which we are to look at Eternal things, I proceed
to the manner of our Looking: There is a looking unto them, Psalm. 34 7. There
is a Looking unto them, by studying the Nature of them, to know more of the
reality, necessity and dignity of them, 1 Pet. 1.12. Which thing, the Angels
desirs to look into. If Angels do, Men should. There is a Looking for them,
either as we look for things that we have lost, look till we find, as the Man
for his lost sheep, or the woman for her lost silver, Luke. 15.4.8. to look for
a thing that is yet to come: Tit. 2.13. and there is a looking at them, which
is not an idle gazing at the unseen Eternal World, but a practical lively,
affecting look in this manner following.

1. We should look at Eternal things with such an Eye of Faith, that should
presentiate them unto us, though they are yet to come. Hence Faith is said to
be the substance, or substance of things not seen, and the evidence of things
(...) for, Heb. 11.1. Faith so looks at things that are far off, that they have
a kind of mental, intellectual existence; though absent as if they were
present: being promised as sure, as they were already possessed: Faith
convinces and assures the heart of a Believer most strangly of the truth of a
thing, while it looks to the Revelation and Testimony of God, than any argument
brought forth from Natural reason could do; and does give as firm assent to the
certainty and reality of Eternal things (though unseen) as to any thing he
beholds with his eyes, or perceives by the apprehension of any Sense;
because our Eyes may be deceived, but God neither can deceive, nor be deceived.

Look then, i.g. at the coming of Christ with such an eye of Faith, as if with
your bodily Eyes you saw him descending from Heaven, in flaming fire, with
glorious attendance; as if you heard the Tru^^pet sounding and the Cry made,
arise ye I tad, and come to Judgment: At which command, as if you saw the Dead
quickened, and peeping out of their Graves, to see why they are raised: as if
you saw the wicked come ^o^th, fearfully amazed, with vile and filthy Bodies,
like Toades from their holes, with pale and ghastly countenances, with trembling
hearts, and their knees (...) horror knocking one against an (...) rearing
their hair, smiting on their (...), and crying out, what is the matter! What
meant that loud Alarm, that thundering Call that awaked us out of the deep
sleep of Death? Oh! the Lord is come, the slighted Christ is come: Come! how
does he come? How? clothed with vengeance, with fury in his face, and his
Wrath like Fire burns before him: because of his Indignation, the Heavens melt
over our heads, and the Earth burns under our feet, and all is in flames round
about us. Oh terrible day! such as this we never saw. Oh the storms! the
storms! Oh such burning, scorching storms we never saw, nor felt before! We
have been sleeping all the night of Death, and the morning is come, the day
does dawn: Dawn! Oh it is bread day all about, we were wont to wake, and go to
work, and go to sin, to swear, and lie, to drink and take our pleasure, but now
we wake, and must to Hell, to Pain, and Punishment. Now we must go from God to
Devils, from the only Savior, to Eternal Torments. Oh what day is this! What
day! it seems to be rather night than day, for ^^is a day of Wrath, a day of
trouble and (...) is, a day of wastness and desolation, (...) of darkness and
gloominess, a day o^ Clouds and thick darkness; a day of the trumpet and alarm
against us all Impenitent Sinners, and to us all it would pove the great
Damnation day. When our Souls and Bodies by Death were separated, it was a
sorrowful parting, but this is a sorer meething: the Body with doleful groans
does strangely greet its reunited Soul. Oh thou cursed Soul! must I be tied to
thee again with a faster knot than ever? Death did heretofore part thee and me,
but all the pains of Hell hereafter connot do it: thou wast commander over me,
and should have managed thy Govern mont better: thou should have used this
Tongue to call upon thy Maker: thou shoulgst have used these Ears to have
hearkened to the calls of Christ, to the wooings of Grace, to the entreaties of
Mercy: these feet to have carried thee to the means of Grace: these hands to
have been Instruments of good, they were all at thy command, what thou biddest
them do, they did, and whither thou command them to go, they went. Oh that I
might have lain rotten in my Grave, for then I had been at reast! for though in
the Grave I had no pleasure, yet there I felt no pain; but since I have been
again united to this before damned Soul, I feel intolerable punishment, and I
now perceive it is past doubt that it will be Eternal; the Soul will give no
better salutations to the Body. Oh cursed flesh! what, alive again! Must I be
linked to such a loathsome lump, worse chan any Carrion: thou did rebel
against the commands of reason, and thy Appetite was pleased, and thy Lusts
obeyed, and all the time of Life on Earth was spent, and fooled away, in
seeding, clothing, and adorning thee; and as I was led away, and enticed by
thee to live with thee a sensual stesh pleasing life, so formally, sowing to
the flesh, now of the flesh we reap that Damnation that shall be Eternal For
the Judge is come, his Throne is set, and all the World is summoned to appear,
the separation is made, the Books are opened all on the right hand are
acquitted, and called to the possession of an Everlasting Kingdom, while we are
doomed down to Eternal Torments. Lo they are going with their Blessed Glorious
Lord unto Eternal Glory; and we with cursed Devils, like cursed Wretches to
Everlasting shame, and pain, and banishment from God and Christ, and Saints and
Angels for ever.

Look thus believingly on these unseen things, as if you saw all these, and a
thousand times more terrible and more joyful, transacted now before your eyes.

2. Look directly at unseen Eternal things. Many do look indirectly at things
Eternal, but directly at things Temporal? pretending things not seen, intending
things that are seen, in praying, preaching, and professing seem to have an eye
to God and Christ, and Heaven, but they look asquint to their worldly profits,
credit and applause: Should pray that they might see God, but it is that they
might be seen of men: Mat. 6.5. But this is to look away, contrary to Solomon's
advise, Prove. 4.25. Let thine eyes look right on, and let thine eyelids look
straight before thee.

3. Let unseen Eternal things be the first that you look at. Do not first look
at Riches, Honors, Pleasures, and please your selves with purposes after that,
to Look after God and Christ, and the happiness of Heaven, when sickness
comes, and Death approaches, and when near the end of time, begin to make
preparation for Eternity. Men spend their days in getting a visible estate,
while the unseen Eternal God, and Glorious Savior, and Heavens happiness is
neglected by them; but it would make a considering man to tremble to think what
a sight these Sinners shall have after Death has closed their Eyes, when the
separated Soul shall see an angry God, a condemning Judge, the Gates of heaven
shut against it, and its self in Everlasting misery.

Unseen Eternal things are first in order of duration, for the invisible God
was, when nothing was beside himself; and first in order of dignity, and should
have the priority of our thoughts, care and diligent endeavors, Mat. 633. Seek
ye first the Kingdom of God, and hisrighteousness; and all these things shall
be added unto you, when we first take care about Eternity, the things of time
shall be given to us over and above: but the Eternal happiness of Heaven shall
never be given over and above to those that primarily look at, and seek the
things of time, for amongst men, the overplus does not exceed in worth the
things contracted for.

But this damnable preferring things Temporal, and cursed post-poning things
Eternal, is the setting of God in the room of the Creature, and the Creature in
the Throne of God, as if they would set the heavens where the Earth does stand,
and the Earth where the Heavens are, and so subvert the order of things which
God has appointed to be observed in the Nature of things,

4. Look heedfully at Eternity. All the things that are only for time, are
toys and trifles: the Things for an Eternal World are the grand concerns we
should narrowly look to in time; the gathering of Riches in time to the getting
of Grace, and an interest in Christ for the escaping of Damnation, and
obtaining of Happiness to Eternity is busy Idleness, careful Negligence, and
laborious Sloth. If God that inhabiteth Eternity looks narrowly to all our
actions done in time. Joh. 13.27. how narrowly should we look to our own, when
every one is a step to Everlasting Happiness, or Eternal Misery? We should look
narrowly that we do not walk in the broad way that leads unto the one, but in
the narrow that will bring us to the other. Mat. 7.13, 14.

5. Look Earnestly with a longing look at unseen Eternal things. Let your
Hearts be filled with greatest intense desires after them, as one that looks
and thinks it long, till the desire be accomplished: as the Mother of Sisera
looked out at a Window, and cried through the Lattice, Why is his Chariot so
long in coming? Why tarry the Wheels of his Chariot? Judge. 5.20. Why does time
make no more haste to be gone and flee away, that when it is gone and past, I
might enter into Eternal Joys, that never shall be past and gone? Why does the
Sun that by its alternate presence and absence, is the measure of my nights and
days, make no swifter speed in its diurnal Motion? If it be as a Bride groom
coming out of his Chamber, and rejoices as a strong man to run a race, why
does it seem to my longing Soul, (as in the days of Joshua) to stand still; if
the Sun in the Firmament be so slow, let the Son of Righteousness make more
haste, and come and lighten my passage to the other Eternal World, that I might
see him as he is, and be more like unto him, than at this distance I can be?
Return, Return, O Shulamite, return, return, that I might look upon thee: Make
have my Beloved and be thou like unto a roe, or to a young heart upon the
mountains of spices, that my looking for, and after thee might be turned into
looking upon thee. Did thou say a little while, and ye shall see me, and
again, a little while, and ye shall not see me? Why dearest Lord! shall I count
that a little while in which I do not see thee? have thou lest it upon record,
yet a little while, and be that shall come, will come, and will not tarry?
Sweetest Savior! to my thirsty, panting Soulit seems a great while, while thou
do tarry, and not come: time seems long till I do see thee, but when I shall
see thee in looking on thy lovely glorious Self, Eternity shall not seem long.
I will mind thee of thy Promise, surely I come quickly, and make in matter of
my prayer, and in consider^^ of the performance of thy promise, and audience of
my prayer, will say, Amen, even so, so quickly come Lord Jesus: for according
to my earnest expectation, and my hope, I groan, and am traveling in pain,
until I see thee who to me art now unseen, that when I might live by sight, and
no longer walk by Faith.

6. Look through with earnest, yet with Patient expectation, at unseen Eternal
things. He that walks now by Faith, that he shall hereafter live by sight,
will not make undone, untimely haste; tho what he sees by Faith in unseen
Eternal Joys, and Glory, does fill his Soul with longing desires after them,
yet hope does help with patience to wait for them Romans 8.25. For the beatifical
vision is yet for an appointed time, but at the end of Temporal Life it will be
given, though it tarry, wait for it, because it will surely come, it will not
tarry; though it tarry beyond some Months or Years that you desire to be there,
yet it shall not tarry one moment beyond the time, that God has appointed to
take you to it, therefore in the mean time live by Faith, and see in things
^^seen, what can be seen by Faith, till things unseen, shall clearly, and with
open face be seen by you.

7. Look with a fixed, steadfast Eye at unseen Eternal things, if you give a
glance, or cast of the eye toward things seen and temporal: the Eye and Heart
too is ready to six upon them: if you would six your Eyes upon Eternity, upon
God and Christ, and the Joys above, Satan, Sin, the Flesh and World will be
diverting of it, that now in time, comparatively, you can but glance upon
Eternity: If you look that way, many Objects will interpose themselves, to
hinder your sight, and to turn your Eyes from things Eternal, to things
Temporal, from God to the Creature, from things above, to things below: But yet
if we were full of the Holy Ghost, as Stephen was, we might look up steadfastly
unto Heaven as Stephen did, and though not with the same Eye, yet to the same
effect and purpose, see the Glory of God, and Jesus, standing at his right
hand. Acts. 7.^5. Though the thoughts are immanent, yet in this respect they
are too transient, that they do no longer dwell upon Eternity; But if the Devil
and the World find yo^^ thoughts tied to this subject, and go a bout to loosen
them, say, why do ye this: for not my Lord, but I have need of them: Or if you
are at any season seasonably got up into the Mount, viewing eternity, and they
send Messengers to you to come down, reply (for they think to do you mischief
(...) am doing a great work, so that I cannot come dowm: Why should the work
cease, whilst I leave it, and come down to you? And though they send more than
four times after this sort, yet answer them still after the same manner.

8. Look unweariedly at unseen Eternal things. The Eye might be fixed for a
while upon an Object, and after a while be weary in looking at it; can you look
unweariedly at the vanities of this World, and will you be so soon tired in
beholding the Glorious things in the other World? Do you look on things
Temporal, where seeing is not satisfying, and yet are never satisfied with
looking? And will you not look on things ^^en^al, where seeing would be such a
filing of your heart with satisfactory con^ent, that looking would be tedious
to your eye? There is so much in God, in Christ, in all Eternal things in
Heaven; so much Beauty, Glory, Fullness, that methinks we might stand looking at
them night and day, with out any irksomness at all. But alas, when the Spirit
is willing, the Flesh is weak; and whilst the Soul must look out of Flesh to
see those Glorious things, and so clogged with Corruption, that is like dust
within its Eyes, that makes it weep, because it can look no longer: But yet in
time we should endeavor to be more like to them that are already in that
Eternity, where they look at God and Christ unweariedly: and though their
looking is not measured by Days, or Months, or Years, but by immensurable
Eternity, yet they shall never be weary of looking at them to all Eternity.

9. Look with a joyful pleasant Eye at unseen Eternal things. Look till you
feel your Heart to leap for joy; look till you find your Spirit is revived
within you; look till the sight of your Eye affect your Heart. Is Christ
unseen? yet not unknown: Do not (...) now see him with bodily Eyes, yet you do
with an Eye of Faith and Love, and therefore may rejoice with joy unspeakable,
and full of Glory, 1 Pet. 1.8. When you look up unto the Heavens, and see and
say, yonder is the place of my Everlasting abode, there I must dwell with God,
there I must be with Christ, and joyfully join with Angels and Saints in
praising of my Lord and Savior; the ford-sight of this will make you joyful
for the present, and pleasant in you looking at it.

10. Look fiducially at unseen Eternal things, with an Holy, Humble Confidence
by Jesus Christ upon the performance of the conditions of the Gospel, they
shall be all your own; that by turning from all your Sin, by Repentance and
Faith in Christ, you trust, you shall be possessed of them; that when you see
there are Mansions now unseen, there are Eternal Joys, an Immovable Kingdom,
an Incorruptible Crown, the Eternal God to be enjoyed, and for all this you
have a promise, and you know this promise is made to you, by the performance of
the Conditions annexed to the promise, you trust in time to come unto it, or
rather when you go out of time into Eternity, you shall be Blessed in the
immediate, Full, Eternal Enjoyment of all the Happiness that God has prepared
in Heaven, to give you welcome, joyful entertainment in that unseen Eternal
World; that you so eye that world while you live in this, that when by Death
you are going out of this World, into that, you might have this well grounded
Confidence to say, I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course,
henceforth there is laid up for me a Crown of righteousness, which the Lord,
therighteous Fudge shall give me at that day -- 2 Time. 4.7, 8.

If you get such a sight as this, as now has been set forth before you, upon
such Eternal Objects as before were propounded to you, you will be able from
your own experience to answer the third question contained in the general case;
but yet I will proceed unto that branch.

Q. 3. What influence will such an Eyeing of Eternity have upon us in all we do?

In all we do? Will its influence be so Universal: Will the efficacy of such a
sight be so extensive to reach forth its virtue in all we do? yes, in all we
do. Whether we Eat or Drink, or go to Sleep, whether we trade, or Work, or Buy,
or Sell. Whether we Pray, or Hear, or search our Hearts, or Meditate, or
Receive, or Study, or Preach or Sin, or Suffer, or Die, it will have a mighty
influence upon us in any thing wherein we are active, or passive, culpable, or
praiseworthy; in any condition, be it Poverty, or riches, Health, or Sickness;
in any Relation, be it of Husband and Wife; of Parents and Children, of Masters
and Servants: In any Office and Employment, Sacred or Civil; out of such an
heap (because I am limited) I will take an handful, and because I have not room
to speak of all, I will not cast them into method, according to their nature,
connection, and dependence one upon another, but take them as they come in some
few particulars only.

1. Such an Eyeing of Eternity in all we do would make us careful to avoid sin
in any thing we do, or however we might fail in all we do, yet that we suffer
it not to Reign, or have Dominion over us. Look at Eternity with a believing
Eye, and you will look at sin with an angry Eye: you will cast a deadly look at
Sin, when you have alively look at Eternity of Joy or Misery.

1. Sin would deprive me of Eternal Life, therefore I will be its Death; it
would keep me from Eternal Rest: therefore I will never rest, till I have
conquered and subdued it; nothing in the World would bring upon my Eternal
Soul, the Eternal loss of the Eternal God, his Glorious Son, and Holy Spirit,
of the Company of his Holy Angels and Saints, of Eternal Treasures, of a
Blessed Kingdom, and Incorruptible Crown; but cursed Sin: Poverty, Sickness,
Men, Death, Devils cannot; nothing but Sin: therefore I will be its bane, that
shall not Reign in me, that would not suffer me to live in Ever^ lasting
Happiness.

2. Sin would plunge me into unseen Eternal Torments, into Endless Flames, and
Everlasting Burnings: If you could speak with a Soul departed but a Month ago,
and ask him, what do you now think of the delights of Sin, of sporting on the
Sabbath day, of your pleasant Cups, and Delightful Games; of pleasing of the
Flesh, and gratifying of its Lusts? What a sad reply would he return, and what
a doleful answer would he make you? Sin! Oh that was it that was my ruin; that
was it, which has brought me (miserable wretch) to Everlasting Torment; that
was it, which shut me out of Heaven, that sunk me down to Hell. O ye foolish
Sons of Men, that are yet in time, be not mad, as I was mad; and do not do as I
did: let not the seen pleasures and profits of the world, which I have found,
were but for a time, deceive you, and bewitch you: the Devil showed me the seen
delights of Sin, but concealed from me the Extremity and Eternity of the pain
that it has bro't me to; the pleasure is past, and the pain continues, and I
am lost for ever! and all this Sin has brought me to. Let your Eyeing of
Eternity whilst you are standing in time, be instead of one speaking to you in
time, that has been in Eternity, for the Eternal God does tell you, as much as
any Damned Soul can tell you, and would you believe one from Hell, and not the
Son of God that came from Heaven? Oh look and view Eternity in the Glass of the
Scripture, and firmly believe it and it will make slaughtering work among your
Sins, and destroy that which would damn you.

2. Such Eyeing of Eternity would be a mighty help to quiet your hearts under
the dispensations of Providence here to men on Earth. When you look at the seen
Afflictions, Distresses, Disgraces, Stripes, Imprisonments, Persecutions, and
Poverty of the People and Children of God, and the Riches, Ease, Honors,
Pleasures, and the seen flourishing prosperity of the worst of Men, that by the
Swearing, Drinking, Whoring, hating of Godliness, being partners of wickedness,
Proclaim themselves the Children of the Devil, and you are offended, and your
mind disquieted, except in this you have a better heart thad Job, cap. 21.6, to
16. or David, a Man after Gods own hear^; Psalm. 73.2, to 16. or Jeremiah, cap.
12.1, 2. to Habakkuk, cap. 1.13, 14.

Now amongst the many helps to allay this Temptation, the eying of the last,
yea, Everlasting things is not the least. Look upon these two sorts of Men,
(which comprehend all in the World) as going to Eternity, and lodged there, and
then you will rather pity them because of their future Misery, then envy them
for their present Prosperity. What if they have their Hearts Desire for a
moment, and must be tormented for ever. What if they have Pleasures, and carnal
Delights for a season, they must be under the heavy wrath of God for ever. You
might stand and see all their mirth at an end, but their sorrow never will have
end; all their joy is but for a moment, as the crackling of Thorns under a pot,
but their misery will be endless misery. Let them laugh a while, they shall
weep for ever: let them rejoice for a season, their mirth shall be turned into
heaviness; their Temporal rejoicing into everlasting howling; and the Eternity
of joy will be more than a recompense to the afflicted Saints, what soever
their Sufferings for Christ, and Conscience be in this World.

A supposed case might be an help in this Temptation. Suppose then that you
were poor, and full of pain for so ^ong time, or rather for so short, that you
should fall asleep, and after you awake, should be poor no more, nor afflicted
any more, but have a life of many delights afterward. Suppose again, another
man were compassed about with all manner of accommodations: costly Dishes to
please his Palate beautiful Objects to delight his Eyes, all manner of Music
grateful to his Ears; many Servants to attend him; all standing bare before hi,
and bowing the Knee in Honor to him; and all this, and much more, he were to
enjoy as long as he could abstain from sleeping; but as soon as he does fall
asleep, he should be taken off his Bed, and cast into a Furnice of boiling Lead
or scalding Pitch. I de mand which of these two men's Condition would you
choose; I know it would be the condition of the former, and not the latter;
this, and infinitely beyond this is the case in hand; you are afflicted till
you fall asleep, and then you shall be afflicted no more, but live a life of
Joy for ever! the wicked prosper till they fall asleep, and they cannot long
keep open their eyes, but Death will come and close them, then the justice of
God will arrest them, and then Devils will seize upon them, and they shall be
cast into a Lake of burning Brimstone, where they shall have no rest, night,
nor day; but the smoke of their Torment shall ascend for ever and ever.
Exercise your thoughts in this manner, and have an eye unto Eternity, and you
will more easily and successfully overcome such Temptations to murmuring and
discontent, from the different dispensations (...) the Providence of God here,
in time (...) good and bad.

3. Such eyeing of Eternity would have great influence for the well improvement
of our time. Time is to be valued in order to Eternity, because we go out of
time into Eternity, (and that which should make every man in time most
concerned) out of time into Eternity of Misery or Glory. Oh! what a precious
thing is time! it is beyond the worth of Gold or Silver, because we might do
more in time in reference to Eternity, than we can do by all our Gold and
Silver: Jewels are but Toys in comparison of precious Time. Many are saving of
their Money, but are prodigal of Time; and have more of time than they know
what to do with, when others find so much to do, that they know not what to do
for time to do it in. Oh Fools, and blind, what were an Hundred years to make
preparation for Eternity? Ob sluggish careless Sots! Do you ask, how shall we
pass away the time? Might ye not with more reason ask, how shall we prevent
hasty time from passing away with such minged motion? Or if that cannot be
^^^vented, how shall we improve our me that is so fast a posting from us? Blind
World! Do any Men in thee enquire, How shall we spend our time? It is easily
answered, in Praying, Repenting, begging for Grace, the pardon of Sin, the
favor of God, and peace with Him, and fitness for Eternal Life Had the Damned
in hell the time that once they had, and you now have, do you think they would
ask what they should do to pass away the time? Their cry rather is, Oh hasty
time, whether art thou fled? Why did thou move so fast while we sat still?
Or why in time did we so swiftly run in ways of Sin, as if we could not have
sinned enough before time was past and gone? When we had a God to serve, and
Souls to save, and an Everlasting State to make preparation for, we like Fools
did say, flow shall we spend our time? But now our time is spent, and past, and
gone; and now the question is, which never can be answered, How shall we spend
Eternity? Which never can be spent, no not in enduring Ten Thousand Thousand
Millions of Years in pain and punishment for when they are past, it is as
fresh, and as far from ending, as it was the first moment it began; then Eye
Eternity, and you cannot but improve your time.

4. Such Eyeing of Eternity would mak^ us careful how we die, because death is
our passing out of time into Eternity. Death is dreadful to the ungodly,
because it opens the door into Everlasting Misery gainful to all endued with
saving Grace, because it lets them into Everlasting Happiness. Did you that are
yet Christless, Impenitent, and Unbelieving, see whether you are going, and
where you must within a little time rake up your Everlasting Lodgings; what
fear and trembling would seize upon all your joints, and when by sickness you
perceive Death to be approaching, you would cry out, Oh Death, forbear,
forbear, stay thine hand, and do not strike, for if thou cut me down in this
Condition, I drop into Eternal Misery (...) There is nothing but this single
thread of my frail Life between me and endless woe, and if this be cut or snapt
asunder I sink into irrecoverable Misery, without all hope of ever coming
forth: Could you but see a Soul the next hour after its separation from the
Body, what a taking is it in, what woe, what despair is it filled with, would
you then live without Christ, go to bed without Christ, and rise and trade, and
still remain without an Interest in Christ? What mean ye Sirs, to make no
provision for Death that is so near, so very near, when you are as near to
going into an Everlasting World, as you are to going out of this Transitory
World? And your Souls be dragged sooner by Devils into Hell, than your Bodies
can be carried by Men unto your Graves. Awake, arise, repent, and turn unto the
Lord, for if you sleep on in sin, till you sleep by Death, you will be awaked
by the flames of Hell; and then though you be under the power of Eternal Death,
you will sleep no more, and rest no more for ever.

And Death is as gainful and desirable to a Gracious Man, as it is terrible to
the Ungodly, for it lets him into unseen Eternal Glory, to the sight of Christ
unseen to us on Earth. How willing would you be to go a Thousand Miles to see
Christ, and converse with him, if he were on Earth, it is better to see this
precious Christ in Eternal Glory; it is worth the while to die, to hav^^ a view
of your Lord Redeemer in the highest Heavens. Oh the wonderful transporting
Joys the Soul is filled with, when it first comes into the unseen, but happy
World! when it has the first Glorious view of its dearest Lord. Do you think
it would desire to return to live in flesh upon Earth again? Do you know what
you do, when you are so loath to die? Do you understand your selves when you are
so backward to be taken out of time? It is to be loath, to go into Everlasting
Happiness, to go and take possession of unseen Eternal Glory.

5. Such an Eyeing of Eternity would make (...) more patient, constant, joyful
in all our ^ufferings for Christ's sake. When we pore upon our seen troubles,
and do not look ^t rest after trouble, when we see and ^eel what is inflicted
upon us, but do ^^ot look what is laid up in Heaven for us; when we see the
rage of Men, and do not look at the love of God, our Hearts and flesh do fail;
but if we set unseen Eternal things over against things seen and Temporal, it
will be strength unto us. Against the power of Men which is Temporal, set the
power of God, which is Eternal; and then you will see their power to be
weakness: Against the Policy of Men which is Temporal, set the Wisdom of God,
which is Eternal; and then you will see all their Policy to be Foolishness.
Against the Hatred of Men, which in its effects to you is Temporal, set the
Love of God, which is both in its self, and in its effects to you Eternal; and
you will see their hatred to be no better than raging, unreasonable madness.
Keep you Eye upon the unseen Torments in the other World, and you will rather
endure Sufferings in this than Venture upon Sin, and expose your selves to
them: Keep your Eye upon the unseen Eternal Crown of Glory, and it will carry
you through Fire and Flames, Prisons and Reproaches for the sake of Christ.
Heb. 11.26. Esteeming the reproach of Christ greater riches than the treasures
of Egypt; for he had respect unto the Recompense of the Reward, 27. By Faith he
forsook Egypt, not fearing the wrath of the King: for he endured, as seeing him
who is invisible.

6 This Eyeing of Eternity will be a powerful preservative against the
Temptations of Men or Devils; a Sovereign Antidote against ^he Payson of
Temptation. I see the Invisible God looks at me, shall I then ^ield to the
suggestions of the Devil, or the sollicita^ions of Men to sin? I see there is
an Everlasting state of Joy or Torment that I must be shortly in, as sure as I
am in this place, and Satan's design is to bring me to that state of Torment;
and if I follow him I shall be excluded from yonder glorious place; from God,
and Christ, and Saints above: therefore by the Grace of God I will not yield to
this Temptation; but strive I will, and Watch and Pray I will against the
assaults of this deceitful Adversary: for why should I be so foolish to lose
Eternal Glory for momentary Pleasures? and run my Immortal Soul into Eternal
pain for short delights? I do plainly see what will be the End, if I do yield
Damnation without end, banishment from God without end: I do clearly see that
Stealing and Murder is not a more ready road to a place of Execution upon
Earth, then yielding to a tempting Devil is to Everlasting Misery.

7. Such Eyeing of Eternity would wean our hearts from the things of time. A
sight and view of Heavens Glory would darken the Glory of the World, as looking
at the shining Sun over your Head, does obscure in your Eyes the things under
your Feet; after a believing view of the invisible God, and the Glory of the
place above, this World would appear as a very Dunghill in your Eyes: Phil. 3.7,
8. as where we love, there we look; so the more we look, the more we shall
love; and the more we love the Eternal things that are above, the less we shall
love the Temporal things that are below.

8. Such Eyeing of Eternity would make us more like to God and Jesus Christ. It
will be a transforming and assimilating look. 2 Cor. 3.18. But we all with open
face, beholding as in a glass the glory of the Lord, are changed into the same
Image, from Glory to Glory, even as by the Spirit of the Lord. Therefore when
we shall see Christ who is now out of sight, we shall be perfectly like unto
him. 1 John 3.2. But we know when he shall appear, we shall be like him for we
shall see him as he is.

9. Such an Eyeing of Eternity would fill (...) Souls with Holy admirations of
Good^ess, Grace, and Love of God to us: When Paul had a sight of such unseen
things, he was in an holy Extacy and Divine Rapture. 2 Cor. 12 2, 3, (...) when
we consider the Eternal Happiness of Heaven, we shall stand as Men amazed that
God should prenare such things for such men, and bear such Love, and show such
Mercy to such as we that are so vile and full of Sin, and say, Lord what am I
tha^ might for ever have howled in the lowest Hell, that I should hope to
praise theein the highest Heavens! Lord what am I that might have been in
Everlasting Darkness, that there should be prepared for me Everlasting light
and Joy! Why me, Lord, why have thou designed me, and wrought upon my Heart,
and made me in any measure meet to be partake^ of such Eternal Glory? Oh! the
depth of the Riches, both of the Wisdom and Knowledge of God! How unsearchable
are his judgments, and his ways past finding out Romans 11 33 How precious are
thy thoughts to me, h^^ great is the sum of them Psalm 139.17. Oh how great is
they goodness which then b^st laid up for them that fear thee^ which th^^ h^st
wrought for them that trust in thee. Psalm. 31.19.

10. Such an Eyeing of Eternity would have this influence sure upon us, to set
our selves under a painful, skilful, serious, Ministry: It does much concern
you, for you are going to an endless Life, and Preaching is the appointed means
to fit you for an endless happy Life; then do you choose the mostlively,
searching, powerful Preaching, it is for the Life of your Souls; for the
Everlasting life of your Everlasting Souls. If you were sick, and in danger of
Death, when your Life lies upon it, you would have the advice of an able
Physician, that is serious and afraid that he no way become guilty of your
Death? Would you like that Physician that seems to be unconcerned, that cares
not whether you live or die, if he might but have his fee? Or that should
merrily jest with you when you are sick at Heart, and near to Death, if you be
not cured? Would you take pleasure in his witty sayings, and be jested into
your Grave? Or if you go unto a Lawyer about your whole Estate, though it were
in Leases that will expire, would you choose one, that you think did not care,
whether you win or lose your cause? Would you be pleased with some witty
sayings, impertinent to the pleading of your cause? Would you not say, Sir, I
am endanger of all that I am worth, my Estate lies at stake, deal plainly with
me, and be serious in your undertaking for me, and tell me in words that I can
understand the plain Law by which my case must be tried. And will you be more
careful about the Temporal Life of a Body that must die? And about a Temporal
Estate which you must leave when you die? and not about your Soul that must ever
live, and never die? No! not so much as to set your selves under faithful
Preachers, that shall in Words that you can understand plainly tell you the
laws of Christ by which you must be tried for your Life, and according to them
be Eternally damned or saved?

11. Such an Eyeing of Eternity would make you serious and lively in all your
spiritual duties in all your approaches unto God: If you have no Grace, the
serious thoughts of the unseen Eternal World, would stin you up to beg and cry
and call for it; if you have to desire more, and to exercise what you have; to
confess your sin with such contrite broken penitent hearts, as though you saw
the ^ire burning, which by your sins you have deserved to be cast into: To beg
for Christ, and Sanctifying Grace, and pardoning Mercy with that lively
Importunity, as if you saw the Lake of boiling Brimstone, into which you must
be cast, if you be not sanctified and pardoned; to hear the Word of God that
sets this Eternal World before you, with that diligent attention, as Men
hea^kning for their Lives; to commemorate the Death of Christ with such life
while you are at the Lords Supper, while you do as it were see the Torments you
are delivered from and the Eternal Happiness by Faith in a Crucified Christ you
have a Title to, it will cause a fire and flame of Love in your Hearts to that
Lord that dyed for you, ardent desires after him, complacential delight in him,
thankfulness, hope of Heaven, hatred to sin, resolution to live to, or die for
him that died for you: If your Hearts are dead and dull, and out of frame, go
and look into the unseen Eternal World; take a believing view of Everlasting
Joys and Torments on the other side of time, and you shall feel warmth and
heat, and lively actings to be produced in you.

Particularly this Eyeing of Eternity would make Ministers sensible of the
weightiness of their work; that it calls for all possible diligence and care,
our utmost serious study and endeavors, our fervent Cries and Prayers to God
for ability for the better management of our Work, and for success therein; for
as much as our Employment is more Immediately about Eternal matters: to save
(under Christ) Eternal Souls from Eternal Torments, and to bring them to
Eternal Joys: When we are to Preach to people that must live for ever in
Heaven, or Hell, with God, or Devils; and our very Preaching is the means
appointed by God, to fit men for an Everlasting state; when we stand and view
some Hundreds of Persons before us, and think, all these are going to Eternity;
now we see them, and they see us, but after a little while they shall see us no
more in our Pulpits, nor we them in their Pews; nor in any other place in this
World, but we and they must go down unto the Grave, and into an Everlasting
World: When we think it may be some of those are hearing their last Sermon,
making their last public Prayers, keeping their last Sabbath, and before we
come to Preach again, might be gone into another World; if we had but a firm
belief of Eternity our selves, and a real lively sense of the mortality of
their Bodies and our own, and the Immortality of the Souls of both, of the
Eternity of the Joy or Torment we must all be quickly in, how pathitically
should we plead with them, plentifully weep over them, fervently pray for them,
that our words, or rather the word of the Eternal God might have Effectual
Operation on their Hearts? This Eyeing of Eternity should,

1. Influence us to be painful and diligent in our Studies to prepare a Message
of such weight as we come about, when we are to Preach to men about Everlasting
matters, to set before them the Eternal Torments of Hell, and the Eternal Jayes
of Heaven: Especially when we consider how hard a thing it is to persuade Men
to leave their sins, which do endanger their Immortal Souls; when if we do not
prevail w^^h them to harken to our message, and obey it speedily, and
sincerely, they are lost Eternally; when it is so hard to prevail with men to
accept of Christ the only and Eternal Savior on the Conditions of the Gospel.
You might easily see that Idleness either in Young Students that are designs
for this Work, or in Ministers actually engaged in it, is an intolerable sin;
and worse in them than in any Men under Heaven; Idleness in a Shopkeeper is a
sin, but much more in a Minister; in a Trade, much more in a Preacher; bear
with me if I tell you an Idle Cobbler that is to mend men's Shoes is not to be
approved, but an Idle Preacher that is to mend men's Hearts, and save their
Souls shall be condemned by God and Men: for he lives in daily disobedience of
that charge of God, 1 Timothy 4.13. -- Give attendance to reading, to exhortation,
to doctrine. 15. Meditate upon those things, give they self wholly to them 16.
continue in them.

2. It would provoke us to be faithful i^ delivering the whole Counsel of God,
and no^ to daub with untempered mortar; not t^^ flatter them in their sin, or
to be afrai^^ to tell them of their evils, lest we should displease them, or
offend them: Is it time to sooth men up in their Ignorance, in their neglect of
duty, when we see them at the very door of Eternity; on the very borders of an
Everlasting World, and this the fruit, that they shall die in their sins, and
their Blood be required at our hands? Ezekiel. 33.1, to 10. but so to Preach and
discharge the Ministerial Function, that when dying, might be able to say, as
Act. 20.25. And now behold, I know that ye all among whom I have gone Preaching
the Kingdom of God, shall see my face no more. 26. Wherefore I take you to
record this day, that I am pure from the blood of all men. 27. For I have not
shunned to declare to you all the Counsel of God.

3. To be plain in our Speech, that every capacity of the weakest in the
Congregation that has an Eternal Soul that must be damned, or saved for ever,
might understand in things necessary to Salvation, what we mean, and aim, and
drive at; it has made me tremble to hear some soar aloft, that knowing Men
might know their parts, while the meaner sort are kept from the Knowledge of
Christ; and put their matter in such a dress of Words, in such a style so
composed, that the most stand looking the Preacher in the Face, and hear a
sound, but know not what he says: and while he does pretend to feed them,
indeed does starve them; and to teach them, keeping them in Ignorance. Would a
Man of any Bowels of Compassion go from a Prince to a Condemned man, and ^ell
him in such Language that he should not understand, the Conditions upon which
the Prince would Pardon him, and the poor man lose his Life, because the proud
and haughty Messenger must show his Knack in delivering his Message in Fine
English, which the Condemned man could not understand; but this is Course
dealing with a Man in such Circumstances that call for pity and Compassion:
Paul had more Parts and Learning, but more self denial than any of these when
he said, 1 Cor. 2.1. And I Brethren, when I came to you, came not with
excellency of speech, or of Wisdom, declaring to you the Testimony of God. 4,
And my speech, and my preaching was not with enticing Words of man's Wisdom, but
in demonstration of the Spirit and of Power. 2. Cor. 3.12. Seeing then we have
such hope, we use great plainness of speech. 13. And not as Moses, which put a
Vail over his Face, that the Children of Israel could not steadfastly look to
the end of that which is abolished. Some put a Vail upon their Words, that
People of mean Education, that yet have Souls that must be damned, or saved,
cannot look into thoss truths that shall never be abolished: but what is this
but a cursed preferring their own parts and praise before the Salvation of
Eternal Souls: and the preaching themselves, and not Christ: which will not be
their praise but shame at the Eternal Judgment, when some shall plead they
stand there Condemned, because the Learned Preacher would not stoop to speak to
them of Eternal matters in Language that they might have understood.

4. This Eyeing of Eternity would stir us up to Improve our Interest in God and
Man, for a continual succession of men in the Ministerial Function: In God, by
Prayer, that the Lord of the Harvest would send forth Laborers into his
Harvest: In Men whether such as have Children of pregnant Parts, Studious and
Bookish, serious in Religion, and inclined to this employment, that they would
give them to God, and give them Education in order to it, which would be the
Honor of Parents, to have such to proceed from their loins that shall be
Ambassadors, to call the blind ungodly World to mind Eternity, to escape
Everlasting Damnation, and obtain Eternal Life; or whether they be such as have
no Children so qualified, or disposed, yet have Riches to be helpful to such as
have such Children, but not an Estate to bring them up; for there is a
necessity of a standing continued Ministry: Men in all Ages are hastening to
Eternity; those that were our Ancestors in former Ages are already there, and
have taken up their Lodgings where they must for ever dwell; and we are
following after them; and what a Mercy is it, that we have the Gospel Preached
unto us, wherein we have directions how to escape Everlasting Torments, and
obtain Eternal Joys in the other Eternal World to which we are a going; and
those that shall live after us, when they have been upon the Stage of this
World a while, shall follow us and our Fathers into Eternity, and give place to
those that follow after them; thus this World does often change its
Inhabitants: What is the Life of Man, but a coming into time, and a going out
into Eternity: Oh how needful is it then, that while they make their short stay
on Earth, they should have Preaching Ministers to warn them of Eternal Misery,
and teach them the way to Eternal Glory: Those that are now engaged in the Work
will shortly be all silenced by Death and Dust: and how desirable is it that
your Children and Posterity should see and hear others Preaching in their room!
and the Honourableness of the Office might allure Young Men to incline unto it:
Is it not an Honor to be an Ambassador of the Great Eternal God, to propound
Articles of Everlasting peace between Him and Everlasting Souls? What is buying
and selling, Temporal, Transitory things in comparison of a calling, wherein it
is men's Work and business to save Souls from Eternal Misery, and to bring them
to the Eternal Enjoyment of the Glorious God. Thus in some few particulars we
have showed the Influence that the Eyeing of Eternity will have upon us i^ what
we do. Do you so Eye Eternity, and the rest here for want of room omitted, you
shall be experience find out, which will be better than knowing of them in the
notion only, because they are told you.

The Conclusion of this Discourse shall be some particular Uses, omitting many
that it would afford.

Use I. Is there an Eternal State: Such unseen Eternal Joys and Torments? Who
then can sufficiently lament the blindness, madness and folly of this
distracted World, and the unreasonableness of those that have Rational and
Eternal Souls, to see them busily employed in the matters of time, which are
only for time, in present Honors, Pleasures and Profits, while they do neglect
Everlasting things? Everlasting Life and Death is before them, Everlasting Joy
or Torment is hard at hand, and yet poor sinners take no care how to avoid the
one, or obtain the other. Is it not matter of Lamentation to see so many
Thousands bereaved of the sober serious use of their Understandings? That while
they use their reason to get the Riches of this World, they will not act as
rational men to get the joys of Heaven? And to avoid Temporal Calamities, yet
not to escape Eternal Misery? Or if they be fallen into present Afflictions,
they contrive how they may get out of them: If they be sick, reason tells them
they must use the means, if they would be well: If they be in pain, Nature puts
them on to seek after a Remedy; and yet these same Men neglect all duty, and
cast away all care concerning Everlasting matters: they are for seen pleasures
and profits which are passing from the in the enjoyment of them, but the unseen
Eternal Glory in Heaven they pray not for, they think not of: Are they unjustly
charged? Let Conscience speak, what Thoughts they lie down withal upon their
pillow; if they wake or sleep, fly from them in the silent night, what a noise
does the cares of the World make in their Souls? With what Thoughts do they
rise in the Morning? Of God, or of the World? Of the things of Time, or of
Eternity? Their Thoughts are in their Shops before they have been in Heaven;
and many desires after visible Temporal gain; before they have had one desire
after the Invisible, Eternal God, and Treasures that are above. What do they do
all they day long? What is it that has their endeavors all their labor and
travel? Their most painful Industry, and unwearied diligence? Alas! their
Conscience will tell themselves, and their practice tell others, when there is
Trading but no Praying, Buying, and Selling, but no Religious Duties performed:
the Shop-Book is often opened, but the Sacred Book of God is not looked into
all the week long.

O Lord! Forgive the hardness of my Heart, that I can see such insufferable
folly among reasonable Creatures, and can lament this folly no more: Good Lord
forgive the want of Compassion in me, that can stand and see this distraction
in the World, as if the most of Men had lost their Wits, and were quite besides
themselves, and yet my Bowels yearn no more toward Immortal Souls that are
going to unseen miseries in the Eternal World; to see distracted men busy in
doing things that tend to no account, is not such an amazing sight, as to see
men that have reason for the World, to use it not for God, and Christ and their
own Eternal good: To see them love and embrace a present Dunghill World, and
cast away all serious affecting and effectual thoughts of the Life to come: to
see them rage against the God of Heaven, and cry out against Holiness, as
foolish preciseness, and serious Godliness, as Madness and Melancholy.

Alas! These Men are Brutes in the shape of Men; for like the very Beasts they
live by sense, and are led away by a sensative appetite: The Brute takes
pleasure in his present Provender, and feels the smart of the present Spur, or
Goad, and so do sensual Sinners find sweetness in their present pleasures, and
profits, and do complain of present pain and sickness; but of pains to come,
and joys to come that are Eternal, they have no care, nor serious Thoughts.
Better such had been Toads and Serpents, than rational Creatures; for as they
mind no future things in the other World, so they are not Subjects capable of
Eternal Punishment, or Everlastings Happiness; they are not so provident as the
Ant, that in Summer lays up for Winter, and while the warm Sun does shine,
provides for a cold and stormy day: but Men that have Immortal Souls are only
for this present World, but do not provide for a stormy day that is a coming,
nor for an Eternal state to which they are hasting.

Let us call the whole Creation of God to lament and bewail the folly of Man
that was made the best of all Gods visible works; but now by such wickedness is
bad beyond them all, being made by God for an Everlasting state, and yet minds
nothing less than that for which he was principally made.

O Sun! Why is it not they Burden to give light to men to do those works and
walk in those ways that bring them to Eternal Darkness? O Earth? Why do thou
not groan to bear such burdensome Fools that dig into thy Bowels for Gold and
Silver, while they do neglect Everlasting Treasures in the Eternal World? O ye
Sheep and Oxen! Fish and Fowl? Why do ye not cry out against them that take
away your present Life to maintain them in being, but only mind present things,
but forget the Eternal God that gave them dominion over you, to live upon you
while they had time to mind Eternal things, but do not? O ye Angels of God, and
Blessed Saints in Heaven, were ye capable of Grief and Sorrow, would not ye
bitterly lament the sin and folly of poor mortals upon Earth ^ Could ye look
down from that Blesse^^ place where ye do dwell, and behold the Joy and Glory
which is to us unseen, and see how it is basely slighted by the Sons of Men, if
ye were not above sorrow and mourning, would not ye take this up for a bitter
lamentation? O ye Saints on Larth! whose Eyes are open to see what the blind
deluded World does not see, do ye bitterly take on, let your Heads be Fountains
of Water, and your Eyes send fourth Rivers of Tears for the great neglect of
Eternal Joys and Happiness of Heaven. Can you see men going out of time into
Eternity in their Sin, and in their Blood, in their Guilt, and Unconverted
state, and your Heart not moved? Your Bowels not yearn? Have you spent all your
Tears in bewailing your own sin, that your Eyes are dry when ye behold such
monstrous madness, and unparallel folly of so many, with whom daily ye
converse? Ye Sanctified Parents, have ye no pity for your ungodly Children?
nor Sanctified Children for ungodly Parents? O my Father, my Father, by whom I
had my Being, is going to Eternal Darkness! Alas for my Mother, my dear Mother,
that carried me in her Womb, that dandled me upon her knees, that suckled me at
her Breast, that did delight to break her sleep to quiet me when I was froward,
to look to me when I was sick, that bound my head when it was pained, that
wiped mine eyes when I did weep, and my face when I did sweat; because of my
Disease, this my Mother is forgetful of her own Immortal Soul; was more
troubled for me when she thought I was near my Grave, than for her self, though
near to Hell: When I was Young, she took care for me, for things Temporal, but
for her self neither Young nor Old, for things Eternal. Ere long she will be
dead, and I am afraid, damned too: Ere long she must go out of time, and for
any thing I can perceive, being Ignorant, and fearless of God, and unmindful of
Eternity, her Soul will go into Eternity of Torments. O how loath am I to have
such Thoughts of one so near, so dear unto me? Oh it is the cutting of my
Heart, it is bitterness to my Soul. I had rather die than she be damned; and
yet it is my fears, she is hasting to Eternity of Woe; for to my observing Eye
she is taken wholly up with the cares, and pride, and vanity of this Life, and
apparently regardless (...) that Eternal World.

Why do not also ye that are Parents, that have a belief of an Everlasting
State, take on, and bewail the doleful state of your ungodly Clildren, that in
their sinful courses are posting to Eternal pains. What my Son! the Son of my
Loins! the Son of my Womb! did I bear him with so much sorrow, and shall he be
a castaway? Did I travail with him with so much pain, and brought and nursed
him up with so much labor, and must he be for ever fuel for the Flames of
Hell? Have I brought forth a Child to be a prey to Devils, and a Companion with
them to all Eternity? O my Son, my Son, what shall I do for thee, my Son, my
Son. Thus whatever Relation, Neighbor, Friend, or Acquaintance you have, or
others that you see go on in sin, let it be your Grief, Trouble, Lamentation,
when there is an Eternity of Joys, and they will lose it, an Eternity of
Torments, and they be cast into it.

Use II. Do something every day in preparing for an Eternal State. If any thing
of weight lies upon your hands, this is it. If I could prevail with you in any
thing; Oh that it might be in this! if in any thing that I am to Preach, I had
need to have gone unto my knees, to beg that my Message might be regarded, this
is it: If in any thing I should be serious in Preaching, and you in Hearing,
still this is it? The longer your abode shall be, the grater preparation you
should make; When we exhort you to prepare for other Duties, it is but in order
unto this, that you might be prepared for the Eternal World: When we exhort you
to Repent, Believe, be Holy, or prepare for Death, in all, we have an Eye unto
Eternity: But if my words be slighted and rejected by you, will you do so by
the Word of the Eternal God himself, that has given you this in charge? If I
show you express commands from God, that will shortly take you into Heaven, or
judge you down to Hell; that will quickly call you out of time into Eternity,
will you promise you will do it then? then read, and do what you shall read.
Matthew. 6.18, 19, 20, 33. Luke 13.24. John 6.27. 1 Timothy 6.12. 2 Pet. 1.10, 11.
To these Scriptures I will add these following Arguments to persuade you.

1. God has s^t you in this World for this very work to make ready for
Eternity. Consider I beseech you, and demand an answer of your selves, Why has
God brought you out of Nothing, and given you a Being more Noble than all his
visible Works, in making your Souls Immortal, induing you with Reason and
Understanding? Do you think it was that you should look after Riches, and not
Grace? Things temporal, not Eternal? To buy and sell, and eat, and drink, and
sleep? Do you in your Conscience think that God has appointed you no higher
things to mind, no more lasting things to get? Reason will convince you, and
Conscience will prove it to your face, and the immortality of your own Souls
considered, does undeniably argue that God has made you for more noble Ends,
higher Employments, and greater Concerns. Why then do you not mind the end of
your Creation, and do the work that God has set you in time to do, and look
after that Eternal State that God has made you for? I have read of a devout
Pilgrim traveling to Jerusalem, and in his way passed through many Cities,
where he saw many Stately Buildings, rare Monuments, and delightful things, but
he was wont to say, but this is not Jerusalem; this is not the end of my coming
hither: I am sure that you are Pilgrims, but whether devout or no, let
Conscience speak: and you should be traveling to the Heavenly Jerusalem, and
if not, you are to Eternal Torments, why then do you stand gazing at the
Temporal things you see in your Journey, and your Hearts and Eyes so taken with
them? Sirs, this is not the Heavenly Jerusalem, this is not the end of your
coming hither, be sure the minding, loving, looking after things of time in the
neglect of God, and Christ, and Heaven, is not preparing for Eternity, except
it be for an Eternity of Woe, and Misery, and what need you be at so much pains
and labor to get thither?

2. God does give you your time in this World to prepare for Eternity. You have
time to repent, to get an Interest in Christ, to Mortify sin, to pray for
Grace to make your peace with God, to get the pardon of your sins, and all this
that you might be fitted for Eternity. Why then do not you do in time that
which God has given you time for; Can you immagine that God does lengthen out
so long a day of his Patience, only that you might labor for Temporal Riches?
Or that you would live a life of Carnal Pleasure, or gratify the flesh? Can it
enter into your heads that God supporteth you in Being, and keeps you yet out
of the Grave and Hell, that you might scrape together things Temporal, and
neglect the things that are Eternal. Does he make his Sun to rise upon you
every Morning, to give you light to drudge for things that are but for a
moment, and let alone the things that are for ever? And if God has given you
time in order to Eternity, why do you spend your time in getting things that
are but for a Time, and not for Eternity? Oh the Years that you have had! the
Months, the Weeks that God has given you to be improved for Eternity, and you
spend it, some in things absolutely sinful in serving of the Devil, and your
Lusts; some in things in themselves lawful, but unlawfully, but none in the
things absolutely necessary that you may be happy in Eternity: Some in taking
your Carnal Pleasures, some in Trading, some in every Thing but the One Thing
needful, that none is left for an Everlasting state; but when you shall be in
Eternity, you will repent, though then too late, that in this World, you so
spent your time.

3. A^ you go out of Time, so you must in the same state go into Eternity. If
you die in your sin, you must in your sin go down to Hell. This is a Life of
Trial here, in Time you are Probationers (...) Eternity, and as you are found
at the end of Time, so your state shall be determined to Eternity of Happiness,
or Misery without end.

4. You stand upon the Brink of Time, you are near the Borders of Eternity, so
near, that you that are in Time to day, might be in Eternity to morrow, or
sooner; for you never yet saw that hour, that you could say, you are sure of
the next: when you have drawn one Breath you are not sure to draw another. Time
is short, 1 Cor. 7.29. set forth sometimes by Years, if Seventy, how much is
already past? Psalm. 90.10. Sometimes by Months, Job 14.5. by days, Psalm.
90.12. by one day, Job 14.6. by a span, and nothing, Psalm. 39.5. by a vapor;
Jam. 4.14, 15. But what if you were to live a Thousand Years in pleasure upon
Earth, and after that pass into Eternity of pain and torment; would you not
when there, cry out of yourown folly that you should purchase a thousand Years
of pleasure at so dear a rate, as to endure for them Everlasting Burnings? One
would think you should not get it out of your heads that you are almost in
Eternity. One would think you should think on this when you lie down, and when
you do rise up, or dream of this in your sleep, that you are as near to Heaven
or Hell, to an Eternity of Joy, or Misery, as to your Grave.

5. When Time is past and gone, and you are entered into Eternity, it will be
too late to prepare for it. Preparation for Eternity must be done in Time, not
in Eternity. Now, or Never, if once Death stop your Mouth, and close your Eyes,
dying in your sin, you must bid farewell to God and Christ for ever. When time
is gone, y^^^ hope and all is gone. When Time is gone it will never come again:
Yesterday you shall never see more; and the time that is going while I speak
and you hear; when gone will never come, that which is to come, will he
present, but not that which is past. If you lose your Health, you might recover
it again; if your Estate, you might get it again; but if you loose your time,
it is gone for ever.

6. If you go out of Time unfitted for Eternity, better you had never been in
Time. Better for you, if you had been always nothing: Or if a Being, to have
been a Dog, a Toad or Serpent; for these do live in Time, but after Time they
do not live in Eternal Misery, as they are not capable of Eternal Happiness;
and when you lie in extremity, and Eternity of pains in Hell, this will be your
judgment, that it had been better never to have been, then to have been for
ever miserable.

7. Multitudes have and more shall come short of Eternal Happiness, and go down
to Everlasting Misery, and yet does it not concern us to be preparing for
Eternity? What means this sottishness of Mind, that when Multitudes are going
daily out of Time into Eternity, from seen Pleasures to unseen Pains, that we
are thus secure and careless, as if we should live so long in Time, as never to
live in Eternity? Or that our Beings should end with Time? Have not we
deserve^^ Eternal punishment as well as they that in Eternity are now enduring
of it? And do you know you have deserved it, and take no care to prevent it,
not so much as ask of God by serious Prayers and Tears, that you might not be
cast into Everlasting burnings? Do you think you can make as light of the Wrath
of God, when you shall feel it in Eternity, as you do when you hear of it in
Time? Can you be merry in the flames of Hell? Can you jest, and sport, and
play, when you shall be filled with the Indignation of a provoked God, or when
the Arrows of the Almighty shall strike so fast, as never to be plucked from
you? Why then do you in Time Cry out and Roar, and bitterly complain under the
smarting pain that the Gout, or Stone, or Cholick puts you to? why do you say
if this were to continue for one Year, without intermission or mitigation, you
had rather dye than live? Do not many walk in the broad way that leads to
Eternal Damnation? Matthew. 7.13, 14 Are not the Holy, Humble, Penitent ones
saved with much difficulty? 1 Pet. 4.18. Are not many Professors gone to Hell?
Matthew. 8.12. and Preachers too? Matthew. 7.22, 23. and yet is it not time for you
in good earnest to mind your Eternal state, lest there being an Everlasting
Kingdom, you should never enter into it, and Everlasting Torments, and you
should feel them to ^ll Eternity?

8. God does give you all the hopes and means you have, that you should make
ready for Eternity. Have not you had Sermons and Sabbaths? Have not God's
Ministers Preached to you, and warned you from God, of the wrath to come, and
charged you in the name of God, to repent, believe, and turn, and told you, you
must turn from sin, or burn in Hell? And will you go from hearing on Earth, to
howling in Hell? From the Light of the Gospel to utter Darkness? With the sound
of the Voice of Mercy in you? Ears? After a Thousand calls to mind your Souls,
to accept of Christ, and remedying Grace? Do you mean to have the hottest place
in that Infernal Lake? The heaviest load of Wrath in that Eternal Furnace?
Read, and tremble when you read. Matthew. 11, 20, to 25.

9. This will be approved Wisdom ere long by all the Sons of Men. Those that
now do mock at Praying, and make a mock of Sinning, and deride serious
Godliness, shall quickly be of another mind; shall confess and know that they
were the Wisest Men, That in Time prepared for Eternity, and they were the
Fools that spent their Time in Sin and Vanity. Some do say as much when they
lie a Dying, and wish, Oh that I had been convinced of this before my Time had
been so near an end! before my Glass had been so nigh out! Oh my Folly! Oh my
Vanity! that had Eternity to make preparation for, and yet of all the time I
had, I never spent one hour in hearty Prayer unto God to save me from
Everlasting Torments. Woe is me! my strength is almost gone, my time is almost
gone, and I in danger of Eternal Torments, that never shall be past and gone!
or if they be blind or hardened on their Deth-Beds, yet a moment after Death
they shall be convinced indeed, that it was worse than madness to neglect
Eternity. When stepped into the other world, shall be amazed and confounded,
saying, where am I now? What a place is this? What a state is this? I heard of
such a place before, but it is worse than any Man's Tongue in time could tell.
What is Time gone! this is not Time. Here is no Sun to measure it by its
motion; here is no succession of Night and Day. Here is no turning of an
Hourglass, no striking or telling of Clocks; No Morning, Noon, and Evening:
This is not Time. I see nothing like the things I saw in Time. But a little
while ago, I was among my Friends on Earth: Did I say alittle while ago? Alas,
I am but lately come, and this little while seems to me a Thousand Years. No
while in this place is little, and it will never be less, because it does not
go. Oh happy they that are in Eternity, but in another place than I am in! They
were wise indeed that have prevented their coming hither, and are got into a
place that is as light as this is dark: As joyful, as this is sorrowful: As
full of ease, as this is of pain: And yet this must last as long as that, and
that makes this as bitter and dreadful, as that is pleasant and delightful.
Wise were they that did foresee while they were in time, but I like a blind
Fool did not see before I felt what I must endure for ever. I did not see but
Death did draw the Curtain, open the Door, and let me in to an Everlasting
State; but woe is me! it is of Misery and Damnation. You are for being of the
mind of the most, and doing that which the Generality do approve; take in but
these. Words, First, or Last, and then do so: Even that which all first or last
shall confess to be truest Wisdom, and the neglect of it, folly and madness.
God, Angels, Good Men do all approve of this as sober Wisdom; and the Devils
cannot deny it, and all Damned Souls in Hell, and all the Wickd upon Earth as
fast as they go down to them, and feel what now they do not believe and fear,
shall not deny it to be Wisdom in them that escape that, and got to a better
place in the Eternal World.

10. In Eternity there will be no mixture. In the other World there is all pure
Love. or all pure Wrath! all Sweet, or all Bitter, without all Pain, or without
all Ease; without all Misery, or without all Happiness. not partly at Ease, and
partly in Pain, partly Happy, and partly Miserable, but all the one, or the
other. This Life is amiddle place betwixt Heaven and Hell, and here we partake
of some good, and some evil: No Judgment on this side Hell upon the worst of
men, but there is some Mercy mixed with it, for it is Mercy they are yet on
this side Hell; and no Condition on this side Heaven, but there is some evil
mixed with it, for till we get to Heaven, we shall have sin in us. In Heaven
all are Good, in Hell all are Bad; on Earth some Good, but more bad. In Hell
Misery, without mixture of Mercy, or of Hope; they have no Mercy, and that is
bad; and they can hope for none, and that is worse; while they be in Time, they
are pitied; God does pity them, and Christ does pity them, and Good men do pity
them, their Friends and Relations do pity them, pray for them, and weep over
them: but when Time is past, all pity will be past, and they in Misery without
pity to all Eternity. Rev. 14.10. The same shall drink of the Wine of the Wrath
of God, which is poured out without mixture into the Cup of his Indignation:
and he shall be tormented with fire and brimstone in the presence of the Holy
Angels, and in the presence of the Lamb. 11. And the smoke of their torment
ascend^th up for ever and ever, and they have no rest, day nor night. -- No!
then for the Lords ^ake, for your Souls Sake, as upon my knees I beseech you,
if you have any dread of God, any fear of Hell, any desire of Heaven, any care
whither you must go, take no rest night nor day in time, till you have secured
your Everlasting happy state, that you might have Everlasting rest, night and
Day in Eternity; or that you might pas into that Eternity where it is always
day and no night; and not into that, where it shall be always night and never
day. Sins! what say ye? What are ye resolved upon? to sin still, or to repent
that ye have already sinned, and by the Grace of God to sin no more? To work in
Time, for things of Time, or in Time to prepare for Eternity? Will ye obey my
Message, or will ye not? Speak in Time, or I will not say, hold your Pease for
ever, but repent in Time, or ye shall cry and roar for ever: The Time of this
Sermon is out and the Time of your Life will be quickly out, and I am afraid I
shall leave some of you as unfit for Eternity as I found you: And my heart does
tremble, least Death should find you, as I shall leave you, and the Justice of
God, and the Devils of Hell should find you as Death shall leave you, and then
Vengeance shall never leave you, and the Burning Flames, Tormenting Devils, and
the Gnawing Worm shall never leave you. Will ye then work it upon your Hearts
that ye come into Time, unfit to go into Eternity: That in Time ye have made
your selves more unfit: That the only remedy is the Lord Jesus Christ, that in
the fullness of Time did Dye, that sinners might not be Damned for ever; that
this Crucified Christ will not save you from Eternal Misery, nor take you to
Eternal Glory, except ye do perform the Conditions of the Gospel, without
which, his Death puts no man into an actual state of Happiness; ye must repent
and be Converted, ye must take him for your Savior, and your Lord; ye must be
Holy sincerely, hate Sin universally, love Christ superlatively, or else the
Savior will not save you; Mercy it self will not save you from Everlasting
Misery: Ye must persevere in all this to the end of your time, and then ye
shall be happy in Eternity, to Eternity. Otherwise ye shall not give audience,
Sirs, otherwise ye shall not be Happy. Happy! no ye shall be Miserable. If the
loss of God and Christ, and Heaven will make you Miserable for ever, ye shall
be Miserable for ever; if the pains of Hell, the Company of Devils, the
stingings of Conscience, the terrors of Darkness, total, final, despair of
having any end of your Damned condition will make you Miserable ye shall be
Miserable. If all that God can lay upon you, if all that Devils can Torment you
with, if all that Conscience can for ever accuse you for; if all that is in
Hell can make you Miserable, except you repent in Time, and belive on Christ in
Time, and be sanctified in Time, ye shall be Miserable for ever. O my God! be
thou my Witness of this Doctrine. All ye that fear God, that here me this day,
bear me witness that I have published this in the Ears of all that hear me.
Thou Conscience that art in that man, that is yet going on in Sin, and posting
with speed to Eternal Misery, bear me witness now and at the day of Judgment,
that I told him what must be done upon him, in him, and by him, if he would
escape Eternal Torments. If he will not hearken nor obey while he is in Time:
Conscience, I bespeak thy^ Witness against him, and that thou bring thy
Accusation against him, and upbraid him to the Confusion of his face, among all
the Devils in Hell, and all that shall be damned with him, that he was told he
could not keep his sins, and be kept out of that place when he dyed; he could
not reject Christ, and finally refuse him, and be saved for ever. Sinner!
carest thou not? Will thou still go on? Good God! must we end thus? Must I come
down without hopes of his Repenting; and he die with foolish hopes of being
saved, and after Death be cast into that Eternity, where the worm dies not,
and the Fire is not quenched? But in those Endless Flames shall cry out and
roar, Oh cursed Caitiff! what did I mean all the while I was in Time, to
neglect preparation for Eternity? Oh Miserable Wretch! this is a doleful,
dreadful state, and still the more, because it is Eternal. Woe is me! that I
cannot dye, nor cease to be! Oh that God would cut me off! Oh that Devils could
tear into a Thousand, Thousand pieces; or that I could use such violence to my
self, that I might be no longer what I am nor where I am! But alas, I wish in
vain, and (...) these desires are in vain, for though (...) Union of my Soul
and Body in my M^^thers Womb was liable to a dissolution^ yet since this Body
did arise out of the Bosom of the Earth, and is reunited t^ its Soul, admits of
no separation for ever and which still is worse, this Soul and Body now
separated from God and Christ and all that be above in that Belssed Eternity,
must Never, Never be admitted near unto them. Oh cursed be the day that ever I
was ^orn! Cursed be tha^ folly and madness that brought me t^ this cursed
place! For here I lie under extremity of pain, which if it were for an Year or
two, or many Millions, and then end, would be in this respect exceeding heavy,
because it were to last so long, but that then shall be no longer, would make
it in the mean while to be the lighter; But when Eternity is added to
Extremity, nothing can be added to make me extremely, because to this extremity
I am Eternally Miserable. Oh! Eternity! Eternity! in my condition what is more
dreadful than Eternity? This Fire burns to all Eternity; the heavy strokes of
revenging Justice will be laid on me to all Eternity; I am banished from God
and Happiness to all Eternity. Oh Eternity! Eternity! nothing cuts m^ to the
heart, like the corroding thoughts of this Eternity. I am an object of the
Wrath of God, of the contempt of Angels, of the derision of Saints, of the
mockings of Devils, and cursed Fiends to all Eternity: I burn, but cannot be
consumed; I toss and roll, and cannot rest to all Eternity. Oh Eternity!
Eternity! thou art enough to break my heart, and make it die, but that it
cannot break nor dye to all Eternity. And if this shall be the doleful
Language, the direful Lamentations of Souls that went Christless out of Time
into Eternity, do ye while ye are in Time, Eye Eternity in all you do, and get
a Title of Eternal Happiness, or else when ye are in Eternity, ye shall
remember that in Time ye were forewarned, which warning because ye did not
take, shall be a vexation to your Hearts to all Eternity.

FINIS.

