A LETTER, About a Good Management under the Distemper of the MEASLES, at this
time Spreading in the Country. Here Published for the Benefit of the Poor, and
such as may want the help of Able Physicians.
My Good Friend,
THE Measles are a Distemper which in Europe ordinarily proves a Light Malady:
but in these parts of America it proves a very heavy Calamity; A Malady
Grievous to most, Mortal to many, and leaving pernicious Relics behind it in
All. Because the Sickness is now spreading in all ^^rts; and its Malignity
increases, as the Winter advances, and Good Physicians are not every where at
hand for the Relief of the Sick, and a very nice Management of the Case is
requisite: You are now addressed with a short Letter of Advice concerning it.

You will by no means forget the first and main Care, which is, To (...) an Eye
unto the Glorious GOD, who is, The Lord our Healer. You are no Stranger to
Exodus XV. 26. Psalm. CVIII. 12. and XLI. 4. One of the most Learned and Famous
Physicians that ever was in the World, the Great Kirstenius, has this reported
of him; He would ordinarily do nothing for his Patients, till he saw them first
hopefully Reconciled unto God.

It should be Remembered, That multitudes of Lives have been Saved, in the
Measles as well as in the Smallpox, by peoples being at last persuaded out of
the pernicious Methods of Over-doing, and Over-heating, and giving Things to
force Nature out of its own orderly way of proceeding. Before we go any
further, Let this Advice for the Sick, be principally attended to; Don't kill
'em! That is to say, With mischievous Kindness. Indeed, if we stopped here, and
said no more, this were enough to save more Lives, than our Wars have destroyed.

The Usual Symptoms of an Arrest from the Measles are, An Headake; Troubles in
the Eyes; a Dry Cough; an Oppression on the Breast or Stomach; or a pain there,
and in the Back and Limbs; and sometimes a Faintness, with Sickness, perhaps
Vomiting, or Griping and Purging; A Thirst, with a constant Fever, which is
mild at first, but grows high enough before it has done.

When such Symptoms of the Sickness, bid your Friend look about him, let him
not throw away his Life by not being Sick soon enough.

If the Symptoms are Gentle, and the person can yet claim his place at the
Table, or can bear to Sit up, Let him do so, till the Red Specks begin to show
themselves. But let him keep house, and keep warm; not dare to expose himself.
Let him feed sparingly and on a very Easy Food. Though an Hourly Appearance of
the Enemy may be Expected, yet be not in an Hurry. No Haste of your Hot Things:
Wait with a little patience. A little Brimstone finely powdered, as much as may
lie on a Sixpence, twice or thrice a day, may do more than Twelve penniworth
of Service.

If there be any Shocking Violence in the Symptoms, or the Red Specks begin to
make their Appearance, let the person take his Bed, and be sure to Lie very
warm, till all be over. In the Winter, Infants are best kept in the Arms.

Ordinarily, Sweating must not be indulged, much less provok^^* But a
comfortable warmth, I say, a convenient warmth, cannot be too much inculcated.
As many Coverings, as the Times that the word, Warmth, occurs in our now
speaking of it, may be little enough.

A Gentle Vomit in the beginning, has had much Benefit expected from it. Be
sure, if there be an Oppression by a Body of Phlegm, or an overcharged Stomach,
or any thing of a Nauseous Inclination, a Gentle Vomit is loudly called for.

If there be none of this, but only a pain in the Head, and Breast, Back, and
Limbs, a moderate Sweat may do. It may be procured, by the well-known
preparation which is become every bodies First Resort, Syrup of Saffron and
Treacle Water. A Tea of Sage, or of Rosemary, or a little Mull'd Cider, or Wine
with those Plants infused, will do well. Some can dispense, with an Infusion of
the Snakeweed. But others are for waving it, as too fiery and enraging in a
Distemper which is allowed by all to be an Inflammatory Fever. A Scabious Tea
will do. There is also a Composition of Hot Beer and Rum (for which they that
are Learned in such potions, do not want a Name,) this coarse Composition, has
been of Good Consequence. But it must be very weak; and it must not be used
often, if at all after the Measles appear in the Skin. The use of such Things
must be very Temperate; It may be continued until the full Eruption. But I
repeat the Admonition against, Over-doing and Over-heating. It will spoil all.

The Coarse Composition aforesaid, will best suit the pained Patient. But it
will hardly do so well, in Costive Bodies; or where the Breast is oppressed; or
where the Fever is high, or in too hot Constitutions. That Coarse Composition,
it is a very strange thing, that if it happen to Do a Little Good now and then,
people must presently be Bewitched with it!

Where the Patient is most prone to be faint, a Balm Tea, or a Glass of Wine a
little Saffronized, may do very well. Twenty or Thirty Drops of good Elixir
Proprietatis, have been sometimes very serviceable to them that could be
Masters of it, in this as well as many other Cases; But, this does not happen
to every man!

Your Patient is by this time full of the Measles. He Will be Thirsty. And what
shall he do?

If he will venture to drink any thing that is Cold, it will be well, if he
don't find, There is Death in the Pot.

Let him Drink a Tea of Balm, and Scabious. If he be Faint, or Sick, add a
little Saffron. If he be Loose, Let the Tea be of Sage, or of Rose-mary. If he
be Grip't, it may have Pennyroyal in it.

But what is to be done, if a Cough annoy him? Then a Pectoral of Maidenhair,
Anniseed, Liquorice, Raisins, and Figs. Liquorice alone, in a Tea, may do. Or,
if that cannot be had, a Syrup of Maidenhair, of Hyssop, and of Colts foot. The
Cough must not be stopped; you may allay it with Sugar-Candied, and with Buttered
Pills; and the Pectorals now prescribed. Or, Hot Honey alone will do admirably
well.

In hot Constitutions especially, a proper Drink would be, Water with Roasted
Apples in it. Some would add a little Ginger to it.

Hot Cider, if it be not hard, is an allowable Drink.

Toward the Height of the Distemper, Hyssop Tea may be preferrible to
Scabious. Let the Diet (through the whole course) be Thin enough; Gruels,
Caudles, Water-pottage, and the like; and given Often enough.

About the Third or Fourth Day, from the Eruption, will come the Crisis, which
you call, the Turning. And this will be often attended with Frightful
Circumstances; Grievous Oppression, Fainting, Vomiting, Purging, and the
Vapors, which is to say in one word, All that is terrible. But all will be
presently and easily relieved, if Heaven afford a Blessing to a proper
Management. Sometimes the sudden Disappearance of the Measles give a Needless
Fright. They have performed their course; but the frighted Patient flies to hot
Expellers, which endanger the raising of a putrefactive Heat, that had better
have been spared. Some have observed, That these Frightful Circumstances have
come with their greatest Fury, where the praevious use of Hot Things, which you
have been so warned about, has been Immoderate.

For the Oppression, take Wine and Oil, (or if the Patient be Loose, let him
take, Rum and Oil:) Give it pretty hot; The Dose two or three Spoonfuls every
Hour, as there may be Occasion; Or, take almost any thing, that will cause a
Vomit or two. A Gentle Vomit at this Time, has Reprieved many a Life, that was
just Expiring: Especially when there is a Collection of a wretched Phlegm, to
be Encountered. The Wine and Oil is preferrible to the Rum and Oil. And when a
Vomit would not relieve the Oppression, the Wine and Oil, with a Decoction of
the Cooling Seeds, has presently done it.

You have been taught already what you shall do for Faintness in your Patient.
Or, Give him a few Drops of the Spirit of Hartshorn

For his Vomiting and Purging, you need not go far for a Remedy. Give scalding
Hot water; Do this, even to nine or ten times, if it be needful, and as he can
bear it. Then give a little Hot Wine with a bit of toasted Bread. Or a little
of the Coarse Composition, you were formerly told of; Or another, that is akin
to that, and as well-known as that. In twenty four hours, more or less, it may
be hoped, the Storm will be over.

For a considerable while after this, the Patient must be mighty careful of
taking any Cold, and Eating too soon of any Flesh-meat. Let him not be well too
soon, and throw himself into a Fever, and throw away his Life, as many have
inconsiderately and presumptuously done. Let him take Time, and spend his Time,
in Studying to be Thankful.

If a Cough continue, let him fly to the usual Remedies. To take a spoonful of
shavings of Castile Soap in a Glass of Wine or Beer, for a few Nights
following, has been very successful for the cure or that inconvenience* If ^
Flux follow, whether a common, or a Bloody, a Tea made of Rhubarb, and
sweetened with a Syrup of Marshmallows, given daily, so much as to cause one or
two Stools, is a way to carry it safely off. The same Tea will also carry off
the Worms, that so often follow the Measles; especially in Children.

A Purge will be necessary for all, that would not have the Venom of the
Measles remaining in them, and followed with many Evil Consequences.

A Fever (perhaps that which they call, The Pleuretick) too often follows the
Measles. But for this, I do not now offer any Directions: A Skilful Physician
must be consulted withal.

All that is proposed in this Letter, is to direct in the plainest manner that
is possible, without any Terms of Art, and so that any Child may understand,
and any Nurse may administer, what is to be done, in the single Case of the
Measles: Which Malady, though it be not so Dangerous in it self perhaps, as many
others are, yet upon the Least Error in treating of it, proves as Deadly, as
most that the poor Children of Death fall before. I know not (and for some
Reasons I have read in a very Ancient Book, I may add, I care not,) what
Censures this Action may meet withal. I am sure, nothing but a pure Act of
Charity to the Poor, where Physicians are wanting, is now intended; nor any
thing offered, but what a Number of our most Eminent Physicians have approved
of, with their Charitable Wishes to have it Communicated; and the helping, though
of but one or two Miserables, weighs down, against all that may be said,
against the Freedom which this Letter has taken. I am satisfied, The Angel of
Bethesda would Esteem it so. I take Leave;

Your Hearty Friend and Servant.


