A DIALOGUE Between a Boston Man and a Country Man.
Boston. WE are like to be involved under great difficulties and bondage by the
Projecting Gentlemen of this Town.

1. The Charge of Incorporating this Town will be very Great, in Translating of
it into a City, a Town, Prison and Keeper, a Bridewell, and keeper of Two Great
Silver Mases, to be carried before the Mayor, and two Men to carry them; and a
Sword Bearer; a Clerk of the Court; a Clerk of the Market; a Recorder; a
Chamberlain; and our Paying for our Freedom, that was Freeborn and in bondage
to no Man.

2. That which is worst than all, is to the Trading part which is put under a
possibility of being reduced to manage but one Trade, which will be great
Confusion, if not Unsupportable in its difficulties, viz. The Shopkeepers
which do many of them occupy more than Twelve Trades; and the Handy crafts-men
as many as their Genus and Stock do lead them to, without Interruption.

3. The Laying us under difficulties with respect to our Provision, in that it
must be brought into the Market, and there Pay dues and duties, and observe our
Customs; which we believe they will not so long as Charlestown and Rexbury do
stand.

4. The taking away the Ancient Rights, and undoubted Property of our Voting at
Town Meetings, which we now enjoy.


Countryman. 1. I Have heard something of this before. and it was resented to
me to be for the Honor and Benefit of the Town, which I should be glad of, viz
The Mayor and Aldermen must be Men of considerable Substance in the World,
which will be for the Honor of your Town: at the least they must be worth a
1000 l.

2. They will be able by this to Regulate your Town better than now it is, and
to take Notice who comes into the Town; and to Let in or Keep out who they
please: for they hinder by your Charter all that will not Pay 5 l. for their
Freedom to the Mayor; and be also able to detect Vice, and to hinder such
Outtages as have broke out of late.

3. I should be willing to hope that they will not lay you under those
difficulties with respect to the Trading Part of the Town, although I confess it
is in their Power to Reduce each Man in the Town to Occupy but one Trade.

4. What if you lose your Privilege of Voting, as long as you have Men in of
Good Estates, and undoubted Fidelity, for they take off the trouble from you.

5. By this you reflect upon those Gentlemen that Composed your Charter.


Boston Answer I Always observed, That when any Great Project was in hand by a
Designing and Projecting People, it was covered over with some plausible Story:
If you look back no further than Dr. Sacheverell's days. That the Church was in
danger under the present Ministry, when in reality it was France was in danger,
and the Pretender was in danger: but Experience has taught us, That the Church
has really been in danger ever since that Ministry was turned out, until His
Majesty King GEORGE came to the Crown.


Boston. 1. I shall answer your Objections and leave it to your consideration.

2. Object. You say they will be better able to Regulate your Town.

I answer: I do not like the Rule of Regulating of it, not the Qualifications
of Mayor and Aldermen; for a Man may be worth a 1000 l. and yet have neither
Grace nor good Manner, but be a Coveteous, Man, that play (...) like a Wolf
among Sheep: An honest Man may not come into the Town without buying his
Freedom, and if one never so vile may his Freedom (...) his ^onde^ of 5 l. to
the Mayor: So now I think we have a much better way already, for a Man to give
to the Town Security.

Sir, I think you are mistaken about that, this would (...) such O^^^^ges that
has broken out of late, except it should give a Power of Devination whereby
they should Divine or Tell who they are; for when we know who they are we have
Power enough to detect them already.

3. You say, You are willing to hope that by your being Incorporated, they will
not lay the Trading part of the Town under such difficulties, a^^o they have
Power enough in their hands.

Sir, You mistake again, there is no grounds for you or us to hope so, except
you believe that Rich Coveteous Mayors will not love Money, not honest Mayors
be bounded by the Oath of God, nor Town-Sericants willing to Serve Warrants,
nor Counsollors willing to plead Cases. Furthermore, I can assure you, That a
Hatter in this Town which understands the Nature of a Corporation, I believe,
better than those Projecting Gentlemen did declare in my hearing, That if this
Place was Incorporated, they should have a good Trade (for from that day no
Shopkeeper might Sell a Hat:) and further added, That there was some
Shopkeeper did Sell more Hats than they, which was of the Trade.

4. You say, What if your do lose your Power of Voting at Town Meeting, as long
as you have Men in of Good Estates and undoubted Fidelity, to take off the
trouble from you.

Answer. Its hard to find them amongst us: but the common Maxim is, If you
would have your work well done do it yourself. I observe in that great and last
Speech of King WILLIAM, of Blessed Memory, to His Parliament, He Exhorts them
to hold the Balance of Europe in their hands; therefore I conclude, we ought
to be careful how we let go the Balance out of our hands.

5. You say, By this you reflect upon those Gentlemen, even Thirty that
Consulted and Composed this Charter.

I answer, It Is true, and if Men will fish in such dirty Waters, and bring or
endeavor to bring on their Neighbors such Calamities, they ought not to think
or take it hard to have dirt thrown in their Faces, for I see no ground to
believe that they were free from Proud Spirits, and a desire from their Places
to receive Greetings in the Market Places, and Coveteous, if not of finding the
Philosophers Stone; yet to have a fellow-feeling of every bodies Pocket in the
whole Town, and of being like to the Great Fish, of being lords over the Small,
to make them to observe their Motions, and also in part to live upon them.


Country Man. I thank you for giving me such light with respect to the Bondage
and Difficulties that as you say you are like to be brought under: I am of your
Mind, and I would offer you some Advice, which if followed, by the blessing of
God may prove effectual.

1. Be careful to bring up your North Nagatives,

2. Be sure that you choose a good Moderator.

3. That for the future there shall be no Public Business brought into a Town.
Meeting, except such and such Things as your Town shall think meet, or Warned
for before, and having Voted, then your Town Clerk to Record it, which if you
do, I doubt not but it will be for your good, and so you may hold the Balance
with those Projecting Gentlemen.


Boston. I thank you for your good Advice; and do believe that its our concern
to Observe it; seeing we have so Noble a Hero to follow as KING GEORGE, which
assured His Council, That there is not One among them shall more Earnestly
endeavor the Preservation of Property than My Self.


PRINTED FOR A PUBLIC GOOD. 1714


