Some REMARKS, On a Pretended Answer, To a Discourse concerning the
Common Prayer Worship. WITH An EXHORTATION to the Churches in New England, to
hold fast the Profession of their Faith without Wavering.

By Increase Mather, D.D.

Phil.i.17. -- Knowing that I am set for the Defense of the GOSPEL.

Necessarium est, ut qui falsis dicendis assueti sunt audiant vera, et qui quod
volunt effutiunt, etiam quae nollent intelligant.

Rivetj Jesuita vapulans. Printed for Nath. Hillier at the Princes Arm's in
Leaden-Hall-Street in London: and for the Booksellers in Boston, in
New England.

SOME Remarks, On a Pretended ANSWER.
THE Author of a Discourse written many Years ago, to Satisfy one who desired
to know, what were the Reasons, which made him ap^ehend (as the Presbyterian
Divines in ^^otland do) that the Word of God does not ^^^ow men to partake in
the Common Prayer ^orship, did not design to Concern himself ^y further about
it. He has had by him ^^ove Seven Years a Pretended Answer to ^^at Discourse,
Printed at London, 1693, but ^^rceiving it to be very Weak, and very Ma^^ious,
he resolved to make no Reply unto ^ only to Answer it with Silence, and de^^ved
Contempt. But some worthy Persons in England having desired that he would send
them some Remarks upon it, he has at last complied with their importunity;
notwithstanding the Author of a Pamphlet which will Confidently deny matters of
Fact, which all the World may presently prove and know to be true; and which
will particularly deny a Quoted Passage to be found, where every Eye may see it
at pleasure, must certainly be thought unworthy of an Answer, by all Persons of
Reason and Honor.

The Answerer in his Preface tells the world a ridiculous Story, That deluded
People broke into the Church Erected in Boston, for Worship according to the
Church of England, to search for the Images which they supposed Church of
England Men Worshipped. He that begins with such a Falsehood as this, it is easy
to guess what Truth he is like to Furnish us with. It Is no wonder that he goes
on to Charge the Discourse, he attempts to Answer, with Untruths; in affirming
that the Apocrypha Chapters are to be Read on the greatest Holy Days. But does
not the Common Prayer Book appoint them to be Read on Whit-sunday, Candlemas,
Saint Peter's Saint Michael, and all Saints? which by some are accounted among
the greatest Holy Days; and in some Places the greatest Concourse of People
uses to be on those Days, as they who should know it have informed me. And has
not the Liturgy ordered the abominable Magical Prescriptions, and Corrupt
Doctrine taught in the Apocrypha, to be Read as if it were agreeable to
Scripture? And does it not appoint some Apocrypha Chapters twice, nay, thrice
in the Year to be Read? A respect not put upon a great part of the Canonical
Scripture. And does it not Ordain; that when on an Holy Day, in which one of
them is to be Read, falls on such a Day as on which the Calender has appointed
a Canonical Chapter, that the Canonical shall give way to the Apocryphal? The
Answerer then has no reason to Complain of the Discourse, for saying that the
Liturgy does advance the Apocrypha above the Scriptures. It Is plain by what has
been mentioned. The Preface asserts, That it is the Opinion of the Author of the
Discourse, that all Forms of Prayer are Unlawful. That Is a notorious Slander;
like a great deal more in the Answer. There are many Witnesses, who can testify
that he has Publicly declared the Contrary. Only he judges, the imposition of
Forms (which is more than the bare use of them) to be Unlawful. The Preface
has another Untruth with the former, viz. That the Author of the Discourse is
against Reading of the Scripture in Public Congregations. He wishes it were
Read more there: Yet concurs with Didoclavius, Mr. Weems, Mr. Rutherford, and
other Divines in Scotland, that it would be most for Edification, that Public
Readings should be attended with Expositions or an Exhortation: Ezra ^.3.2
Chron. 17.9. Luke 4.16, 21. Act. 13.15. Thus it was among the Jews of old; and
among Christians in the Primitive Times: As is evident from the Writings of
Justin Martyr, Origin, Cyprian, Austin. These Remarks may suffice for his
Preface.

Both in his Preface and in his Book, he does endeavor to persuade the World,
that the Author of the Discourse, never compared the English with the Roman
Liturgy; and that he speaks falsely, when he affirms that he had done it, and
was satisfied. This Treatment of the Answerer is Base and Scandalous. I am
certain, that the Discourser Compared the English with the Roman Liturgy, and
another Minister was with him when he did it; although he did not think it worth
the while to read over every Word in both Liturgies: Nor did he ever give the
least hint, as if he had so misspent his Time, notwithstanding the Answerer does
so unreasonably insist upon it. An Hours Comparing them, will let any man see,
that the English is borrowed from the Romish, as to the Order and Substantial
parts of it; of which more by and by.

In the First Edition of the Discourse, Printed in New England, there is the
word Jephilleth; whenas there is no such Hebrew word: But it was the Printers
fault, who made Jephilleth instead of Tephilloth; which is the Hebrew word for
Prayers: And in the Second Edition of the Discourse, Printed at London 1689, it
is so expressed. Now this Answerer falls to Flouting at the Author of the
Discourse, for that which was the Error of the Printer. What ingenuous Man
would do so? But such mean discoveries of an evil Spirit are of a piece with
the rest of the Answer.

As for the Jews saying, (which he Quarrels at) viz. That Christians receive
their Tephilloth from Armillus; that is, their Prayer-Books from Antichrist:
Dr. Owen, in the Preface to his Discourse concerning the Spirit of Prayer, page
20. Mentions it, for the same reason and to the same purpose as the Author of
the Discourse has done; so that in Jeering him, he Jeers Dr. Owen too; a far
Better and more Learned Man than himself. The Answerer would make you believe,
that the Discourser is guilty of Scurrility and Profaneness, because of that
Expression; Broken Responds, and Shreds of Prayers, whereby they toss their
Prayers between the Priest and People. Those words are not Originally the
Discoursers; they are the words of a Person well known in the Church of God, in
his Testimony from the Scripture against the Common Prayer Book, page 72. Who
had them, or part of them from the Famous Cartwright. The Judicious Dr. Rule,
in his Rational defense of Nonconformity, page 229. has words of a like
import. But I take these Authors to be as free from all Scurrility and
Profaness, as ou^ Answerer. The Author of the Discourse affirms, that Bishop
Juell, in the defense of hi^ Apology, page 346. quotes and approves o^ those
words out of Leonicenus, viz. That the Priests of ^is used to wear Linen
Surplices, which seems to be derived from them to our time. T^ which the
Answerer replies; It is not in the Place he refers to; if any where. Thus does
h^ show his good Will to make the Discourse a Forger of Testimonies. Whereas, I
kno^ not how many have for their Satisfaction seen that Book; and in the Page
referred t^ found the words mentioned.

To proceed. The Discourse pleads again the use of the Cross in Baptism; that
t^ first users of it were Heretics viz Valentin and Montanus. This the
Answerer is lo^ to own. And for what reason? Because the some who used the
Cross, Wrote against t^ ^eretick Valentine! And is not this a weighty Reason?
Sure it is, we hear nothing of the ^se of the Cross, in any authentical Writer,
^ntil we come unto Valentine; he then must ^e the Father of it. And as he Begat
the Cross, so Montanus the Heretic first gave i^ ^redit among Christians.

We go on with our Remarks. It seems by his Answerer, that the Author of the
Dis^ourse is so very Profane, that he is loath to ^ell the World of it. His
words are, Hi^ ^stance of the Gallows looks so Profanely, that I ^all rather
pass it by, than Correct it. Speak ^ut man, and let us hear the worst of it.
The ^rofane words in the Discourse are these; ^udicious and Holy Men have
argued thus, If Child should Worship the Gallows on which his ^ather was
Hanged, that would manifest him to ^e Ungracious and Unnatural: the Papists in
A^oring the Cross, do as bad. This is the Pro^ane Passage. If Bellermine
Complains of the ^etro-brus^^ni, for saying; That the Cross ought ^o be as
Odious to Us, as is the Gallows to a Child ^n which his Father was Hanged: will
our An^werer join with him? It seems he does. But ^f the Discourser be Profane,
how Profane then, was the Great and Learned and eminently Pious, Robert Parker^
who says; It is as Unfit to make a Cross a Memorial of Christ, as for a Child
to make much of the Halter, wherewith his Father was Hanged.

One Remark more. The Answerer without reason accuses the Discourse, of
Trivial, Unintelligible, Dirty Reflections. Good words, I pray, Sir, if it be
as you say; Turpe est Doctore, ^um culpa re^arguit ipsum. But the Discourser is
not Conscious to himself of any such Reflections. If there had been any such,
his Antagonist would not have spared to mention them; which he does not,
because he could not. I have omitted to take notice, that the Answerer, page
21. Reflects on the Author of the Discourse, as a man without any Care or
Conscience. Which whether he is such an one, they that know him best, and among
whom he has been Preaching the Gospel for some Scores of Years, are best able
to judge. And I have omitted, that the Answerer Charge him with gross
Ignorance, and something worse; because he affirms, that Day, the Bishop of
Chichester, a dissembling Hypocrite was one concerned in Compiling the Liturgy.
That Day, was one of the Compilers, is related by Dr. Fuller in his Church
History, Book. 7. p. 386. That he was a dissembling Hypocrite, the Answerer
don't deny; nor, I suppose, will any one else, when he reads the account that
Fuller; and others have given of him. I omit also, that the Answerer unjustly
Complains of the Discourse, for affirming that the Preface to the Common Prayer
Book declares, that nothing is appointed to be read but the Pure Word of God,
or that which is evidently grounded on the same. He says the words are not so.
But I maintain that those are the very words in the Old Edition of the Liturgy;
and it was such an one that the Discourser then had by him.

It is now time to Argue the Point a little. The Discourser has Reasoned after
this manner; The Mass Book is the Papists Idol: Protestants should not p^^t
such Honor upon that Idol, as to take their Prayers and Ceremonies from it.
The Answerer Denies that the Mass Book is an Idol: and yet it is certain that
the Papists Idolize it. And do, they not Swear by it? See Howell's Letters,
page 218. And do they not say, that to Swear on a Protestant Bible, is no more
Swearing, than on Aesop's Fables? If the Mass Book is not (as among Papists it
is) an Idol forbidden in the First, it is an Idol forbidden in the Second
Commandment. All Images or Means of Worship not appointed by the Lord himself,
are such Idols. But the principal difference between the Discourser and the
Answerer, is on this Question, Whether the English Liturgy is not as to the
Substance of it, borrowed from the Papists? The Author of the Discourse ^^firms
that it is derived from the Romish; and that although there are things in the
Romish, which are not translated into English; and some things in the
Common Prayer Book, which are not in the other; nevertheless, that the
Substance of the latter is taken out of the former. The Answerer says, that
this is a gross Falsehood. If it is so, King James I. was very much mistaken,
when in a General Assembly of the Ministers in Scotland, he thus Expressed
himself; As for our Neighbor Kirk in England, their Service is an evil said
Mass in English; they want nothing of the Mass, but the lifting up. I Charge
you my Good People, Ministers, Pastors, Doctors, Elders, Nobles, Gentlemen to
stand to your Purity, and to Exhort the People to do the same. This Speech was
uttered by the King, August 4. 1590, as is testified by Mr. Calderwood, in his
History of Scotland, page 256. We find in our Martyr Books, Vol. 2. p. 667.
that King Edward the VI. in his Declaration to the Devonshire men who rose up
in Rebellion, in defense of the Popes Service Book, has these words; As for the
Service in the English Tongue, it perchance seems to you a New Service; yet
indeed it is no other but the Old, the same words in English, for NOTHING is
altered; but to speak with Knowledge that which was spoken with Ignorance, only
a few things taken out so fond, that it had been a Shame to have heard them in
English. If the Service were good in Latin, it is good in English.
Notwithstanding Two Kings have thus declared, our Answerer has the good Manners
to say, It is a gross Falsehood. But we shall produce some further Testimonies;
and then let the World see, who has Truth on his side, the Discourser or the
Answerer. Mr Thomas Gage having been a long time a Popish Priest, and so Versed
in the Roman Liturgy, is a very Competent Judge in this Case. Now he in the
First Edition of his English American, page 205. thus expresses himself; I
continued Twelve Months at my Uncles House in Catton, Searching (though unknown
to my Uncle and Kindred) into the Doctrine and Truth of the Gospel, Professed
in England; for which cause, I made many Journies to London; and then Privately
I resorted to some Churches, and especially to Paul's Church to see the Service
performed; and to hear the Word of God Preached; but so that I might not be
seen, known or discovered by any Papist. When in Paul's Church, I heard the
Organs, and the Music, and the Prayers, and the Collects, and saw the
Ceremonies at the Altar, I remembered Rome again; and perceived little
difference between the two Churches: I searched further into the Common Prayer,
and carried with me a Bible into the Country on purpose to Compare the
Prayers, Epistles (...) Gospels, with a Mass Book, which there I ^ at Command;
and I found no difference, ^ English and Latin, which made me wonder and to
acknowledge, that much remained still ^ Rome in the Church of England; and that
feared my Calling was not right. In the Latter Editions of Mr. Gage's Book,
such men as our Answerer, have caused these Passages to be left out; just as
the Papists use to serve the most profitable Passages in Books, with their
Index, Expurgatorius.

It may be, the Testimony of Popish Writers, will be of more Weight with such
Men as our Answerer, than any thing that Mr. Gage, or any other Presbyterian
can say. They shall have some of them. There are Popish Writers enough, that
will join with Dr. Mountegue, (an Arminian Protestant) who asserts, that their
Service is the same in most things, with the Church of Rome; and that the
differences are not so great, as that they should make any Separation. The
Author of the Discourse; at which the Answerer is in such a Rage, takes notice
that the Jesuit Carrier, owns that the Common Prayer and the Church-Catechism,
contains nothing contra^y to the Roman Service; and that another ^esuit, being
asked how he liked the Service (...) Paul's; replied, I have nothing against
it, but that it is done by your Priests. And that two Popish Intelligencers,
having seen the London and Canterbury Cathedral Services, was pleased with it;
declaring that it did very much Symbolize with that at Rome. I shall mention
but one Testimony more, which indeed is a Satirical one; it is that of Weston,
a Popish Bigot; who having said, That the Religion of Protestants was without
all Religion, because they have no Sacrifice, Priesthood, or Sacred Ceremonies.
He further adds; Some Protestants indeed, that they may not appear absolutely
Impious and Irreligious, use our Missal and Breviary; selecting what they
please thereof for the Rubric of their Liturgy; and to make the Form of their
Worship appear more Goodly, they have their Canonical Persons, forsooth, after
the Modes and Customs of the Church of Rome; their Caps, and Hoods, and
Holy Days, and such like stuff, which they say they found in the Synagogue of
Antichrist; by which very thing it is apparent, that the Religion of these
Protestants stands guilty of Stealth and Robbery, by which it first came into
the world; or if they will not be taken for Thieves, let them go for our Apes.
These with their whole Service, are derided; not only by ours, but also by
their own. The English seem to have driven the ^ope out of England ^n such
haste, that they forced him to leave his Clothes behind him; which they as
Fools in a play, put on with a kind of Pompous Ceremony of Triumph, and so lead
the Quire. A goodly Reformation it is, that they dare not carry through!

Our Answerer will tell you, if you will believe him, that there is not one
Collect or Prayer, in the English Liturgy, taken out of the Mass Book. But then
why do some Church men Plead for the Collects taken out of the Mass Book, that
those Prayers are in themselves Good; and therefore the taking them out of the
Mass Book, cannot make them to be Evil? Are not Six Canticles in the
Common Prayer Book, taken word for word from the Mass Book? But our Answerer
has the Front to tell us, that Papists will not Communicate in our Liturgy. He
would persuade us, that they cannot endure the Common Prayer Book. But how then
did Parpalio, the Popes Legate, offer to Queen Elizabeth, in the Popes Name,
that the English Liturgy should be Confirmed by his Holiness? And how then does
Dr. Heylen (whom I take to be one of this Answerer's Brethren) affirm, that for
several Years, Papists continued in Communion with the Church of England; and
that when they did forsake it, 'twas not because they approved not of our
Liturgy; but upon Politic Considerations, and because the Pope had
Excommunicated the Queen. If Papists are such terrible Enemies to the
Common Prayer Book as this Answerer would make us believe, how does Bishop
Hall, in his Quo vadis, say, That his Eyes and Ears can testify with what
Applause the Catholics entertained the New translated Liturgy of our Church?
And does not Dr. Moor, in his Mystery of Iniquity, page 468. say, It is well
known, that for some space of Years, the Catholics joined in Public Prayer
and Service? But to put an end to this Dispute, Whether the English Liturgy is
(as to the Substantials of it) taken out of the Romish: The Truth will be as
clear as the Light of the Sun, Obsignatis Tabellis. Let us then now Compare
them before we go any further, and see with our Eyes, whether it be not so. Mr.
Delaune, in his Plea for the Nonconformists, has done it to our hands. He has
truly observed, that as to the Time of Worship, the Roman Breviary and Calendar
do divide their Year into Feasts, Vigils, Fasts, and Working-days: The English
Liturgy takes these directly from them, dividing their Calendar by them, both
as to Feasts, Vigils, Fasts, and Working-days. It is true, that they have more
Feasts than we; but all ours are found in theirs, and taken from them. In the
Popes Liturgy, their Moveable Feasts are, (1.) Their Easter Day, on which the
rest depend; which is to be the first Sunday after the first Full Moon, which
happens next after the Twenty-first of March. (2.) Their Advent Sunday, which
is always the nearest Sunday to the Feast of St. Andrew. (3.) Their
Septuagesima Sunday, nine Weeks before Easter. (4.) Their Sexagesima Sunday,
eight Weeks before Easter. (5.) Their Quinquagesima Sunday, seven Weeks before
Easter. (6.) Their Quadrigesima Sunday, six Weeks before Easter. (7.) Their
Rogation Sunday, five Weeks after Easter. (8.) Their Ascension Day, which is
forty Days after Easter. (9.) Their Whit-Sunday with a Vigil, seven Weeks after
Easter. (10.) Their Trinity Sunday, eight Weeks after Easter, and Twenty-four
Sundays after Trinity. Thus it is ordered in the Roman Liturgy; and it is
directly so in the English. And if we Consider the Twenty-six fixed Feasts,
appointed in the Common Prayer Book, they are all observed on the very same Day
in the Popes, as in the English Liturgy. The Days appointed for the Honor of
St. Matthias, St. Mark, and the other Apostles, they are all the same with
those in the Popish Calendar. Whether it be not Idolatry to appoint Days to be
observed in Honor (...), we shall not here Dispute; nor can there be any
Reason given, why Days should not be Consecrated to Abraham, Moses, Samuel, and
the Prophets, as well as to the Apostles; only that the Pope has not Canonized
the former and has the latter. If we should proceed to Consider Rites and
Ceremonies: In the Popes Liturgy, men are directed to stand at the Singing of
Quicunque vult, and at the Recitation of Athanasius's Creed, and to Kneel at
the receiving the Eucharist; that the Priest and People shall read Psalms
alternately, Verse by Verse, with other Rites too many to be mentioned. Does
not the English Liturgy do just the same? Why then does our Answerer endeavor
to make the World believe, that the English Liturgy is not borrowed from the
Roman? Mr. Delaune has moreover showed in Thirteen Particulars, that the
English Pontificial, is taken out of the Roman; and that in Ordination of the
Priesthood, we Symbolize with them. He might therefore upon good grounds
affirm, as he does, page 31. The Public Worship and Service contained in the
English Liturgy, is the same, in the main Body and Essentials, chiefest
Materials, Frame and Order with that of the Popish; and whosoever will take
the pains to search into the Popish Breviary, Ritual, Missal, and Pontificial,
which Four Comprehend their whole Liturgy; will find, though there may be some
Alterations and Variations in several Particulars, yet the Substance, chief
Materials, and Order are the same, and that they are taken out of theirs, viz.
Collects, Mat^ins, Even Songs, Epistles, Gospels, Creeds, Litanies,
Consecration, Administration of Sacraments, Baptism of Infants, with Gossips to
answer for them, Kneeling at the Altar, Confiteor, Absolution, Confirmation,
Burial, Matrimony, Visitation of the Sick, Ordination of Archbishops, Bishops,
etc. These things are Plain and Incontestable.

Some Object, That the Reformed Churches have their Public Liturgies. It Is
true, some of them have so, without any Imposition. But the most Learned
Voctius, discoursing of Liturgies, says, that none used in any Protestant
Church does Symbolize with Rome like the English. Dr. Bilson, (a Famous
Episcopal Divine) speaks the Truth when he says, That the Reformed Churches are
so far from admitting a full Dose of Papists Heresies, that they can by no
means digrest a Dram of their Ceremonies.

Thus we have seen the First Argument in the Discourse Vindicated: As for the
rest, not (...) them is Enervated by any thing (...) by this Answerer. He has
offered nothing but what has been Replied unto more pl^^n Twenty times, by ^
earned Nonconformists; which may justly give a Supersedeas to my further
Proceeding therein: For if I should, I shall but Actum Agere.

As for the Second Question in the Discourse, about Swearing by the Book; why
should any Reply be made to such an Answerer, as maintains, that when the
Papists in Swearing Pray to the holy Evangelists to help them, they are not
guilty of Idolatry? I shall at present only say further, that Athanasius in
Swearing, would not use any other Rite besides that of lifting up the Hand to
Heaven. And the Martyr Mr. William Thorp, refused to comply with the usual Mode
of Swearing; and he says, that Chrysostom was against the Book Oathe, as he
styles it: He thus Argues; If I touch the Book, the meaning of that Ceremony is
nothing else but that I Swear by it; whenas it is not Lawful to Swear by any
Creature, Vid. Fox Martyrol. Vol. I. Page 705. In Scotland, and in other
Reformed Churches, that Ceremony is not used; and in our own Courts of
Admiralty, another Form of Swearing is frequently practiced. Many in England
many Years since, were Scrupulous about that Mode in Swearing. In the Year
1649, in the Oath which was Enjoined on Mayors and other Magistrates, a Proviso
was inserted as to the Mode of Swearing, that ^o Doubting Consciences might not
be Ensnared. Vid. Scobel's Collections, Chap. 51. This Mode of Swearing is at
best, a Superstitious piece of Judaism. For the Jews who indulge themselves in
Swearing by Creatures, will frequently Swear [ Bethorah] by the Law, as is
declared by their R. David, on Isa. 8.20. And at this Day, in Swearing they ^se
to lay their Hands on the Books of Moses; and suppose that an Oath has no
Obligation, that it is no Oath except Sworn on the Book of the Law. Thence is
the Custom of laying the Hand on the Evangelists in Swearing derived to us; as
Drusius, and other Learned Men have Conjectured. Vid. Drus. de Trib. Sect. Lib.
II. Cap. 16. p. 109. Leusden Philol. Hebr. p.423. I might have mentioned
several other Martyrs and Eminent Confessors, who would not Conform to this
Mode of Swearing. Nor is there any Law to Enforce it, only Custom.

Concerning the Name of this Anonymous Answerer, I list not to Enquire. Some
say he is a Bishop. If he is a Bishop, I doubt not but that there have been
many better Bishops in New England than he; and I hope, there are such still.
But I cannot easily Believe that he is one. It is beneath the Gravity and
Learning which becomes a Bishop, to Write in such a petulant Style. I should
rather by his Book, take him to be some High Flyer, who hopes for Preferment by
his Bigottry to the Liturgy and Ceremonies. No Man of Honor could act so Mean
or so Rude a part, as appears in the Answer from first to last; whereof the
Reader has seen a little scantling. Sure I am, that many Worthy Conformists
have been of another and a better Spirit, than this man is of. Great Divines of
the Church of England, who have esteemed the Ceremonies to be indifferent
things, and not (as the Nonconformists believe) Transgressions of the Second
Commandment, nevertheless, were willing to have them removed; and the many
Offensive things in the Common Prayer Book altered. This is true, not only
concerning Hooper, and Coverdale, and Latimer, and our Proto-martyr Rogers, and
others, when the Liturgy was first Published in English, and was then a good
step toward Reformation; but in the latter end of Queen Elizabeth's Reign, Mr.
Deering a Renowned Conformist, Writes thus; The Similitude which the
Common Prayer Book has with the Form of Prayer which the Papists use, I think
declines from the Equity of the Laws in the VIIth. and in the XIIth. Chapters
of Deuteronomy. Great inconvenience has followed this Book, while it has
maintained an Unlearned Ministry. Also in the last Century, there was (as is by
Mr. Delaune related, p 4^.) a Paper presented to the Parliament by Archbishop
Usher, Dr. Williams Bishop of Lincoln, Dr. Prideaux, who was afterward Bishop
of Worcester, Dr. Browning Bishop of Exeter, Dr. Hacket Bishop of Coventry and
Lichfield, Dr. Ward, Dr. Featly, etc. Which Paper Subscribed by those Learned
Episcopal Divines, contained five and Thirty Exceptions against several things
in the Liturgy, and among others, against the Corrupt Translations of the
Epistles, and Gospels, and Psalms, and against the Apochrypha enjoined to be
Read in the Lessons, against Singing Service, against adding Gloria Patri to
the Psalms, against Hymns taken out of the Mass Book, against Priestly
vestments, against the Sign of the Cross in Baptism, which they say might as
well be omitted as the Oil which was heretofore its Concomitant. But our
Answerer stands to justify all these things, which those Worthy Prelates and
Doctors would have had Reformed. We have done with him.

Boston March 4. 1701, 2.

AND now, O you Churches of Christ in New England, Hold fast the Profession of
your Faith without Wavering. Be steadfast in your Religion, both as to the
Faith, and as to the Order of the Gospel. Buy the Truth, but Sell it not.
Remember what it was your Fathers came into this Wilderness to see. They did
not (as Conformists now do) come into a fruitful Land to get Estates, but they
ventured their own Lives and the Lives of their Children over a vast Ocean, to
Encounter with the Straits and Difficulties of a Barren Howling Wilderness: An
undertaking (as one truly speaks of it) hardly to be paralel'd, except in that
of their Father Abraham, out of Vr of the Chaldees, or of his Posterity out of
Egypt. They Expected nothing but poverty and mean things whilst in this World.
And all these Sufferings they very willingly were subject to, for no other
reason, but that so they and their Posterity might be freed from the
Superstitions of the Common Prayer Book. An Ignorant Young Man, has the
Confidence (I should have said the Impudence) to tell you in Print, that your
Fathers did not come hither on any such account. He will also tell you, that
your Vulgar Capacities, cannot distinguish between Truth and Falsehood, Like as
the Papists, will not allow you to have a judgment of Discretion, and therefore
you must Believe as the Church Believes. But if your Fathers did not come to
New England for their Nonconformity, what else was it for? There are many still
living who can remember that their Fathers have often informed them, that it
was their dissatisfaction with the Liturgy and the Worship of it, which induced
them to leave their Native Land. My Reverend Father (who was for many years the
Renowned Teacher of the Church in Dorchester) did frequently declare it to his
Children, both to those he brought with him, and to those born here. And in the
Narrative of his Life Printed above 40 Years since, there is inserted the
Reasons which he left written with his own hand, that caused him to Transport
himself and Family from Old-England to New England, viz. That it was to remove
from a Corrupt Church to a Purer, from a Church where Discipline is Wanting, to
a Church where it may be Enjoyed, from a Land where the Truth and the
Professors of it were Persecuted, to a Land of more Quietness. Other Ministers
of Christ by whom Churches were first Planted in New England were of the same
Principles, and so likewise the People who came with them.

Mr. Brightman above an hundred years since, Commenting on those words, Rev.
17.3. He carried me into the Wilderness, and I saw, etc. Conjectured that the
Time would come, when some Faithful Servants of Christ in a Wilderness, would
make the clearest discoveries of those Truths which are most opposite to the
Romish Apostasy, which some have thought has been fulfilled when Churches were
Erected in New England, Eminent for their Purity and Piety. These Churches were
Planted Noble Vines. God grant they may Ever be in respect of Purity and
Holiness as once they were. Dr. Ames was wont to say, that if there were any
Churches on the Earth which Christ would own, they were the Churches in
New England, and therefore had purposed to dye among them, but when ready for
his voyage hither, Death removed him to the Church Triumphant. When our Fathers
showed such love to Christ, as to follow him into a Wilderness, and there were
Holiness to the Lord, as Jer.2.2, 3. He rewarded them with showing to them the
form of his House, and the fashion thereof, the goings out thereof, and the
comings in thereof, and all the Laws thereof. It was not (as has often eno'
been said) with respect to Fundamental Articles of Faith that your Fathers came
hither. For as to the Essentials of Religion, they concurred with the Articles
owned by the Church of England, and therefore were willing to Own that which is
the true Church of England, (but not the Apostates in it) to be their Mother,
whose Breasts had nourished them; but they came to New England, purely on the
account of Discipline and the Spiritual Government of Christ in his Church, of
which as a Legacy to their Posterity, they have left us a Platform gathered out
of the Word of God. All and only such Officers, as that word has Ordained, have
been owned by us. Our Bishops, or Elders (for those are in Scriptural Language
the same) have been Scripture ones; Men able to Teach, Blameless, Vigilant, not
given to filthy Luore. Lord Bishops we have had none, nor shall we own any such
to be of the Lord's Institution, Mar.10.42, 43. I have seen a Book with that
Title, Lord Bishops, none of the Lord's Bishops. Memorable are the words of our
Famous Mr. Norton, in his last Election Sermon; I may say thus much, and pardon
my Speech, a more yielding Ministry unto the People, I believe is not in the
World. Our Churches as to the matter of them, consist of visible Saints, which
made them Golden Candlesticks. The gates of our Churches have been set open for
the Righteous Nation to enter in. No ungodly persons (who were visibly such)
have been admitted into our Communion. If any crept in unawares, and afterward
by Scandalous practices discovered their Hypocrysy, the holy Discipline of
Christ purged the Church of them. The Liturgy confesses, that there was a Godly
Discipline in the Primitive Churches, and that it is much to be desired, that it
might be restored, and yet for these 150 years, they have done nothing to
restore it. The Prelatists would Excommunicate Men because they were as^ to Sin
against their Consciences, but they might be Vicious, and Profane, Drunkards,
Swearers, Sabbath Breakers, and though never so Debauched, no Excommunication, no
Discipline exercised toward them. And if a Man were liable to Censures for
offending against their Ceremonies or Canons, he might with Money buy off his
Excommunication, as Mr. Hickeringill did his for a Guinea, for which he says
merrily, that he should love a Guinea the better for it as long as he Lived.
The Discipline practiced in the Churches of New England is not like this. But
as Tertullian says, the Discipline in the Primitive Churches was, a little
Resemblance of the great Day of Judgment to come. In a word, All and only
Divine Institutions have been received among us, and those Administered to the
proper duly qualified Subjects of them, and this according to the Simplicity of
the Gospel, without any Mixture of Popish Ceremonies, or Humane Inventions.
There are some that will tell you, that you have no true Ministers, nor
Churches, nor Baptism, nor Sacrament, because your Ministers have had no
Ordination. But they have been Ordained as Timothy (whom Prelates pretend to be
an Archbishop,) was, with the laying on of the hands of the Presbytery, 1 Timothy.4.14. Bell^^^ne says, that Protestants have no true Mini^^^s among them,
because they have not received Ordination by the Imposition of a Bishops hands
from the Apostles Successively. And Prelatists say the same, but that is at
once to Unchurch and Unchristian all the Churches and Christians in the world*
excepting some in England, and Ireland, and the Church of Rome. The Ordination
of a Presbyter is as Valid ^s that of a Bishops. Does not the excellent Bishop
Juel s^^, that if it is Heresy to Maintain that a Bishop and a Presbyter are
the same, then we must make the Apostle Paul to be an Heretic? There have been
Bishops Ordained by Presbyters. Luther and Melancton, who were no mo^^ (...)
Presbyters, Ordained se^^^^ The (...) ^^^^gy have (...) intend^^^ who are
Shadows of Bishops, these in the beginning of the Reformation were Ordained by
Presbyters. In Denmark, Bugenhagius, who was the great Instrument of
Reformation in that Kingdom, and was a mere Presbyter, Ordained Seven Bishops
at one time. In Sweden there is an Archbishop and Seven Bishops. The first
Protestant Bishops there had their Ordination from Presbyters. A Learned
Lutheran, lately a Professor in Wittenberg, asserts, that a Presbyter has equal
power of Ordination with a Bishop; and complains of Papists for giving the sole
power of Ordination to Prelates, and with him those English Divines who plead
for it, are Papa^ur^em^^^ Britanni. The Lutherans are the more concerned, for
that Jesuits endeavor to persuade those Protestants that they have no true
Churches among them, because their Ministers are Ordained by Super-intend^^s
who are not a distinct Order from Presbyters. To make all Ordinations Invalid
and Null except Episcopal ones, and to make Ordination Essential to a True
Minister, does not destroy the Ministers and Churches of New England only, but
in Scotland, in France, in Switzerland, ^n Holland, in Germany, in D^^mark, and
^we^en; that in short, a^^ the Protestant Churches in the World besides
themselves. This makes many serious Men, begin to think, whether they who thus
renounce Communion with all the Reformed Churches in the World (though very
liberal in calling others by the name of Schismatics) are not guilty of a
Schism, wherein they shut themselves out of the True Visible Catholic Church
of Christ, and ought therefore to be Forsaken of all that would adhere to that.
Is it reasonable that a Popish Priest who has received no Ordination, but from
the Ministers of Antichrist, shall be capable of Preferment without any other
Ordination, but a Protestant Minister Ordained by Presbyters may not without a
Reordination? We have been Taught better. Wherefore, O Churches of New England
remember how you have received, and heard, and hold fast. Let no Temptation
shake you from your stedfastness. Shall such Churches Degenerate into Strange
Vines? Shall their Posterity embrace such Superstitions and Corruptions in the
Worship of God, as their Fathers would r^^her have died than complied with
them? Most certainly it is at this day a duty incumbent on the Ministers of
God, to endeavor that their People may be Enlightened with Truth, left shortly
it should be too late, and some in their Flocks depart from the Pure and Holy
ways of the Lord, through Ignorance; and the guilt of their Apostasy lie at their
Ministers door. Sometimes a swift Apostasy from the Purity of Worship overtakes
a People. I very often think of what is written, Judge. 2.17. They turned
quickly out of the way, which their Fathers walked in, obeying the Commands of
the Lord; but they did not so. If the Lord should remove but a few of his
Eminent Servants from among us, there is cause to fear there will be a great
Defection Quickly. The Children of Israel kept to their Religion all the days
of Joshua, and of the Elders that outlived Joshua, but then there arose another
Generation, which forsook the God of their Fathers. Let us pray that there may
not such a Generation rise up in New England, and use our best endeavors to
prevent it. The Purest Churches are apt to degenerate. We find that the
Churches Planted by the Apostles themselves did so. Whilst the Apostles were
yet living, Religion decayed in some of the Churches, some of them left their
first love, and there was a scandalous neglect of Discipline in others of them.
In the Autumn of the Apostles Age (as an Eminent Divine expresses it) there
was a great Falling among Professors of the true Religion. It is an old
observation, that the Christian Church continued a Virgist during the
Apostolical Age, but in the next Age, Corruptions and Superstitions began. What
a contest was there about the day when Easter should be observed? And yet
Ireneus says, that the custom of observing that Day, crept into the Church
through Ignorance. And Socrates in his Ecclesiastical History, acknowledges, that
neither our Savior, nor his Apostles, did Ordain the keeping of that Holi-day.
In Justin Martyrs time, they mixed Water with the Wine at the Lord's Supper,
and the Deacons carried the Elements to absent Persons; neither of which
practices was according to Divine Institution. Nevertheless, these Innovations
crept into the Churches within 50 years after the Apostles were all dead. The
Sacrament of Baptism was corrupted, with the additions of the Cross and Oil,
Milk, Honey, and Superstitious Garments, in the early Ages of Christianity. Of
so little weight is the pretense of Antiquity, without Scripture, which
Prelatists use to boast of Consuetudo sine veritate verustas erroris est, Cypr.
Such Considerations as these, should make us the more Cautious and Vigilant
against Degeneracy in Religion. As yet our Temptations to Apostasy, or
Conformity are not great, and therefore our Sin in it will be the more
unreasonable and inexcusable. By means of the Late Happy Revolution, our
Nonconformists Brethren in England have their Religious Liberties confirmed by
Law. Dr. Cressener (a worthy Conformist) speaking of the Indulgence granted to
Dissenters, has these words, whatsoever others may intend or design by this
Liberty of Conscience, I cannot believe that it will ever be recalled in
England, as long as the world stands. It is like to be of more lasting
continuance, than Magna Charta. To this I shall only say, Oh! Vtinam. As for
the Severe Penal Laws against Dissenters, they neither do nor ever did they
extend to the Plantations. Shall we forsake the pure Worship of Christ before
it comes to Suffering for it? If to gain Wordly advantages we shall Sin against
our Light, what will we do if it should come to Fire and Faggot? What if Popery
should take another turn in our Nation? That is not impossible; it is not long
since we were in danger of it. But will Popery return without Persecution?
Conformity will not secure us from the rage of Popery. Bloody Papists will no
more spare a Godly Conformist, than a Nonconformist. Nay, they will endeavor
to extirpate the Name of a Protestant. Dr. Usher's Prophecy has been much
spoken of, what if it should at last be accomplished? I pass by Mr. Archers
Opinion, who thinks the Pope will regain all that he has lost in Europe. Good
Men in England of all persuasions, are afraid that the Crying Sins of a Nation
which hates to be reformed, will pull down very desolating Judgments, and
provoke God to say, Shall not my Soul be avenged on such a Nation as this? What
greater vengeance can their come on the Nation than a return of Popery? It
would better become us to prepare for Suffering, than to think to escape by
sinning against our Light. It may be they that will save their Lives, or
Estates, or Places, shall lose them and a good Conscience, and a good Name
among the People of God, and be infamous to all Posterity; as the celebrated
Pern is for his time-serving. It Is hoped upon Scripture ground, that a glorious
day for the Church of Christ is approaching, and not far off, but how dark the
Night will be ere the Day break, who can say? If any of us shall be found among
the last Apostates, we shall be the unhappiest Men that ever were in the world.
Say not Liturgies and Ceremonies are small matters, and we had better Conform
though against our Consciences, than Suffer for such Trifles. Know we not, that
the faithful Servants of Jesus Christ, have chosen to submit to the Extremest
Sufferings, rather than to sin, though it were but in a circumstance of Divine
Worship? Did not the Hebrew Martyrs choose to be tortured to death, rather than
to transgress a Precept of the Ceremonial Law? Heb. 11.35. Oh! that Men would
consider the words of Christ, Mat. 5.19. Whosoever shall break one of these
least Commandments, and shall teach Men so, he shall be called the least in the
Kingdom of Heaven. What do we think of our Fathers, who left a pleasant Land,
and some of them great Estates, to live meanly in this Patmos, only because
they were Conscientiously afraid of the Sin of Conformity? What do we think of
such Men as Mr. Cotton, Mr. Hooker, Mr. Chancey, Mr. Davenport Mr Norton, and
many other eminent Ministers of God, who underwent a voluntary Exilement into
this Wilderness? Were not they men of uncomon Leaving and Holiness? And have
not they set us an Example of Suffering for Nonconformity? The cause which
Nonconformists appear in the defense of, is worth Suffering for, worth Dying
for. Some faithful Witnesses of Christ have been cast into Prison and dyed
there, for this their Testimony. So it was with Mr. Vdal, in a former Age, for
being the Author of a Book called, A demonstration of the Discipline which
Christ has prescribed in his Word. And yet a Conformist writer gives this
Character of Mr. Vdal, that he was a Learned Man, blameless in his Life,
powerful in his Praying, and no less profitable than painful in his Preaching.
The like is to be said of Mr. Jenkins, Mr. Thomson, Mr. Delaune, and many
others, in our days, whose Blood will be remembered in the day that God shall
make Inquisition for Blood. And when all the Righteous Blood which has been
shed, from the Blood of Abel unto this day, shall come upon an Antichristian
Persecuting Generatinn, as it will as soo^ as they have filled up the measure
of their Fathers. And considering the goodness of the cause, the Author of the
Discourse, does not desire to have his Name concealed.

Me, me! adsum qui feci, in me Convertite ferrum.

He has been greatly pleased with those words of his Brother, in his Sermons on
the Types, (p. 275. in the 1st. Edit.) speaking of the evil of promiscuous
Communion and carnal Mixtures in Church-Society: This (says he) is a thing so
clear throughout the whole Scriptures, that were I to choose what Death I would
dye, I think I could never choose to dye in a better cause, than for bearing
witness to this Truth. And yet this truth is but a small part of those truths
the Author of the Discourse has witnessed unto, and is willing to leave the
world with this Testimony. He knows that for what he has done, he shall suffer
Persecution, at least from the Tongues of Men, from the Reproach of Moab, and
the Revilings of the Children of Ammon. But he remembers that Christ has said,
Blessed are you when Men shall Revile you, and Persecute you, and shall say all
manner of evil against you falsely for my sake. Rejoice and be exceeding glad;
for great is your reward in Heaven: for so Persecuted they the Prophets which
were before you.

AN Appendix, CONTAINING Some REMARKS, ON A BOOK Written by the Bishop OF DERRY.

Sold by Several of the Booksellers in Boston. M D CC XIII.

SOME Remarks, ON A BOOK Written by the Bishop of DERRY.
AMongst all the Books written against Nonconformists, I have seen none so
plausible as that Published by Dr. King, the Bishop of Londonderry. He does
not Write (like the Pretender to Answer a small Discourse concerning the
Liturgy) with Rancor, but with Candor, becoming a Christian, and a Gentleman.
Were I inclined to make a large Reply to him, I would treat him with all
possible Respect and Deference. Cum Boni^ been agier oporfet. But there is no
need for me, or any one else to answer him, since it has been done to good
purpose already, at least three times by three several hands, to which the
Bishop has made no Reply, so far as I understand. A Nameless Author of the
Presbyterian Persuasion, returned a solid Answer to him in the Year 1701. Also
Mr. Boyse, (who was Born in New England, and has been a Judicious and Worthy
Minister in Dublin for many years, has given so fair and full an Answer to him,
as there needs nothing more. The Bishop seems to have a notable Art at making
Candida de nigris, et de Cande^ti^us Atra, his own Opinion white, and the
Dissenters black: But Mr. Boyse has clearly discovered the Sophistry of his
arguing. Likewise Mr. Kreighton, (a Scotch Divine in Ireland) has notably
refuted him. I am not the Owner of that Book, some time since I had only a
Cursory view of it. I remember he Complains the Bishop had been misinformed
concerning some Principles and Practices of the Nonconformists, and that he has
done them wrong in Publishing those things. As to what the Bishop objects
against their no^ Reading the Scripture in their Congregations, Mr. Kreighton
replies, that the Sermon^ of Nonconformists are full of Scripture, tha^
sometimes they have as many Scripture quoted in a Sermon, as there are Verses
in a whole Chapter: But the Harangues of the Conformists in that part of
Ireland, have ^^tle Scripture in them. Nay, he says, they despise a Sermon if
it is well Confirmed with Scripture. Moreover he declares, that the
Presbyterians do not only read some part of the Scripture in their
Congregations, (as the Churchmen do) but the whole Bible, from Genesis to the
Revelation inclusively: Only they do it not all within the Compass of one year;
and when they read a Chapter, it is accompanied with some Explication or
Application, as was usual among the Lord's People under the Old Testament, and
among Christians in the Primitive Times. I remember also that he Objects
against the Church-Catechism, that there are some things in it not Orthodox,
and that it is a very defective Composure, not to be compared with the
Assemblies Catechism. He argues thus, that Catechism in which there is nothing
^^^tioned, concerning the Person of our Lord Jesus Christ, nor concerning his
Offices, is surely a very defective Catechism: But this is true of the Church
Catechism. If the Books referred unto were duly read and considered, I doubt
not b^t many would thereby be Confirmed in their N^^^onformity, notwithstanding
all the Bishops plausible pretentions to have the truth on his ^ide. But page,
78. He advises Dissenting Ministers to Discourage their People from Reading the
Books written by Dr. Owen, Mr. Bax^er, Mr. Alsop, and Mr. Boyse, alleging
that they are Independents, in which he is mistaken; for these are all (except
Dr. Ow^^) known Presbyterians. For him to Dissw^de Men from Reading what they
have written, under a groundless pretense of their being Independents; (which
if they were so^ ^t makes no matter) is not fair. But it ha^ been the manner of
Conformists to misre^present the Arguments of their Antagonist^ whereby they
have wronged the Cause o^ Nonconformity, and Confirmed their ow^ Conformity.
Witness for this that Scholastical Divine, Mr. Henry Ieans, who was for some
time a Conformist, and wrote against the Nonconformists, but when he
impart^ally read and weighed their Arguments o^ both sides, he became a
Strenuous Nonconformist. Hear his words, for they are wort^ hearing. In the
second part of his Schola^tical and Practical Divinity, page 94. I rea^ (says
he) all such Books of Nonconformists, ^ I c^uld p^ocure; upon perusal, I soon
found th^^ their Adversaries must Disingenuously misr^presented all that they
said, that they came a^ (...) demning such Irreverence and Irreligion. Only he
seems to Run into another Extreme, in making the posture of Kneeling, to be
Necessary in Prayer, for Standing al^^ is a Praying Posture. Job stood up when
^e Prayed, Job 30.20. Mark 11.25. When you stand Praying, forgive. The Jews
have a Celebrated Saying, That without Standing, (they mean Praying) the World
would not stand. Why then should Kneeling, tho very suitable and convenient in
Private Prayers, be urged in Public Worship? As ^or Kneeling at the Sacrament,
which he is zealous for, we dare not do it. Our Savior Christ has taught us
otherwise by his own Example with his Apostles. Papists say, that if they did
not believe that the Bread is Transubstantiated into the very Body of Christ,
they would sooner be torn in pieces, than Kneel at the Sacrament. It is
certain, that the Primitive Christians did not so. For in the Nicene Council,
near upon fourteen hundred years ^^o, there was a Decree (it is in the 20th
Canon) that Christians shall not in any Chur ^^ay Kneeling, but Standing on the
Lord's Day. But undoubtedly they had the Lords Supper on the Lord's Day. I
cannot by searching, ^^^d, that Kneeling before the Bread was En^^yned before
Antichrist was come to his height, nor for some time after that. But ^ design
not an Answer to all that is Exceptionable in the Book written by this Right
Reverend Doctor; Others having done it with solidity and strength of Argument.
The last Edition of his Book Printed in Boston is much disgraced, with a very
foolish Preface set before it, by a Young Man, who in his Satirical Charity
fleers at me for being an Old Man, and as he says forgetful. I have no reason
to boast of a great memory, yet humbly to acknowledge the singular mercy of
God, that I am no more forgetful, when obliviosa Senectus, a Great Old Age has
overtaken me. I know not but that he, for all his Youth may be forgetful too.
He supposes he may say to me, fugisti qui tacuisti, that I am vanquished
because I made no reply to his admired Answerer; but he forgets that I returned
a sufficient Answer to him in a few Lines ten years ago (in my Remarks on
George Keith's Sermon) declaring and demonstrating that that Virulent Anonymus
had in many things spoken falsely and slanderously as well a^ Disingenuously. To
be sure, the Young Man has forgotten the 19th Chapter of Leviticus, and the
32d verse, which says, thou shall rise up bef^^e the Hoary-head, and honor the
face of the Old Man, and fear thy God.

December. 2. 1712.

FINIS.

