An EPISTLE Sent from GOD to the World, Containing the best News that ever the
World heard. And transcribed by John Rogers a Servant of Jesus Christ.
1 John 1. Chap. and 4th Verse. And these things write we unto you, that your
joy may be full.


An Introduction in order to an Exposition upon the 1. Chap. of the first
Epistle of John.
BUt before we enter upon the Exposition of it, let us premise these following
particulars: In the first place let us take Notice, this First Chap. is an
Epistle written by it self, distinct from the rest of the Book; and not written
Singularly by the Apostle John, as the rest of the Book is, as appears Verse
1st, That which we have seen, Verse 2nd, For the life was manifested, and we
have seen it: Verse 3d, That which we have seen, Verse 4th, And these things
write we unto you, Verse 5th, This then is the message which we have heard of
him, and declare unto you: thus it appears to be written Pluralitively; that
is, by more than by the Apostle John, in using the word We.

But the rest of the Books, is written. Singularly by the Apostle John, as
appears, Chap. 2.1. These things write I unto you, verse 7th, I write no new
commandment unto you, and so through out the book; as appears in the last Chap.
verse 13. These things have I written unto you, that believe on the name of the
Son of God. Thus it appears, that the second Chapter to the end of the Book is
a second Epistle, written to believers in the Light, to encourage them to
continue in that State; and written by the Apostle John, in his own name
Singularly, in Saying; I write unto you, not using the word we, as he does in
the first Chapter.

A Second thing to be observed, is, That as the first Chapter contains a
distinct Epistle from the rest of the Book; So it is not directed to persons in
the same State and Condition, as the other part of the Book is directed to: for
the first 4 Verses of this Chap. is written to the Sinful World, or to such as
were not in fellowship with the Children of God, as appears in the 3d and 4th
Verses. That which we have seen and heard declare we unto you, that ye also may
have fellowship with us, etc. And these things write we unto you, etc. And the
other 6 Verses, contains a Message sent from God, and directed to such, as had
lost Sight of their Calling and Election, and were in a State of darkness, with
the rest of the world; having wandered from the Unity and Fellowship which once
they were in with God: and the message from God was, and is, to reduce and
bring them back to God again, by repentance and confession of their Sins; that
thereby they might obtain forgiveness of them, and so come to be cleansed from
all Sin, as those were that walked in the light: as God is in the Light, as
appears in the 7th verse.

And thirdly we may observe, that the Apostle John, in Chap. 2.1. begins his
own Epistle in his own name, thus; My little Children these things write I unto
you, and so goes on in his writing, from babes in Christ, to young men and
Fathers in Christ, yea, unto all Sorts and degrees of Christians, who were in
the light. But the first Chap. contains a particular Epistle written in the
Pluralitive; that is in the name of many, or in the name of all the Children of
God, who were in the light, as God is in the light; who were cleansed by the
blood of Jesus Christ from all Sin, as appears in the 7 verse, and by them
directed to the World, and to them that were in a State of Sin and darkness, as
appears in the 5th and 6th verses.

An Exposition upon the First Chapter of the first Epistle of John.
1. John, 1.1. Verse. That which was from the beginning, which we have heard,
which we have seen with our eyes, which we have looked upon, and our hands have
handled of the word of life.


IN this verse the Apostle John, with the rest of Gods Children, does declare
unto the world, that which was from the beginning, which they had not only
heard of, but had seen it with their eyes, and looked upon it; and not only
looked upon it, but also had handled of this word of life, which was from the
beginning: all these Expressions are to convince the world of the truth and
certainty of the being of the word of life, by their certain knowledge of its
being; not only by hearsay, but by seeing of it with their eyes, and looking
upon it, and also in handling of it with their hands: this word of life is
Jesus Christ, as he is the Son of God the Creator of all things: and his first
proceeding from God, or being born of God; is showed, Genesis 1.3. And God said
let there be light, and there was light; this creating word proceeded from God,
and was in the beginning with God; and it was Jesus Christ who is God blessed
for ever more, and all things were made by it: as appears in the following
verses of this First Chap: of Genesis and in the first Chap. of John, and 1 verse,
etc. this is the word of life, declared in this verse, to the World by the
Children of God, and was the first born before any creature: as appears, Coll.
1.15. Who is the Image of the invisible God, the first born of every creature.
for by him were all things created, and this was the first birth of Jesus
Christ, as he was the Son of God or word of life: by whom God created all
things, as appears, Ephesians. 3.9 Who created all things by Jesus Christ. Heb. 11.3.
Through faith we understand that the worlds were framed by the word of God; or
by the Son of God, as appears, Heb. 1.2. Has in these last days spoken to us
by his Son, etc. by whom also he made the worlds: as also, John 1.1. etc. In
the beginning was the word, and the word was with God, and the word was God,
all things were made by him, (or by it:) This is the word of life declared in
this first verse.

And whereas it is said in the said verse, which we have heard; the hearing of
it came by the Information which God gave to Moses of it, in the aforesaid Gen,
1.3. etc. And whereas it is said, which we heve seen with our eyes; this sight
of it, is such a sight as Moses had of it: Heb. 11.27. Seeing him who is
invisible: Job. 42.5. I have heard of thee, by the hearing of the ear: but now
mine eye sees thee. Isaiah 6.5. For mine eyes have seen the King the Lord of
hosts: Such a sight as this is, the Apostle John, with the rest of Gods
Children had of this word of life; which they declare of to the World, which
word of life in process of time was made flesh, John 1.14. And the word was
made flesh, (or became flesh:) and whereas it is said, and our hands have
handled of the word of life, 2 Cor. 4 2. Nor handling the word of God
deceitfully; this is a Spiritual handling, in ^eling its powerful operation,
such as no natural man can have, as appears, Ephesians. 4. ^ Who being past feeling
have given themselves over unto lasciviousness: but these ^t declare this word
of life to the world, (...) such Witnesses as were created and made (...)
Creatures, by this word of life; for it (...) the creating word, which created
all ^ngs, Ephesians. 2.10. For we are his workmanship, created in Christ Jesus unto
good works. Ephesians. 4.24.

Verse 2. For the life was manifested, and we have seen it, and hear witness,
and show unto you ^at eternal life which was with the Father, and was
manifested unto us.

This Second verse, contains a Second De^aration to the world, of the truth of
the ^ght that the Children of God had of this life; which they are witnesses
to, to the ^d that the world may credit the truth of (...): which eternal life
(say they) was with the Father, and was manifested unto us; this is to
distinguish the Son from the Father, in saying it was with the Father: and and
the reason why the children of God makes this distinction, between the Father
and the Son, will appear more fully in the next verse.

Verse 3. That which we have seen and heard, declare we unto you, that ye also
may have fellowship with us: and truly our fellowship is with the Father, and
with his Son Jesus Christ.

These three verses does Evidence the vehement desire that the Children of God
has; that the world may credit the truth of their, testimony, concerning the
manifestation which they had of this word of life, that ye also (say they) may
have fellowship with us, and truly our fellowship is with the Father, and with
his Son Jesus Christ: in this verse Jesus Christ is named with the Father, for
all that has been said, is to testify to the Divinity of Jesus Christ, who is
the word that did proceed from God the Father, and is the Son of God: which
Truth was denied by those Antichrists, and false Prophets that went forth into
the world, before this Epistle was wrote: as appears, Chap 2.18. Little
children it is the last time, and as ye have heard that Antichrist shall come,
even now are there many Antichrists; whereby we know that it is the last time,
etc Chap. 4.1. Beloved believe not every Spirit, but try the Spirits, whether
they are of God, because many false Prophets are gone out into the world, etc
And this Epistle was sent into the world after them, to confute their denial of
his divinity.

Verse 4th, And these things write we unto you, that your joy may be full.

In this verse, the children of God, gives (...) world the reason of their
writing these ^ings to them, which was matter of great (...); to hear such glad
tidings that Jesus Christ was both God and Man, and thereby (...) mediator
between God and Men, to reconcile the Sinful world to God, being relat^ to both
Natures: and to hear this glad tidings from their brethren that had been
enemies to God by wicked works, and now to hear that they are come into a
fellowship and reconciliation with God, this is matter of full joy: for it is
the best News that ever the world heard.

Now we are come to the Second part of this Epistle, which contains a message
from God, which all the Children of God that are in the light has heard of
him, and are to declare unto their brethren that are in a State of darkness.

These Messengers of God are the same ^rsons that gave forth their witness in
the ^e part of this Chapter, or Epistle, concerning the word of life to the
world; and and wrote this Epistle with the Apostle John.

Verse 5th, This then is the message which we have heard of him, and declare
unto you, that God is light and in him is no darkness at all.

This verse contains a Message which was heard of God, by all his children that
were in the light, as he is in the light; and the following part of this
Chapter contains the said message, and they were to declare it to all their
brethren that are in darkness: the message it self is, that God it light, and
in him is no darkness at all; this message is to show to all professors, that
if they are not in this light with God, they are not in fellowship with him;
and these messengers which God sends this message by, are to declare it to all
professors, of Churches, that those Professors who are intermixed with those
that are in the light, may not deceive themselves by being in a visible Church
fellowship with them that are in the light, and thereby conceit themselves to
be in fellowship with God, while they are in a State of darkness: therefore
these messengers of God are to acquaint them in what State and Condition they
are in, while in a State of darkness; that they may not deceive themselves with
an outward visible Church fellowship, while in a State of Sin and darkness, and
not in fellowship with God, and to inform them by what means they may come out
of such a State. Verse 6th, If we say that we have fellowship with him, and
walk in darkness, we li^ and do not the truth. These Messengers of God, use the
word We, to comprehend the whole body of the visible church in one; expressing
the State of them that are in darkness, and the State of them that are in the
light distinctly, one from the other: this verse expresses the State of those
that are in a State of Sin and darkness, and their profession to be a lie; for
they do not the truth, for they are not in fellowship with God; and therefore
if these should say we have no Sin, while in this State of darkness, they would
but deceive themselves, for the truth is not in them: but if these in this
sinful dark State should come to confess their (...), then they will find god
faithful and just to forgive them their sins and to cleanse them from all
unrighteousness; and then the will come to see the State that those are in, set
forth in the next verse, and so come to be in fellowship with them: for these
messengers of God sets both States together, distinctly in two verses, the
State of those who are in Sin and darkness, in this verse; and the State of
them that are in the light, and are cleansed from all Sin, in the next verse;
that those that are in a State of Sin and darkness, may discern which of the
two States they are in; when these Messengers has expressed both States
together, the^ they open the gate of Salvation to them the are in a State of
darkness, that they man come out of that State: for if these the are in a State
of darkness should say we ha^ no sin, they will deceive themselves, for t^
truth is not in them; this truth which (...) not in them, is Jesus Christ John
14, 6. ver^ 2 John, 2. For the truths saKe which dwe^leth in us, and shall be
with us for ever, b^ if these confess their Sins, God is faithful and just, to
forgive them their Sins, and (...) cleanse them from all unrighteousness: and
then they will be in the same State, as tho^ are in, expressed in the next verse,
who a^ already cleansed from all Sin: but if the that are in a state of
darkness, say, we ha^ not sinned, then they make God a liar; f^ if his word
were in them, they could not be in a state of darkness; for his word is h^ Son
Jesus Christ, who is God, and God light, and in him is no darkness at all: but
his word is not in them that are in a state darkness, for if his word were in
them, the they would be in the light as God is in the light, and in fellowship
with him; for the indwelling of this word, brings us into fellowship with God.
These Messengers of God deals tenderly with their brethren that are in a state
of darkness, and does not reflect their state upon them; but comprehends
^^selves in with them as brethren, and (...) if we say so and so of our selves,
to (...) if we say we have fellowship with him (...) walk in darkness we lie,
and do not the truth: Expressing in this verse, the state of (...) that are in
darkness, and in the next verse the state of them that are in the light, (...)
are cleansed from all Sin by the blood of Jesus Christ, and so leaves the
judgment of every one of them, to judge of his own state, (...) her he be in a
state of light, or whither he are in a state of darkness.

That which is here intended by darkness, (...) when professors do not order
their Con^^ation aright, and so come into such a (...) of darkness, that they
loose the sight of these justification, and sanctification; so that they cannot
assure their own hearts before God that they are reconciled to God; so that
Instead of rejoicing to appear before God, they dread his presence; for instead
of being in that Spirit which is in the children of light, which cries Abba
Father, they are in a Spirit of Bondage to fear, because the love of God is not
in them.

Verse 7th, But if we walk in the light, as is in the light, we have fellowship
one with another, and the blood of Jesus Christ his Son clea^seth us from all
Sin.

This verse expresses, just a contrary sta^ to what the fore going verse does,
even such a state as these Messengers of God are in who wrote this Epistle, and
all others that are in their state, who are in the light, a^ God is in the
light; and these only are in fellowship with God, and one with another i^ the
light, as God is in the light: and the blood of Jesus Christ his Son, has
cleanse^ these from all sin, says God in this verse b^ these his Messengers:
so that if these should say, we have sin, when God says, they are thus
cleansed from all sin, by the blood o^ Jesus Christ his Son; they make God a
lia^ and undervalue the precious blood of his So^ Jesus Christ, for his word is
in them, and has cleansed them from all sin: so that the are in the light as
God is in the light, and has obtained the forgiveness of their sins for they
are such as have already confesse^ their sins. and God has been faithful, an^
just, to forgive them their sins, and has cleansed them from all
unrighteousness, b^ the blood of his son Jesus Christ: so that the^ have
already done, that which the other ar^ directed to do as is testified by these
his Messengers, and immediately by God himself; as appears Chap. 5 10. He
that believes on the Son of God has the witness in himself, he that believes
not God, has made ^n a liar; because he believes not the Regard that God gave
of his Son: thus it appareth, that he that believes on the Son (...) God, is
in the light, and has, the witness (...) God in himself, that he is cleansed
by the ^od of the Son of God from all sin: for ^hese are those that are in
fellowship with ^od the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ; as in the third
verse of this Chap. that God will have no fellowship with unrighteousness, nor
no Communion with darkness, neither will Christ have any concord ^th Belial;
for the Bodies of these Saints are the Temple of God, and god dwells in them, as
is to be seen, 2 Cor. 6, 14. For these are the light of the world, says Christ
Mat. 5 14. And are obedient to Christ's doctrine being perfect even as their
Father which is in heaven is perfect: verse 48. These are made free from sin,
says Paul, ^^m. 6.18, 21. Being cleansed by the blood of Jesus Christ from all
sin, and by him presented before God, without Spot or wrinkle, or any such
thing; being holy and without blemish, says Paul, Ephesians. 5.27 These are they
that came out of great tribulation, and have washed their Robes, and made them
white in the blood of the Lamb, says the Apostle John, Rev. 7 14. These are
they which are not defiled with women, for they are virgins: these are they
which follow the Lamb whither soever he goes these were redeemed from among
men, being the first Fruits unto God, and the Lamb, and in their mouth was
found no guile: for they are without fault before the Throne of God, says the
holy Scripture, Rev. 14 4, 5. As God is, so are these in this world, says the
Apostle John, 1 John, 4 17. These are in such a fellowship with God, and one
with another, as Christ speaks of, John, 17 21. etc. That they all may be one,
as thou Father art in me, and I in thee, that they also may be one in us; that
they may be one even as we are one, I in them, and thou in me that they may be
made perfect in one: this is the fellowship that these are in, spoken of in
this 7th verse: And can they say, they have sin dwelling in them with god the
Father, and with his son Jesus Christ; and not make god a liar, for his word is
in them and they have overcome the wicked one says the Apostle John, Chap. 2
14. For these are born of God and are the Sons of God, and his seed remains
in them, and this seed is the word of God; spoken of (...) the foregoing part
of this Chapter, and they cannot sin (because they are born of God) while this
seed, or Son of God re^ineth in them. 1 John, 3.9. For he is greater that is in
them, than he that is in the world. Chap. 4.4. For they are kept from sin, by
the mighty power of God that is in them. Ephesians. 3 16. Coll. 1.11. (...) long as
this word abides in them. Chap. 2 24. Let that therefore abide in you, which ye
have heard from the beginning, if that which ye have heard from the beginning
shall remain in you; ye also shall continue in the Son, and in the Father.
Verse 26. These things have I written unto you concerning them that seduce you.
The 8, 9, and 10th Verses, speaks to that part of the visible Church, spoken
of in the 6th verse, to wit, If we say that we have fellowship with him, and
walk in darkness we lie, and do not the truth: So that if this part of
professors should say, we have no sin, they will deceive themselves, and the
truth is not in them, as appears, in verse the 8th. But if these confess their
sins, he is faithful ^d just to forgive them their sins, and to cleanse them
from all unrighteousness: as appears in verse 9th. Then they will be in
fellowship with the other part that walks in the light, as God is in the
light; and the blood of Jesus Christ his Son, has already cleansed them from
all sin, as appears in verse 7th: But if we are of that party that walks in
darkness, and yet say that we have fellowship with God, and have not sinned, we
make him a liar, and his word is not in us: as appears in verse 10th. For if
his word were in us, sin could not dwell there: for his word is himself, Joh.
1.1. In the beginning was the word, and the word was with God, and the word was
God. For God and sin will not dwell together, for they two cannot have
fellowship one with the other, in the same body of flesh: for the^ are two
contraries. 2 John, 9.10.11. He that abides in the Doctrine of Christ, has
both the Father and the Son; if there come any unto you, and bring not this
Doctrine receive him not into your house, neither bi^ him God speed; for he
that bideth him God speed, is partaker of his evil deeds.

Advertisement.
IN the year 1705. I printed a Book in which book, I have expounded several
places of Scripture, which places of Scripture are grossly wrested; to defend
and maintain a Doctrine that there is no freedom from sin on this side the
grave, which is a gross contradiction of the holy Scriptures: and is an
undervaluing the precious blood of Jesus Christ the Son of God, which clean^eth
us from all sin: which said books, I have now some of them by me.

The Scripture expounded in said book, are these Scriptures under quoted. Prove.
24.^5.16. This Scripture is falsely reported, and traditionally believed that it
says: A righteous man falls into sin seven times a day; when as it speaks
not of falling into sin, but into perils. A second Scripture is, 2 Cor. 12,
9.10. A third Scripture is, Jam. 3.^. A fourth Scripture is, Jam. 4.5. A fifth,
is several verses in the 7th Chapter of the Romans which is grossly wrested, in
judging it to speak of Paul's converted state; because he wrote it after his
Conversion, for (...) his converted state he was not a carnal ^an Sold under
sin, but a spiritual man re^eemed from sin, neither did sin dwell in ^im: but
Christ did dwell in him, as appears Gall, 2.20. neither was he a wretch^^ man
then wanting deliverance, but a happy man, having obtained deliverance by
Christ. A sixth Scripture is Gall. 5 17. A seventh Scripture is 1 John 1 8. An
eighth Scripture is Eccele. 7 20. All these Scriptures above mentioned, is
often quoted and grossly wrested by the ignorant and unlearned to their own
destruction; not understanding the Scriptures, neither the power of God, as is
written 2 Pet. 3 16. Mat. 22.29. There is also in said book, an Exposition upon
Jere. 10.25. Tit. 2.11. 1 Cor. 12.7. All which said scriptures are restored
into their natural Sense, by comparing scripture with scripture.

J. R.

JOhn Rogers a Servant of Jesus Christ, to them that are called of God to be
Saints, and sanctified by the spirit of truth, and preserved in Jesus Christ;
grace unto you, and peace from God our Father, and from our Lord Jesus Christ.

Beloved in the Lord, my prayer to God for you is that you may be growing in
grace and in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ; and not be seduced by
unprofitable teachers, who transform themselves as the Ministers of Christ: of
whom we have had sufficient warning from our Lord Jesus Christ and from his
holy Apostles; who have so plainly described them to us, that if we ^lk in, and
be guided by the Spirit of truth, (...) shall easiely discern them; by their
con^ary practices to the Doctrine of Christ, ^d by their differing Doctrine,
from the ^octrine of his holy Apostles.

The Apostle John declares, that as we were fore told of them, so they did
appear (...) his time, 1 John 2 18. It is the last time and as ye have heard
that Antichrist shall ^ome, even now are there many Antichrists ^aith he;
these Antichrists that did appear ^n this Apostles time, (as the Church
histo^ies informs us,) was one Carpocrates, from whom the Carpocrations did
arise, and did ^old that Jesus was only man, descending from both Sexes: and
also one Cerinthus, of whom came the Cerinthians: and also one Merinthus, of
whom arose the Sect of the Merinthians; these also denied Christ's divinity, and
said he was not before Mary, and that he was a mere man: as also one Hebion, of
whom came the Hebionites; they also held that Christ was only man. This
Doctrine ^preading so much in the world, occasioned John to write his Gospel,
and his first Epi^tle, to suppress and to confute this Doctrine; and he did it
so effectually, that those Anti-^hrists and false Prophets that are in this our
^ay, are forced to confess in words, that Jesus Christ is both God and man; and
yet are as blind and ignorant of his divine nature as they were: and by their
Doctrine it appears, they do not feel his power, nor see his presence, as he is
God Almighty any more than they did: and for them to preach him as he is the
Son of man in our nature up in the visible heavens, from the report of the holy
Scriptures, without any immediate revelation or the truth of it, is no more
than they did. For though the children of God have not seen, nor known him as he
is the Son of man, yet they have seen and known him as he is the Son of God, as
will appear by Scripture evidence, by what follows: and how the Children of
God come to know the truth of what is written of him, as he is the Son of man;
so as to give a true testimony to the truth of the Scriptures, by a mystical
knowledge of him, such as the Apostle Peter had, Mat, 16.15. He says unto
them, but whom say ye that I the Son of man am. Peter answered and said, thou
art Christ the Son of the living God; and Jesus answered and said, flesh and
blood has not revealed it unto thee, but my Father which is in heaven; this
immediate Revelation from God, is greater than a Revelation of him from the
Scripture; and this revelation every faithful Child of God has of ^m, which is
unknown to Antichrists and ^se Prophets, who with good words and ^^r speeches
preach him from the report of ^he Scriptures, but know not the truth of it: ^ut
the Children of God, have a greater witness of him than the Testimony of the
Scripture, as appears in Acts. 5 30. here the Apostle gives a witness of his
death, resurrection and exaltation, and says we are his witnesses of these
things, this is a scripture witness: but further says he, and so is also the
holy Ghost whom God has given to them that obey him; but this witness of the
holy Ghost is immediate from God, and is a greater witness than the Scriptures,
given to every one that does obey him: by which Revelation they know the truth
of the Scriptures, Rev. 19.10. The testimo^ty of Jesus is the Spirit of
prophecy. 1 Cor. 12 3. No man can say that Jesus is the Lord but by the holy
Ghost, that is he cannot say so in truth, by hear say; So that those
Antichrists and false Prophets lie, when they say he is a man up in the
visible heavens, for they know not whether the Scripture is true that reports
such a thing, though it be true; Jer. 5.2. And though they say the Lord lives,
surely they swear falsely.

But Gods children know that the testimony of the Scriptures concerning him (as
he is the Son of man) is truth; the truth of this is further manifested, 1 John
2.20 21 But ye have an unction from the holy one, and know all things the
Apostle uses these words, to wit, but ye have an unction from the holy one, to
distinguish these to whom he writes to, from those Antichrists, which he had
been speaking of in the foregoing verses, who had not this unction, and
therefore did not know all things: John speaks of all those things written to
them by him, in the foregoing part of this his Epistle; and therefore says he
in the next words: I have not written unto you, because ye know not the truth,
but because ye know it; thus it appears they had an inward witness of the truth
of what he wrote to them. But these Antichrists tho they confess him to be
man, and the Son of Mary, Abraham and David, which was true, for so he was,
flesh and blood as we are, sin only excepted: yet they denied him coming in the
flesh of that man born of the Virgin Mary, as he was the word, or Son of God;
which word created all things, before it appeared in that body of flesh; and so
consequently denied his coming into the Saints Bodies of flesh as he is the Son
of God, vanquishing Sin and Satan; and ^ setting them free from Sin and Satan;
and ^his his coming in the Saints bodies of flesh ^hey denied, and this
Doctrine they opposed, ^hey being Satan's Ministers, in whom was ^he Spirit of
error: and for this opposition, John calls them Antichrists, in that they
opposed this Doctrine, to wit, Jesus Christ ^oming into the fleshly bodies of
the children of Adam, where the Devil had possession, and did rule; who dreads
christ in his divine nature, knowing he is too strong for him, and able to cast
him out, and take from him his Seat and Throne, which he has in men's bodies of
flesh; for this was the wisdom and kindness of God to man, to take our nature,
and so become man, that the Devil might no more overcome us: we thus having
Gods strength through Faith, might stand, and no more be overcome by him: and
this great mystery of Gods manifesting himself in man, this Apostle manageth
against the Devil and his Ministers, as follows. 1 John 3.23: And this is his
Commandment, that we should believe on the name of his Son Jesus Christ, and
love one another, as he gave us Commandment. From hence we may take Notice,
that John mentions two Commandments in this verse, which God commands his
Children to observe and keep. The first is to believe on the name of his Son
Jesus Christ: and the second is, to love one another: and in the next vese,
says he; he that keeps his commandments dwells in him, and he in him: in
this verse he testifies, that he that keeps these Commandments, dwells in
God, and God in him; and this God that dwells in the Saints, is Jesus Christ
as he is the Son of God, (or in his divine nature) and in keeping these two
Commandments, we fulfill both Law and Gospel, as appears, Romans 13.10. Love
works no ill to his neighbor: therefore love is the fulfilling of the law.
Gal. 5.14, For all the law is fulfilled in one word, even in this: Thou shall
love thy Neighbor as thy self.

And secondly, as to Faith, it is written, Heb. 11 6. Without Faith it is
impossible to please God. Mat. 17 20. If ye have faith as a Grain of
Mustard Seed, nothing shall be unpossible unto you, 1 John 5.4.5. And this is
the victory that overcomes the world, even our faith. Who is he that
overcomes the world, but he that believes that Jesus is the Son of God: take
notice the Antichrists did believe him to be the Son of man, but not the Son
of God: thus the Apostle shows us, that if we keep these two Commandments, to
wit: to live the ^ife of faith, and love, as God has commanded us; then we
dwell in him, and he in us; hereby says he, we know that he abides in us, by
the Spirit which he has given us; for this Spirit is the Spirit of faith and
love. 2. Cor. 4.13. We having the same Spirit of faith, 1 John 3 16. God is
love, and he that dwells in love, dwells in God, and God in him: and in the
following verse of the following Chapter, or first verse of the fourth Chapter,
John exhorts these children of God, (to whom he writes to, they having a
certain knowledge that God abides and dwells in them, by the Spirit that God
has given them,) to try the spirits of false Prophets: because at that time
many of them were gone out into the world; and he does not only bid them try
the Spirits, of said Prophets: but tells them how they shall try what Spirit
they come in, so as to know certainly what Spirit they come in, verse 2. hereby
know we the Spirit of God, says he: every Spirit that confesses that Jesus
Christ is come in the flesh, is of God says he; and this confession ^s as he
came in the body of flesh, born of the Virgin Mary: so likewise is come into
the body of flesh, of every Saint; for Jesus Christ is the head Member of the
Body, which is the Church: for as much then, as the children are partakers of
flesh and blood, he also himself likewise took part of the same, Heb. 2.14. So
likewise has made them partakers of his divine nature, 2 Pet. 1.4. Whereby are
given unto us exceeding great and precious promises: that by these ye might be
partakers of the divine nature. compare this with Heb. 2.11. For both he that
Sanctifies, and they who are Sanctified are all of one. that is, both he and
they are of one flesh, and of one Spirit in union: as appears, Joh. 17.21. etc.
That they all may be one, as thou Fat^^^ ^rt in me, and I in thee: that they
also may be one in us, I in them and thou in me, that they may be made perfect
in one. And in the third Verse, says the Apostle, And every Spirit that
confesses not that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh is not of God. thus he
shows those to whom he writes to, and exhorts to try the Spirits of the
Prophets, to know whither they are true Prophets or false: in they are false
Prophets, they may know them to be so, by their denying that Jesus Christ is
come in the flesh of the Saints of whom Jesus Christ in our nature is the chief
Saint, and in his divine nature, is over all, God blessed for ever Amen. Romans
9.5. And is in them all. Ephesians. 4 6. compared with ^aiah 9 6. For unto us a Child
is born, unto ^ a Son is given, and his name shall be called the ^ighty God,
the everlasting Father: and says ^he Apostle John, in the last part of the
^hird verse. That these that deny Christ coming ^ the flesh, is not of God; but
are those Antichrists whom they had heard of that should come, and even now
already, says he, is in the world.

These were those false Prophets that did ^onfess Jesus Christ to be man only;
and no doubt but that they confessed him to dwell in ^he visible heavens: for
their confessing him ^o be a man was by hear say from the Scriptures, which
also testified of his ascension unto heaven: their faith reached thus far upon
hearsay, but opposed this Doctrine of Christ's coming in the flesh of his
Saints, to ^trengthen them with might in their inner ^an against Sin and Satan:
and thereby to ^eanse them from all unrighteousness. 1 John 9. And so make them
free from Sin. ^om. 6.18 22. this Doctrine they denied, this Apostle shows in
the 4th verse, compared with the last verse of the forego^g chapter. Ye are of
God little Children, and ^ve overcome them; because greater is he that in you,
than he that is in the world. and hereby we know that God abides in us, by the
Spirit which he has given us; for he that keeps faith, and love, keeps
Gods Commandments, and dwells in him, and he in him; who is greater than the
Prince of the Power of the air, the Spirit that now works in the Children of
Disobedience. Verse 5th, They are of the world, therefore they speak of the
world, and the world hears them, says the Apostle: thus he shows, that they
can preach Christ in our nature, who could be seen and known, as he was man of
the seed of Adam, and visible to be seen with a carnal eye: but they knew him
not as he dwells in his Saints, and so is in fellowship with them, and they
with him; as John says in the foregoing Chapter, The world knows us not,
because it knew not him.

Thus they deceived and seduced many, by their Preaching up Christ as he was
the Son of man; and in Practicing an imitation of the Saints in the visible
ordinances which is of the world, and this Doctrine the World would here: for
says he, the world hears them, but this indwelling of God in his Children
which is the Power of Godliness, they know nothing of: for it is not of the
world, neither will the world hear this Doctrine: as appears in the 6th
verse. We are of God, says the Apostle, that is God dwells in us, and we in
him; as he showed in the last verse of the foregoing Chapter, and in the 4th
verse of this Chapter: and further says he, in this 6th verse. He that is of
God hears us. for he that is of God in him God dwells, and he sees and
knows God; for his faith is from a divine sight of God, seeing him who is
invisible to the carnal eye, who imagines his Savior to be a great way of from
him: knowing nothing of this invisible Power of the Almighty God in the Saints:
which is the Power of Godliness, which those Antichrists will not confess; for
they see him not, neither do they know him: and therefore says John in the 6th
verse. He that is not of God, hears not us, for the faith of Gods Elect is by
a sight of the unction of the Spirit which they are anointed with; even the
same Spirit of gladness, which Jesus of Nazareth was anointed with above his
fellows. Heb. 1.9. but these Antichrists have not this unction. 1 John, 2 20.
But ye have an unction from the holy one. and these to whom he writes, that had
this unction, knew the truth of John's writing, as appears, verse 21. I have not
written unto you because ye know not the truth, but because ye know the truth:
thus the Children of God who had this unction, knew the truth of John's writing:
but these Antichrists knew not the truth of it, and therefore would not
believe this Doctrine; as appears in the 6th verse of said 4th Chapter. He that
is not of God hears not us. says the Apostle, and they not hearing us, in
this our testimony of Gods dwelling and abiding in us, who is greater in us,
than he that is in the world: hereby says the Apostle, in this 6th verse, know
we the Spirit of truth, and the Spirit of error; for he that is in the Spirit
of truth will confess this Doctrine to be truth: because his Faith is from a
sight of Jesus Christ's coming into his body of flesh, and is a present help and
deliverer out of Sin, and from the Power of Satan, 2. Cor. 13.5. Examine your
selves whether ye be in the Faith, prove your own selves: know you not your own
selves, how that Jesus Christ is in you, except ye be reprobates. For if your
faith be not from this sight of Christ in you; ye are yet in your Sins, and
your Faith is only the hypocrites Faith: or the Faith of those Antichrists,
that believe only in the Son of man a great way off in the visible heavens; who
know nothing of the Power of God: though they have a faith of Christ in our
nature, up in the visible heavens, whom they new saw, nor knew, who has
declared, as it is written, Joh. 5.30. I can of mine own self do nothing; says
he: this is to be understood in our nature as he was man; thus is he believed
on by these Antichrists and false Prophets, and known by them no other ways.

These are undeniably Hypocrites, and Counterfeits foretold off by Christ and
his Apostles, that should appear in these last days; and deceive the very elect
if it were possible, by their hypocritical lying signs and wonders to deceive.

And therefore as we have taken a view of their deceiving Doctrine; let us in
the next place take a view of their contrary practice to the Doctrine of Christ
and his holy Apostles, to seduce and deceive the very elect if it were
possible: and therefore let us take a view of the Doctrine of Christ; to see
how contrary they Act to it, which may be seen by their Synagogue prayers, and
trumpet sounding alms, or public Synagogue contributions, and hypocritical
fasts. All these things are contrary to Christ's Doctrine, Mat. 6.1. etc. which
he commanded his Disciples to perform in secret, and further these hypocrites
deceive by their self righteousness, but live a faithless life and
conversation, as Christ says, Mat. 23.28. Ye are righteous before men, but are
full of hypocrisy: and their Doctrine is feigned words, 2 Pet. 2 3. for Christ
is not in them; and therefore it is not the voice of his Spirit; but as the
Scripture says with good words, and fair speeches they deceive the hearts of
the simple. Romans 16 18. All these things are lying Signs and wonders to
deceive, attended with their sabbaths, and their solemn meetings. Isai. 1.13.
etc. Attended with their unclean and unwasht hearts, Verse 16. for they
performing all these things in a polluted state of sin (Christ not being in
them,) it is all an abomination to the Lord, for they are but reprobates, or
counterfeit Silver, 2 Cor. 13 5. Jer. 6 30. having no fellowship with a Christ
in them, so that all that they do, is but a form of godliness. these are they
that the Apostle foretold us of, 2 Timothy 3 1. ver. compared with the 5th verse
This know that in the last days perilous times shall come. for men shall be
lovers of themselves, having a form of godliness, but denying the power thereof
from such turn away; now this power of godliness which they deny is christ in
the Saints, tho they confess him to be in the visible heavens, as he is a man,
even as he is flesh and blood with us, yet deny him in his perfect
righteousness in us; by whose righteous Spirit in us, we fulfill the law, Romans 8
4. by whom we are strengthened with might in our inner man, by his immediate
power and presence in us: which Doctrine they deny; though our predecessors in
Scripture have fully given their testimony to the truth of it, as appears, Col.
1.25.2^ compared with the 27th verse. Whereof I am made a Minister, according
to the Dispensation of God, which is given to me, for you to fulfill the word of
God, even the mystery to whom God would make known, what is the riches of the
glory of this mystery among the Gentiles, which is Christ in you the hope of
glory. thus it appears, that a true faith is derived from a sight or Christ in
us: and we have no Grounds to hope for glory if we see not Christ dwelling in
us: for he in us is the hope of glory, and power of godliness appearing in us,
as a warrior against the power of the Devil that dwelt in us, whom he has
overcome for us, and taken from him the Seat of his throne and now has taken
our fleshly bodies to be his habitation to dwell in, by his Spirit. Coll. 1.11.
That we might be strengthened with all might, according to his glorious power.
And this Apostle that was called of God to preach this great mystery, that
these hypocrites, and Antichrists in this our day know nothing of, does
declare to the Church of Ephesus; that he did bow his knees on their behalf
Ephesians. 3.14. etc. To the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, that he would grant
unto them that they might be strengthened with might, by his Spirit in their
inner man. This is the power of godliness seen and felt in the Saints: and this
Spirit that strengthens them is Christ in them, as appears in the 17th verse.
That Christ may dwell in your hearts by faith. this faith is derived from this
fight of Christ's dwelling in us, for this Spirit that strengthens us with
might in our inner man is Christ, 2 Cor. 3 17 thus Christ in us is the Spirit
of faith; for the gift of the Spirit of Christ is the gift of faith: thus it
appears that no man can have a saving faith of his Salvation till Christ comes
into him, and Diethrones the Devil, that Rules and Reigns in him; for until
then he is in his sins.

My friends and brethren, I tell you glad tidings of great joy, that you may
come and have fellowship with us, and truly our fellowship is with God the
Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ: and if we say we have fellowship with
him, and walk so in darkness that we see not the truth of those things, we are
liars and the God of truth is not in us Gall. 2.20. I am crucified with Christ,
says Paul, but this was not Paul's body of flesh that was crucified with
Christ; but it was Christ's body of flesh that was crucified for Paul's body of
Sin: and it was Paul's body of sin that was crucified with Christ's body of
flesh; by reason that Christ's body of flesh, was crucified for Paul's body of
sin: nevertheless says Paul, I live, this is to demonstrate to us that though he
was crucified with Christ, yet his body of flesh did live, and that it was only
his body of sin that was crucified with Christ; yet not I says he but Christ
lives in me: this is to be understood that when Christ through the eternal
Spirit (which Spirit was his divine nature) offered his spotless body of flesh
for Paul's sinful and defiled body of sin: then he in his divine nature, as he
was the Son of God, entered into Paul's body of flesh, to dwell there, that he
might now be kept through faith unto Salvation: thus when Christ had destroyed
the body of Sin, he takes possession of the body of flesh and lives there; and
now Christ is greater in Paul, than he that was in him before his body of sin
was destroyed, or crucified: for now he is made free from sin, Romans 6 18.22.
and Christ in him is the Spirit of faith, and this great mystery of faith can
be kept only by a pur^ conscience cleansed by the blood of Je^^ Christ upon the
cross* but Paul was a reprobate before he obtained this faith, (...) Christ's
coming into him, and living in him now Paul can say, I live by the faith of the
Son of God, who loved me and gave himself for me, and now Christ dwells in him
by faith essentially in his divine nature, as he is the Son of God. the first
born before any creature, being that word, which in process of time was made
flesh, and then became the Son of man also: for this word that was with God in
the beginning was God, and all things was made by it, as appears in the first
Chapter of Geneses, and in the first Chapter of John It was God without any
other nature, till it took hold of the Seed of David, for before it was only
the Son of God, by whom he made the worlds, Heb. 1 2. and was the first born
before any creature, Coll. 1.15.16. Ephesians. 3.9. Who created all things by Jesus
Christ. And his name is called the word of God. Rev. 10.13.

Beloved in the Lord these things have I written unto you, concerning them that
seduce you, that you may come into this fellowship with God, and with the
children of God who are separated from all the ^ecta^es, and are in this
fellowship with God.

For the holy Scripture that testify the truth of these things, are as a Light
that shines in a dark place; and you will do well to take heed unto them,
until the day shall dawn, and the day light appear unto you, after this long
and dark night of Apostasy: for none of these Scripture testimonies are of any
private interpretation, but the earth is covered with darkness, and the people
with gross darkness; for the penmen of these Scripture truths, spoke by the
inspiration of the holy Ghost, and not by the wisdom or learning of men: and
for this end was they penned, that we might not be misled by Seducers.

Finally my brethren, if we will be christ's disciples, we must have no respect
to Sects, or to say with them of old, I am of Paul; and I of Apollos, and I of
Cephas, as it is this day; the Papists is the right way says one, another the
Church of England, another is for the Presbiterian, another for the Quaker,
another for the Baptists: are ye not carnal and Sectaries, and walk as men, is
Christ divided, is he not a man of a Sea^less garment, and of a Spotless body,
and presents his Church to God, not having Spot or wrinkle, or any such thing,
but that i^ should be holy and without blemish.

Thus we see the members of Christ are not Sectaries, but are united together
in a perfect bond of Love and Unity: for Love is the bond of perfection, and by
this says Christ, shall all men know that ye are my disciples: when ye love
one another, for God is love, and all his children are taught of him to love
one another. It is a new Commandment given unto us, by the Spirit of love, that
came from God the fountain of love, who has shed it in our hearts, by the holy
ghost that dwells in us.

Grace be unto you all, Amen.
Printed in the Year 1718. for John Rogers living in New London.


