Smoking Flax INFLAMED OR, Weary Sinners Encouraged To go to CHRIST, FROM The
Certainty, and Eternity of their Happiness.

By Samuel Moodey, A.M. Pastor of the Church of CHRIST in York, in the Province
of Maine. N. E.

Matthew. 11.28. Come unto Me all ye that labor, and are heavy laden, and I will
give you Rest.

2 Cor. 6.18. -- Ye shall be My Sons and Daughters, says the Lord Almighty.

BOSTON: Printed by B. Green, for Samuel Gerrish, and Sold at his Shop. 1718.

Smoking Flax inflamed, OR, Weary Sinners Encouraged to go to CHRIST.
JOHN VI. 37. All that the Father gives me, shall come to me; and him that
comes unto me, I will in no wise cast out.


IN the 27 v. of this Chapter, Our Lord Jesus Exhorts his Hearers, that they
labor for the Meat which endures to everlasting life. And there is a double
Motive couched in the Exhortation.

(1.) That this Spiritual heavenly food of the Soul is unspeakably desirable;
in that whereas bodily food, and all that the carnal heart can desire, is
perishing, this is Everlasting; and such as feed on it, shall live for ever:
Compare this 27 v. with v. 57. Labor not for the Meat which perishes, but for
that Meat which endures unto everlasting life, which the Son of Man shall give
unto you; for him has God the Father sealed. As the living Father has sent
me, and I live by the Father; so he that eats me, even he shall live by me.

(2.) That it is Undoubtedly attainable. Which the son of man shall give unto
you; for him has God the Father sealed. There is not only all fullness of
suitable and satisfying Provision stored up in Christ; but he has both
Authority and a Disposition to give it out unto hungry and humble Beggars at
his Door.

Now Christ having told them that they must labor for this Unperishing Meat,
they enquire what Works they must do, v. 28. As the Young Man, Matthew. 19.16. --
Good Master, What good thing shall I do that I may have Eternal Life. They are
careful about many good works; but Christ directs them to One, which includes
all, v. 29. Jesus answered and said unto them, This is the work of God, that ye
believe on him whom he has sent. This is the One thing needful; for it
receives Christ in all his Offices, with all his Benefits, that he may Of God
be made unto us Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification and Redemption: So that
even the Righteousness of the Law is fulfilled in them which are in Christ
Jesus by a lively, working Faith; Romans 8.1, 4. And the Faith of Gods Elect does
work by love, purify the heart, crucify the flesh, overcome the world, quench
the fiery darts of the wicked one, give glory to God, and is the great
Condition of the New Covenant.

But what is this Faith, so useful and efficacious?

Why, it is nothing but what is expressed by the Souls coming to the Lord Jesus
Christ, in the words of our Text, and those that are next before it: And Jesus
said unto them, I am the Bread of life: he that comes to me shall never
hunger; and he that believes in me shall never thirst. But I said unto you,
that ye also have seen me and believed not. All that the Father gives me,
shall come to me; and him that comes to me, I will in no wise cast out. By the
Contexture of which three verses, and the three that follow next after, you may
plainly perceive that Coming to Christ, and Believing on him, are the same
thing: and as was said before, the One thing -- for there be but two things
that we fear, Death and Want: now he that comes to Christ shall never die; and
he that believes in him shall never Want; Chap. 11.26. Compared with this
Context.

And in the Text it self, there is Double encouragement offered unto the
Perishing Sinner, exactly Answering the twofold impediment lying in the way of
many Souls, when they are invited to come unto Christ.

I am so weak and helpless, says the Poor Soul, that I cannot move one half
step toward Christ, in the way of Believing.

Now to Answer this Objection,

Christ, who died for us when, or because we were without strength, Romans 5.6.
does here put the discouraged Heart in mind of the all-conquering efficacy that
there is in the Spirits Drawing; who for this end is sent out by the Father and
the Son; even to make Christ's intended Spouse willing to come, in the day of
his Power* All that the Father gives me shall come to me. His other Sheep,
that are not yet effectually called; they shall hear the voice of their
Shepherd, for he will find them Ears, Joh. 5.25.10.16, they shall come unto,
and follow him; yea run after him: for he will draw them by victorious Grace,
Cant. 1.4. The Father, or the Elder Brother gives the little Child a hand, when
it neither can nor dares attempt to take one step; and so it comes securely,
though with much fear and trembling, to their arms and bosom. All that the
Father gives me, shall come to me.

But the awakned Sinner has further to say;

If I should come to Christ, laden as I am with iniquity; guilty before God and
Man of transgression and sin; for number unaccountable; for heinousness double
died: besides the cursed ignorance and enmity still remaining in my heart; that
as I never have, so I never can do any thing but dishonor God, and damn my own
Soul: How can it ever enter into my heart, that such a Rebel shall be received
to Mercy; and such crimson and scarlet abominations be forgiven.

Answ. Him that comes to me, I will in no wise cast out. Whatsoever he has been
or done, and left undone or set his heart upon; him that comes to me, let him
be as bad as bad can be; and worse than he can think himself to be: Yea worse
than ever came before him, or that ever refused to come; yet, him that comes to
me, I will in no wise cast out.

The Words need further Explication; but the Text, with little variation, will
be the Doctrine; which to explain, confirm, and apply, is my whole business in
the present Exercise; as it is yours to hear, receive, and improve what the
LORD has to say unto you, from the Text and Doctrine, which is, DOCT. All that
the Father gives to Christ, shall come to Him; and He will in no wise cast out
any that do come unto Him.

I purpose, Doctrinally to Discourse the Point, under three General Heads, in
order, as they lie in the Text and Doctrine; by showing how that I. GOD the
Father has given unto His Son Jesus Christ, a Number of Fallen Mankind. II.
All that are thus given to CHRIST shall come unto Him. III. CHRIST will in no
wise cast out, any One that comes unto Him.


I. PROP. GOD the Father has given to His Son JESUS CHRIST, a Number of Fallen
Mankind.
Fallen Man is both Gods Creature, and Prisoner; made at first for his
pleasure, his life now forfeited into the hands of Sovereign Justice, by acts
of hostility, rebellion and treason: So that his Creator and Judge, who has
made all things for himself; even the wicked for the Day of evil, Prove. 16.4.
Might have disposed of the whole Humane Race, as he did of the Deserting
Angels, to be an eternal Sacrifice unto his revenging Justice: nor did, or
could we guilty Criminals, at first, expect any other. But it pleased his
Sovereign Majesty to Assert his right of Dominion, according to which he might
dispose of any or all the whole Kind, into what hands he pleased; by giving
into the hands of his Son, a Number of perishing Sinners; both as his Charge or
Trust, and as his Crown or Recompense.

1. As his Trust and Charge. As straying and lost Sheep, to be restored and
preserved by the Shepherd of Israel: As wounded, sick and dying Patients, into
the hands of this Infallible Physician; to be under his Cure, 'till they should
be, not only made whole and healthful; but immortal, yea invulnerable: As
insolvent Debtors, yea condemned Malefactors, to an able Surety, not to be
bound, jointly and severally with them: but body for body, and Soul for Soul,
in their stead; to be a Prisoner of Justice, 'till he should pay the uttermost
Farthing, though it must cost him his Life and Hearts-blood; yea his Soul must be
made an offering for sin. It Is not enough that he be subject to the Law, in all
its Precepts and Prohibitions; he must also be made Sin and a Curse for
Accursed Transgressors; and expect no merciful abatement, when he comes to
stand before an inflexible Judge, in the room and stead of those who are by
Nature, Children of wrath, even as others. Once more, not to multiply
Particulars; there was a Number given to Christ as Children, to be fed and
taught, educated and trained up, for the Kingdom of Heaven: and whilst Heirs
under Age, to be tutored and disciplined with Merciful, yet Smarting Rods;
sore, but healing Stripes; until these light Afflictions, which are also
Momentany, have worked for them, by working and fashioning them for that far
more exceeding and eternal weight of Glory.

2. This Number was given to Christ, as the Crown and Recompense of his hard
and costly Undertaking. Unsearchable Riches, and eternal Revenues of Glory
would, by the Son of God, in the accomplishment of so great a Design, be
brought into the King, his Father's Exchequer; it was therefore requisite, in
point of Honor and Justice, that some proportionable reward should be given
unto this great and faithful Agent and Sufferer, in so glorious a Cause.
Accordingly, the Father proposes; Ask of me, and I shall give thee the Heathen
for thine inheritance, and the uttermost Parts of the Earth for thy possession.
Christ shall have a Seed to serve Him; shall see of the travel of his Soul, and
shall be satisfied. I will divide him a Portion with the Great, and he shall
divide the Spoil with the strong; because he poured out his Soul unto death;
and he was numbered with the transgressors, and bare the sin of many, and made
intercession for the transgressors. -- Christ Jesus, who being in the form of
God, thought it no robbery to be equal with God; but made himself of no
reputation, and took upon him the form of a Servant, and was made in the
likeness of men; and being found in fashion as a man, he humbled himself and
became obedient unto death, even the death of the cross. Wherefore God also
has highly exalted him, and given him a Name which is above every Name: That
at the Name of Jesus every knee should bow, of things in Heaven, and things in
Earth, and things under the Earth; and that every Tongue should confess that
Jesus Christ is Lord, etc. So shall it for ever be acknowledged, and sung to
the Praise of the Lamb who was slain, that all the thousands of thousands, who
are Saved from the Wrath to come, and crowned with Immortal Glory, are the
fruit of his Purchase and Trophies of his Victory: thus the Bride the Lambs
Wife, the true Queen of Heaven, as she borrows all her Glory from the Prince of
the Kings of the Earth, her royal Husband; so shall she reflect back those rays
on the Sun of righteousness, to the increase of his declarative Glory, and to
his infinite solace and satisfaction; while he shall for ever think out of what
immeasurable depths, and inextricable Labyrinths of Sin and misery, he his
fetched up, rescued and brought home his Dearest Spouse; and to think how dear
she cost him, he cannot but rejoice eternally over her with Singing, and rest in
his Love: A Love that passes knowledge; and that, not only in the strength and
permanency of it; but in its Rise and Antiquity. Before Gods Works of old. --
Before the Mountains were settled; before the Hills -- did this Wonderful Lover
rejoice in the habitable parts of his Earth, and his delights were with the
Sons of men. Jer. 31.3. The LORD has appeared of old unto me, saying, yea, I
have loved thee with an everlasting love: therefore with loving kindness have I
drawn thee. Which brings us to the

II. PROP. All that are thus given to CHRIST, shall come unto Him.
1. Quest. What is implied in the Souls coming to Jesus Christ?

Answ. 1. Conviction of Sin, Righteousness and Judgment; Joh. 16.8. And when
He, i. e. the Holy Spirit, is come, he will reprove, or convince the World of
Sin, and of Righteousness, and of Judgment.

1. Of Sin, because they believe not on me, says Christ, v. 9. Unbelievers
must, of necessity, see the Evil of not coming to Christ, before they will
reform it, by coming in the way of Faith, unto him. Ye will not come unto me,
that ye might have Life, Joh. 5.40. They must, indeed, see their inability to
come to Christ, without Divine, almighty drawings: No man can come to me,
except the Father which sent me draw him -- Joh. 6.44. But the sight of their
weakness is not enough to humble them: they are ready to make an Excuse of
that; they must therefore by a more thorough work of Conviction, be made
sensible that they want a Will as well as Power to come to Christ; that they
have a heart full of rebellion against the Authority of God, in every Command
of the Law; but more especially in [that Command of his] that Gospel Command to
perishing-Sinners, 1 John 3.23. And this is his Commandment, that we should
believe on the Name of his Son Jesus Christ. They must have their Eyes opened
to see also, the horrid nature of this Sin; what blasphemy there is in the
Disobedience of Unbelief, 1 John 5.10, 11. He that believes not God, has made
him a liar, because he believes not the record that God gave of his Son. And
this is the record that God has given to us eternal Life, and this Life is in
his Son. In Gods Blessed Book of Records, the Holy Ghost has inserted, over,
and over and over again, that there is Pardon, Life and Salvation in Christ,
for every one that is willing to accept it, as a free gift. Now, whilst the
Gospel Sinner, either chooses rather to venture on in the Old Covenant way,
then to cast himself wholly on Christ, the Mediator of the New Covenant; or
else stays away from Christ, because of his Unworthiness to come unto him, is
guilty of Charging God himself with Falsehood, as if he had made a false
Record: -- He has made God a liar, because he believes not the Record that he
gave of his Son, etc. Horrid Blasphemy! Unbelief not only shuts up the Heart of
a Sinner, but, in a sort, the Hands of the Savior. Mark 6.5, 6. And he could,
there, do no mighty work, -- because of there Unbelief. Conviction of Sin
against the Law, may be by Natural Conscience; even Heathens have such
Convictions: But the Spirit is sent to bring the Soul to its Savior, by
Convincing it of Sin, because it believes not in Christ; and

2. Of Righteousness, says Christ. Joh. 16.10. Because I go to the Father, and
ye see me no more. q. d. My Father sent me hither, in the Quality of a Surety;
to be made Sin and a Curse, in the Place and Stead of those for whom I
undertook to fulfill all Righteousness; that in me they might have a complete
Righteousness, for their Justification before God; that so He might be just, in
justifying the Ungodly, freely by his Grace, through the Redemption that is in
Jesus Christ: Whom God has set forth to be a Propitiation, through Faith in his
blood, to declare his Righteousness, for the Remission of sins, --. Now I am
just finishing this my Suretiship; and then I shall return to him that sent me:
if the work be done to his acceptance, then I shall be received, as their
forerunner; if not, I shall be sent back again: So that if you see me no more
in the form of a Servant; but I receive of the Father, in virtute of my
Surety-righteousness, the Promise of the Holy Ghost, Act. 2.33. He shall
convince you of Righteousness, in and through me, for you; by this very
argument, that I am received, exalted, rewarded according to the tenor of the
Covenant of Redemption; as having done my work, which was to work out a
Righteousness for you; which if I had not done, or done to the halves; I should
certainly have been sent back again, and never have received my Wages 'till I
had done my work. He shall convince the World of Sin, because they believe not
on me; Of Righteousness, because I go to the Father, and ye see me no more; and

3. Of Judgment, because the Prince of this World is Judged. This last Branch
of the work of Conviction, implied in the Soul's coming to Christ, seems more
dark than either of the former. How plain is it that the whole need not the
Physician, but those that are Sick: The Soul must see its Malady, before it
will look out for a Remedy. Nor will a Sin-sick Soul betake it self to Christ
for a Cure, 'till it be convinced that this Physician has the Balm that will
Mollify, case and heal its wounds: and if Guilt, for having violated the Law,
be the Souls Wound; then a Righteousness to Answer all the demands of the Law,
must be the Guilty Consciences true Relief; which Righteousness is only in and
from Christ. By him all that believe are justified from all things, from which
they could not be justified by the Law of Moses. So the Believing Sinner comes
to be accepted, as Righteous in Gods sight. I say these things seem more plain:
they are plain to him that has a Spiritual Understanding. But what it is to be
Convinced of Judgment, because the Prince of this World is Judged, is not so
obvious. So far as is necessary for my present purpose; that Conviction of
Judgment which draws the Soul to Christ, I conceive, in part, to be thus
wrought, and necessary to be wrought; viz. As Conviction of righteousness
relieves under a sense of Guilt, so Conviction of Judgment under the killing
sense of Sins Dominion in the Soul. As if our Lord should have said; I will
send the Comforter to Apply Redemption, by Convincing of Sin, in its condemning
guilt and reigning Power; and then by showing the Soul, not only its discharge
from the Sentence of Condemnation, by the Imputation of my
Surety-righteousness; but also its deliverance from the Power of Sin and Satan,
through my Conquest for it, in and by it. I will bring forth Judgment unto
victory: the Prince of this World is Judged, condemned, chained and dragged, as
it were, in Triumph, at my Chariot Wheels, in my Ascension, Psalm. 68.18. Colos.
2.15. And truly, to tell the thoroughly awakned Sinner of Pardon without
victory, could be no complete satisfaction; being a Captive that must be
redeemed by Power as well as Price. I acknowledge, says the Soul that is
convinced, not only of Sin, but in some measure, of Righteousness too; I
acknowledge that there is complete Justification, through Christ, for the
Believing Sinner: but as for me, I am an Impenitent Unbeliever. My case and
disposition is expressed, Joh. 5.40. Ye will not come to me that ye might have
Life. And I am likely to drop into Hell, before the Open Arms of a Merciful
Redeemer, because I cannot, or rather because my will is not to run into those
Saving Arms. Then comes the Almighty Spirit, and convinces of Judgment; showing
how that Christ has bruised the old Serpents Head; by banishing him his
Temples, silencing him in his Oracles, dispossessing him of Humane Bodies,
terrifying him with the Unexpected approach of Hell, defeating his Temptations
in the Wilderness, conquering him upon Mount Calvary, disarming him at once of
all his three great Weapons, the curse of the Law, the strength of Sin, and the
Power of Death. So that he can detain the Captived Soul no longer: It is now
made willing in the Day of Christ's Power.

2. Coming to Christ implies or presupposes a sense of Self-emptiness, as well
as Guiltiness; together with the inward and efficacious as well as outward
Doctrinal revelation of Christ, in his All fullness; not only of Righteousness
and Strength, but Grace and Good Will toward Men. This is represented in the
Parable of the Prodigal, etc. Luke 15. He was brought to extremity of pinching
want: Nor could any suitable supply be had for his necessities, in all that
foreign Country, Only in his Fathers House was bread; and there was enough and
to spare. It was this double sense that brought him to Resolve; I will arise
now and go to my Father, etc. Enlarge in your Meditations on this Instructive,
and Encouraging Example.

3. Coming to Christ implies a Disposition in the coming Soul Answerable to the
discoveries of Christ made unto the Soul: And so far as the Soul sees and
considers the Lord Jesus, in his Nature, Offices, Properties and Operations; so
far is this New Disposition reduced into act or motion. Is Christ over all, God
blessed for ever? Acts 9.5. Then says the Soul, I will Worship Him, as I am
required to do, Psalm. 45.11. Was he born of a Virgin, that he might purchase
his Church with his blood, and be a suitable Head to it? And how is he, for the
astonishing Wisdom, Condescension and Love herein expressed, both admired and
adored! Is he the Great Prophet, Priest and King of his People? Then, says the
coming Soul, He shall be both my Atonement, and Advocate; and I will be his
Disciple, and Subject, to take his Yoke upon me, and learn of him. Is he the
chief of ten Thousands? He shall be altogether lovely in mine eyes. In a word,
has it pleased the Father that in him all fullness should dwell? I will then
depend on him as my Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification and Redemption; and
trust in him to save me from my Sins, and deliver from the Wrath to come;
because his Name is Jesus, a SAVIOR; Matthew. 1.21. 1 These. 1.10.

2. Quest. What security is there, with respect to those that the Father has
given to our Lord Jesus Christ; that they shall, all of them, come thus, unto
him?

Answ. There is full and super-abundant Security, as to this Infinite Concern;
and it stands in such things as these.

1. The immutability of the Counsel of God's Will, and purposes of his Grace;
according to an inviolable Covenant of Redemption; Romans 9.11. For the Children
being not yet born, neither having done any good or evil, that the Purpose of
God according to Election might stand; not of works, but of him that calls.
Chap. 11.7. What then? Israel has not obtained that which he seeks for; but
the Election has obtained it, and the rest were blinded. 2 Timothy 2.17, 18, 19.
And their Word will eat as does a canker: of whom is Hymeneus and Philetus; who
concerning the Truth have erred, saying that the Resurrection is past already;
and overthrow the Faith of some. Nevertheless, the Foundation of God stands
sure, having this seal, The Lord kneweth them that are his. Heb. 6.17, 18.
Wherein God willing more abundantly to show unto the Heirs of Promise the
Immutability of his Counsel, confirmed it by an Oath: That by two Immutable
things, in which it was impossible for God to lie, we might have a strong
Consolation, -- Psalm. 40.6 -- 8. -- Burnt-offering and Sin-offering have thou
not required. Then said I, Lo, I come; in the Volumn of the Book it is written
of me: I delight to do thy will, O my God: Yea thy Law is within my heart.
Zech. 6.13. -- And the Counsel of Peace shall be between them both; i. e. The
Lord of Hosts, and the Man whose Name is the BRANCH, v. 12. Two Infallible
Persons; therefore the Salvation of the Elect, which was the Matter Undertaken,
and made as sure as these two Infinite Parties, by contriving, willing,
declaring, promising, covenanting, swearing, and even pledging their very
Being, could make it; cannot possibly Fail.

2. This security further stands in the Divine Alsufficiency to bring to pass
what the Father and the Son have purposed, predicted, promised, engaged in, and
resolved to Effect. All that the Father gives me, shall come to me, says
Christ: But what if they should want both Power, and a Will to come? I will
make them WILLING in the day of my Power. I will work to will and to do, in
them, of my own good Pleasure, says the Lord. I will lead the blind by a way
they have not known. The Dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God; and they
that hear shall live. Every one that has heard and learned of the Father,
comes unto me. -- Who works all things after the counsel of his own will;
Psalm. 110.3. Phil. 2.13. Isai. 42.16. Joh. 5.25.6.44. Ephesians. 1.11. So that unless
Infinite Wisdom, and the Creating Resurrection, and all conquering Power of the
Almighty should be Insufficient to bring to pass what He that cannot lie has
promised, and sworn to accomplish* the Elect cannot fail, any one of them, of
coming into the Everlasting Arms of their Savior.

3. To sum up what might have been further Branched forth, into diverse Heads
of Answer. All proper Means, and such as the Wisdom of God, and the Power of
God has made effectual to the Elect, in all former Generations, and to many
Thousands in our Days; all those Means, in great variety, are ready at hand,
for the Enlightening, Convincing, Persuading, and effectual Calling of the other
Sheep, which are not yet brought in: nor can we suppose more difficult Cases
than have been; such as Menasseh, Magdalen, and Paul; the Corinthians, and
Christ's Murderers: yet suppose, if you please, a Case more difficult than all
these; yet will it be a like easy to Omnipotent Wisdom: And all possible
opposition from Earth and Hell; yea or Sin, which is more than both* all that
Carnality of the Mind, and cursed Enmity of the Will; all that hardness of
Heart, blindness of Mind, and searedness of Conscience, that could ever be
found in any Elect Soul; I say, all was foreseen perfectly, when the Covenant
of Redemption was in making: What then hindered not from undertaking their
Effectual Calling, can never be supposed to obstruct the accomplishing of it;
being once, so solemnly engaged for. In a word; If any one single Person, that
the Father has given to Christ, in the sense of our Text, might fail of coming
to him; then all might fail; and every thing else that he has purposed, or
promised, or sworn to Effect, Psalm. 89.35. Once have I sworn by my Holiness,
that I will not lie unto David, i. e. unto Christ, his Seed, i. e. the Elect,
shall endure; which implies their coming to Christ. Nor could the Blessed God
be secure as to any thing that he should please to engage in; which is
Blasphemy, in a high degree to imagine.

Thus much for the First and Second Branch of the Text and Doctrine; by which
you see, that of all the Father gives to Jesus Christ, not One shall fail of
coming unto him. It remains, that we Explain and Confirm the third Proposition.

III. PROP. That CHRIST will in no wise cast out, any One that comes to Him.
Now there be two or three things imported in this Form of Speech; I will in no
wise cast out.

First; When the great SAVIOR says, I will in no wise cast out; he would be
understood as standing ready, with open Arms and Heart, to receive and make
abundantly welcome, the coming Soul. This is more Expressly contained in the
Fathers compassion and bounty toward his returning Prodigal Son. Luke 15.20.
And he arose and came to his Father. But when he was yet a great way off, his
Father saw him, and had compassion, and ran, and fell on his neck, and kissed
him. And v. 22. He commands the Servants, saying, Bring forth the best Robe,
and put it on him, and put a ring on his band, and shoes on his feet. And bring
hither the fatted calf, and kill it; and let us eat and be merry, v. 23. This
is far from casting out; and I will in no wise cast out, intends nothing less
than all this hearty and abundant Welcome.

Secondly; I will in no wise cast out, is as much as to say, I will never cast
out. Once coming to Christ aright, secures an everlasting Interest in him. My
sheep hear my voice, and I know them, and they follow me. And I give unto them
Eternal life, and they shall never perish, neither shall any pluck them out of
my hand. My Father which gave them me is greater than all: and none is able to
pluck them out of my Fathers hand. The Faith of Gods Elect, through Christ's
Intercession, is Infallible. Luke 22.31, 32. And the Lord said, Simon, Simon,
behold, Satan has desired to have you, that he may sist you as wheat. But I
have prayed for thee, that thy Faith fail not. It were as well never to be
received, as to be received for a Time, and then cast out for ever. If you
should object what David says to Solomon, 1 Chronicles. 28.9. -- If thou forsake
him, he will cast thee off for ever. Its true; He only that endures to the End
shall be saved. But He shall confirm you to the End, that ye may be blameless
in the Day of our Lord Jesus Christ. God is faithful who has called you, who
also will do it, 1 These. 5.24. compared with 1 Cor. 1.8, 9. If the Elect
themselves should depart totally and finally from the Lord, they must needs
Perish; for all that are far from him shall perish. But if that could be, then
where were the Promises? Should that too fail for evermore? Psalm. 77. 8. It Is
the Infirmity of tempted Souls, sometimes to think so, v. 10. 'till they
recover themselves: and it is the Blasphemy of some who say they are Jews, but
are not, to make nothing of all the Security given for the Elect Souls
Converversion, and the Believing Sinners complete Salvation; as if it were of
him that wills, and of him that runs, and not of GOD who has Mercy on
whom he will have Mercy, and whom he will he hardneth, Romans ^ 9. and 10.

Obj. Why then does he find fault, for who has resisted his will?

Ans. Nay, but O Man, who art thou that reply against God -- Has not the
Potter power over the clay? -- What if God willing to show his Wrath, -- and
that he might make known the riches of his Glory on the vessels of Mercy. Jer.
32.38, 39, 40. And they shall be my People, and I will be their God. And I will
give them one heart, and one way, that they may fear me for ever, -- And I will
make an Everlasting Covenant with them, that I will not turn away from them, to
do them good; but I will put my fear in their hearts, that they shall not
depart from me. And Cautions are so far from inferring any possibility of an
Elect Souls perishing, or a true Believers losing his Faith; that they prove
the quite Contrary: Since God, who has engaged for the Saints Perseverance, has
also provided all Means to secure it; among which these Cautions and Warnings
are not the least. Paul once told a certain number of Men, in great hazard of
their Lives, that they should be every Man of them Saved. He told them so in
the Name of God; for he was assured of it by Revelation from Heaven. And yet,
after all, Cautions, Directs and Warns them about the Means of their
Preservation; What they must do, and what they must avoid, in order to it, as
the appointed Means: yea is Positive, that except the way of their safety be
taken, and the way of their destruction be avoided, they could not be safe;
Acts 21. And if these things be consistent in Temporal Cases, why not in
Spiritual? Because I live, says Christ, ye shall live also: Yet, If ye live
after the flesh, ye shall die, says Paul.

Thirdly; There is, at least, one thing more employed in the Words, I will in no
wise cast out; and that is the jealous Fear, partly through ignorance, and
partly through guilt, that is wont to fill and perplex the Minds of awakned
Sinners, that are invited to accept of whole Salvation through Christ. For such
as we are, and have been, to come into a State of Peculiar Favor and
Friendship with the Son of God, and Lord of Angels; Who is of purer eyes than
to behold iniquity, and who cannot look upon Sin? We are afraid and ashamed to
come. But have you not the more need of Pardon and Salvation through Christ?
And since he calls you, it will be no presumption to come when you are called*
but wicked rebellion to refuse. Arise, says Christ, and come away. Come unto
me, all ye that labor and are heavy laden, and I will give you Rest. If any
man thirst, let him come to me and drink. I will give to him that is a-thirst,
of the Fountain of the water of Life, freely, The Spirit and the Bride say,
Come; and let him that hears say, Come, and let him that is a-thirst come:
And whosoever will, let him take of the water of Life freely. Be of good cheer
arise he calls thee. No; Others may do well to go; but I am so vile and
utterly unworthy, that I dare not venture. Alas! All the venture lies in your
Disobedience to the Gospel Call; for him that comes to Christ, He will in no
wise cast. out: But he that believes not shall be damned. Sinners are afraid to
trust in Christ, and not so much afraid to continue in Unbelief, Now what an
unaccountably strange thing is this! Afraid to go to Christ, when he Calls,
Invites, Entreats and Commands the perishing Soul to come: And at the same
time, daring to stay away from Him, although he threatens with all the fiery
Curses in the Law, and Eternal damnation in the other World, every Soul that
disobeys the Gospel, by refusing to come to Christ. What shall we think of this
Matter? Why, the Truth of the Matter is and must needs be this; That they
Question the Truth of the Gospel. It cannot possibly be otherwise; in that, when
the Truth of the Gospel, viz. That there is Salvation in Christ for the chief
of Sinners, on condition of Acceptance, when it is offered: this, I say, being
once cleared up to any Soul; that Soul never objects its Unworthiness to come
to Christ: Nor its want of Power to believe neither; for it is as Natural to
Confide in and rely upon a known, able, bountiful, and faithful Promiser, as it
is to be jealous of a known Cheat. How well then did Jesus say, Joh. 17.3. This
is Life Eternal, that they might KNOW thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ
whom thou have sent? They that Know the Lord, whose Name is Faithful and True,
will put their Trust in him: and they that do not so, therein make him a Liar;
as was shown before. And that you may know the Lord, and the workings of his
Heart and Soul toward perishing Sinners; let me a little argue the Truth of
this last Proposition, to make way for the Application of the whole; by
showing, in a few Particulars, how certain it is, that Christ will in no wise
cast out any One that comes to him.

1. In that he is not only as full as he can hold of Good Will toward Men, and
every way furnished to Complete their Salvation; but he is also many ways
obliged to receive all that come unto him.

For,

(1.) This is his Fathers Will that sent him, that every one who sees the Son
and believes on him, may have Everlasting Life. Joh. 17. 3. Now, he that drank
off a Cup of Unmixed Wrath, which put him into a Bloody Sweat, and because it
was his Fathers Will; cannot, surely, cast out any one that, having heard and
learned of the Father, comes unto him, as the Appointed and Anointed Savior.

(2.) He is Self-obliged, by his own free Promises, to receive all Comers, good
and bad, in the sense of that Text, Matthew. 22.10. So those Servants went out
into the highways, and gathered together all, as many as they found, both bad
and good: and the Wedding was furnished with guests. In the Invitations,
Commands and Promises of Christ, beforementioned, there is no Exception,
exclusive of any Comer.

(3.) Yea, and his thus sending forth his Servants, with such Messages as they
bring to hunger-starved, naked Beggars, does lay some engagement on the
Bountiful Master of the Feast, to make them welcome, when they come at his
Call, and do as they are bidden, Matthew. 22.4. Again he sent forth other
Servants, saying, Tell them which are bidden, Behold, I have prepared my
dinner; my Oxen, and my Fatlings are killed, and all things are ready: Come
unto the Marriage.

Now, before we pass to another Argument, let us lay these Three things
together: and can it once enter into our Thoughts, that the Dear and only Son
of Gods Love will cross his Father's Will; that Eternal Truth will break his
Promise, and Infinite Goodness invite famishing Souls to a Feast, only to mock
them?

2. Which might have been brought under the former Argument; Such as come to
Christ, are the very Persons that his Father gave him, in the Covenant of
Redemption; and on whom he has set his Unchangeable Love, in the days of
Eternity; His Children, his Sister and his Spouse; for whom he did and suffered
more than Son of Man, or Angels Tongue can, possibly declare; and on whom he
has waited, 'till his head was filled with dew, and his locks with the drops of
the Night: And can he yet find in his heart to thrust and kick them away out of
his Presence, when they come; secretly too, drawn by his Spirit? It can never
be!

3. How can that Meek and Merciful Jesus, whose Bowels of Compassion so
tenderly moved toward those whose hearts were full of Murder and Blasphemy
against him, that he bemoaned, and with many Tears, lamented over them, because
of their unrelenting obstinacy in rejecting him, when he came unto them: How
can he, I say, after this, cast out, abhor and destroy such as come, and fail
down in the dust at his feet? A Mother shall sooner forget her sucking Child,
that she should not have compassion on the Son of her womb; Isai. 49.1^. There
may be such a Monster in Nature. But I will add, that the Tenderest Mother, who
cannot bear to see the least Severity used toward an Enemy, or even a dumb
Creature; such an one shall sooner throw an only Son into the fire, and stamp
on it with her feet, than Christ Jesus will deny the most loving and hearty
welcome to the Coming Soul. There is nothing in Nature so impossible, as that
the Lord Jesus should cast out the Coming Sinner.

Finally; If Christ should cast out so much as one Soul that comes unto him;
No awak'ned Sinner, after that, could have any sufficient Encouragement, from
the Gospel, to believe in the Lord Jesus. For, does not every awakned Soul see
it self to be most unworthy? Is there such another Wretch on the face of Gods
Earth? Have any, but the Devils, such Hearts as Mine? Now, if there were any
Exception, on the account of Unworthiness; No thoroughly awakned Sinner would
ever come. All the hope and support is, that the very worst are not Excepted;
and none were ever rejected, unless they refused to come.

Besides, if any Coming Soul, drawing near to Christ, merely on the
Encouragement of the General offer; Whosoever will, let him take of the Water
of Life freely. And this Large, allreaching Promise, that has drawn so many
thousands to Christ; Him that comes to me I will in no wise cast out; I say,
if any One Soul, from Adam's Fall, to the last Trumpets sounding, willing to
Accept the offer, Coming at Christ's Call, should be Refused; there were no
more any Truth in the Gospel, to be depended on.

APPLICATION.
USE. I. Did GOD the Father give a Number of the Fallen Race of Mankind into
the hands of the Lord Jesus Christ, to be Redeemed and Saved? How does this
Commend the distinguishing Love and Care of the Father of Mercies to that
Remnant; and set forth his esteem of them! Especially considering,

(1.) That not so much as one of all the Millions of Fallen Angels was thus
loved and cared for, Heb. 2.16. Jude, v. 6. Those richer and siner vessels were
cast away; and vessels of clay, yea broken Pot-sheards regarded, and gathered
up; when a new World might have been made with less cost; or this have been
furnished with new vessels, made out of the dust, as Adam; or out of nothing,
as the Angels.

(2.) That these were by Nature no better than the rest of Mankind, who were
overlooked and passed by in God's Eternal Purpose of Love; which He is said to
have Purposed in Himself, concerning the Salvation of this Remnant, Yea, do not
many of the Elect prove much worse than others, in Natural disposition, and
Unnatural Rebellion, before their Conversion? 1 Cor. 1. 26. Ezekiel. XVI. the
whole Chapter. 1 Cor. 6 9, 10, 11. Luke 6. 37. to the end of the Chapter.

(3.) If we consider what it was that moved the blessed God, thus to dispose of
this Distinguished Number; this further Commends the freeness of his rich Grace
in Christ. He was not urged by Entreaties; for there was no Creature in Being
to speak a word for them, Prove. 8.21 -- 31. And the first made the Motion to
our Redeemer. No gain or profit at all could be brought in to the glorious God;
but be must be at vast Expense to Ransom them, and the profit will be all their
own: they were likely to be an Exercise to his Patience, all their Days in this
World; by slighting his offered Grace, before their Conversion, and abusing it
afterward. That, then, which moved the Lord to pity and ransom a Number, was
his Gracious good Will, and mere Sovereign Pleasure, which first Disposed him
to raise them from the Depth of Misery to the Height of Happiness; and then to
commit them into a safe Hand, that the Designed Felicity might be secured
beyond Hazard; that there might be no possibility of a Relapse into a State of
Sin and Misery, which would be Irreparable. And it might be further pondered,
what Engagements and Bonds the Father takes of Christ; and how high he bids by
way of Recompense, -- How he furnishes him for the Work, promising to stand by
him, -- and every thing -- beyond hope and desire, beyond conception or
imagination, of Men or Angels; -- And all to Commend this Love to his Chosen.

USE. II. Has the Lord Jesus Christ undertaken for the Elect? Hence, Nothing
can be more abundantly secured, then their complete Salvation. This is what
Christ has Undertaken; even to bring many Sons to Glory, and the thing is as
good as done, when such an Undertaker has Engaged in it, There be some Men, so
through in Business, that we recon our selves secure, when we have committed an
Affair unto them, and they have given us their Word for the Accomplishment of
it. How much more secure is the Father in having Trusted his Anointed with the
Salvation of his Chosen, Isai. 28. 16. 42. 1. compared with Matthew. 16. 18. This
is the Top of all possible Security: it never has Failed; nor is it possible it
ever should; Heb. 6.18.

USE, III. Was there a Number given to Christ? Shall they all come to him? Will
he in no wise cast out any one that does come? Upon the whole, it nearly and
infinitely concerns us all, and each one for himself, to make it sure that we
be of that Number, which was given to Christ; by coming unto him.

Quest. How can our Election be made sure, now; since it was a thing Transacted
and Settled, before the Foundation of the World? Ephesians. 1.4.

Answ. 1. The Secret, Eternal Purposes of God are the Object of Faith; not the
Rule of Practice. Whatsoever God has Revealed, we must Believe; how
Inconsistent soever it may seem to our dark Minds, and prejudiced Hearts: and
whatsoever he has Commanded, we must endeavor, in the strength of Christ, to
Perform; how cross soever to carnal Reason, and a stiff Will, Now, God
Requires that we give Diligence to make our Calling and Election sure, 2 Pet.
1. 10.

2. Though our Election can never be made more certain then it is, in it self;
yet, may it be made more sure to us. Compare 2 Timothy 2. 19. -- The Foundation of
God stands sure, having this Seal, The Lord knows them that are his, with 1
These. 1.4, 5. Knowing, Brethren, beloved of God, your Election. For our Gospel
came not to you in Word only, but also in Power, and in the Holy Ghost, and in
much Assurance: Which leads to a further Answer:

3. Although we cannot know our Election immediately, in it is Root and Cause;
yet may it be surely known by it is Fruits and Effects. If only as many as were
Ordained to Eternal Life, do Believe, Acts 13. 48. Then as many as do Believe,
were Ordained to Eternal Life. If all that were given to Christ, do come to
him; and none but they, Joh. 10. 26. Ye believe not, because ye are not of my
sheep: then our coming to Christ and believing on him, does prove that we are
of the Number that were given to him. If the Election do obtain Sanctifying
Grace, and the rest are blinded; Romans 11. 7. Then, if thou find a Gracious
Change wrought in thee, whether there be more or less remaining imperfection;
thou may conclude that thy Name is written in Heaven, and Rejoice therein
abundantly, Luke 10. 20.

USE, IV. For the Awakening of Secure Sinners; who, after all Means of
Conviction, continue impenitent in their Unbelief. They see nothing to purpose,
of their Sin and Misery; nothing; of any present danger: How then can they
prize, and seek, and apply to the Great Savior.

By some Method or other, You must be rouzed and alarmed; or Destruction will
come upon you, as travail on a woman with Child; and you shall not escape, 1
These. 5.3, with part of the 2 v. -- The Day of the Lord so comes, as a Thief
in the night. For when they shall say, Peace and safety, then sudden
destruction comes upon them, etc.

Now, this Method has been, in some Examples, found effectual, when others
have failed; even the Method that the WISDOM of GOD here takes, in the Text, as
it Refers to the immediately preceding Context; for All that the Father gives
me, shall come to me, seems to be particularly Directed unto some of his
Hearers, then present; who were dead asleep under the best Means that ever were
used, v. 36. But I said unto you, that ye also have seen me, and believed not.
On which it immediately follows, All that the Father gives me, shall come to
me. q. d. Look to it, ye Secure Sons of Sion, Amos 6.1. Ye careless Daughters
of Jerusalem. If ye will not come to me, that ye might have Life; but persist
in your contempt of me, and opposition to me and my Gospel Method; the
Evangelical Dispensation, that the True Israel is now to be brought under; ye
will by your disobedience to the Gospel, prove your selves to be none of those
that the Father gave me: for, All that the Father gives me, they shall, and
they do and will come unto me.

Now, are not some of you, that hear me this Evening, nearly concerned in this
our Saviors Improvement of the Doctrine of Election; by way of most solemn
Warning? Not concerned to find your Names written in Heaven; When your All for
Eternity depends on it!

Consider Three Things:

1. There can be no substantial ground of rejoicing without this; nor any like
unto it, Luke 10 20. Notwithstanding in this rejoice not, that the Spirits are
subject unto you: but rather rejoice, that your Names are written in Heaven. Ye
which rejoice in a thing of naught, Amos 6. 13. Will thou set thine Eyes on
that which is not? Prove. 23.5.

2. All whose Names are not written in the Book of Life, shall be cast into a
Lake of Fire, burning with Brimstone; Rev. 19. 20. Compared with Chap. 20.15.
These -- were cast a live into a Lake of Fire, burning with Brimstone. And
whosoever was not found written in the Book of Life was cast into the Lake of
Fire. But, Who can dwell with Everlasting Burnings?

3. Your Unbelief concerning the Truth of what you have now heard: Your
Quarrelling against the Equity of it; or Unconcernedness about your Near, Dear
and Everlasting Interest therein, is no Good Sign: John 8.46, 47, 48. And if I
say the Truth, why do ye not believe me? He that is of God, hears Gods Words:
Ye therefore hear them not, because ye are not of God. Then Answered the Jews,
and said unto him, Say we not well that thou art a Samaritan and have a Devil?
Acts 19.9. -- Diverse were hardened, and believed not, but spoke evil of that way
before the Multitude. -- Joh. 12.37. -- 41. But though he had done so many
Miracles before them, yet they believed not on him: That the saying of Isaias
the Prophet might be fulfilled, which he spoke, Saying, Lord, who has believed
our report? and to whom has the arm of the Lord been revealed? Therefore they
could not believe because Isaias said again, He has blinded their eyes, and
hardened their heart; that they should not see with their eyes, nor understand
with their heart, and be converted and I should heal them. I will only add here
some verses that follow in the Chapter of my Text, with Acts 18.17. -- Murmur
not among your selves. No man can come to me, except the Father which has sent
me draw him: -- Many therefore of his Disciples when they had heard this, said,
This is an hard saying, Who can hear it? When Jesus knew in himself that his
Disciples Murmured at it, he said unto them, Does this offend you? -- There are
some of you that believe not. For Jesus knew from the beginning, who they were
that believed not, -- And he said, therefore said I unto you, that no man can
come unto me, except it were given to him of my Father. From that time many of
his Disciples went back, and walked no more with him. Then said Jesus unto the
Twelve, will ye also go away? Then Simon Peter Answered, Lord, to whom shall we
go? Thou have the words of Eternal Life. And we believe and are sure, --. But
Gallio cared for none of these Things. So that instead of believing with
trembling astonishment; and then with joy unspeakable and full of Glory, Acts
9.6. 1 Pet. 1.8. To be cold and indifferent, as if Election and Non-Election
were all one to us; or to be hot and contentious, instead of obeying the Truth,
though never so contrary to the carnal Mind, which is Enmity against God; is
indeed a very bad Sign.

Obj. Is this your Use of Awakening? A Use of Discouragement, I think.

Ans. 1. Would you be Encouraged in your Security, or not plainly and loudly
told your danger, to rouse you from your Beds of Sloth? Would to God that among
so many Scores, as various Inducements have now brought together, there were
not some Elder or Younger, who are not likely to be reached by softer Methods;
nor perhaps, by harder neither. Ye Serpents, ye Generation of Vipers, how can
ye escape the damnation of Hell? are Words that came out of the Savior's own
Mouth, Matthew. 23.33.

2 What has been said under this 4th, is but Preparatory unto

USE, V. Which may be for the Direction and Encouragement of Awakned Sinners.

1. For their Direction in the way to Christ; that in order to their finding
acceptance with him, they fail not of coming aright unto him.

(1.)You must not look at any other Preparation, then what is implied in that
Conviction, of which something has been Doctrinally spoken; to which I refer
you. The sense of Guilt, binding the Sinner over to the Judgment Seat; Utter
insufficiency to obey, either the Law or Gospel, together with the sensible
acknowledgment of Unworthiness to receive the least Degree of sparing Mercy,
which is the lowest kind of Mercy, has driven many a poor perishing Soul to
Christ; when ignorance of the Plague of their own hearts, has kept thousands
and ten thousands from him; who have been either always Sober, or of reformed
Lives, and lively affections; living upon their own Righteousness. I was a live
without the Law once; but when the Commandment came, Sin revived and I died,
Romans 7.9. Dead to the Law; then Married to Christ, v. 4.

(2.) You need not fear going to Christ too soon or too fast, if it be to him,
indeed, that you go: nor need you fear a Repulse, or in the least, doubt of an
hearty and abundant Welcome, provided you come to him merely on the
encouragement given you in the Gospel; which, in short, is this, Christ Jesus
came into the World to save Sinners: He is the End of the Law for Righteousness
to every one that Believes; 1 Timothy 1.15. Romans 10.4. If thou come as a most
forlorn, self-undone, and as to what the whole Creation can possibly do for
thee, an Hopeless Wretch, to the Lord Jesus Christ as an Alsufficient and
Compassionate Savior; full of Grace and Truth; thou can not come amiss, nor
miss of what you come for; viz. Sanctifying as well as Pardoning Grace;
Worthiness and Righteousness, as well as Deliverance and Happiness; even whole
Salvation.

(3.) Wait Diligently, Hopefully and Submissively, for the Inward Revelation of
the Holy Spirit of Promise. He has been with thee and in thee already,
discovering thy miserable State of Bondage, causing Fear: It is his work also
to Reveal Christ in thee, Gal. 1.15. And for this it is that thou art to wait.

[1.] Diligently: Using all Means; whither Public, Private or Secret: Sparing
no Pains in the Use of any Means; Praying Always, and not fainting, 'till thou
have obtained a Blessing: Shunning also whatsoever might, either draw thee back
to the ways of Sin, or drive the Spirit from, thee.

[2.] Hopefully: For it is good that a Man both hope, and quietly Wait for the
Salvation of God; Who takes pleasure in those that hope in his Mercy. Yea, in
hope, to believe against hope, when many and mighty Discouragements may Assault
you; is to give glory to God; and to take the Kingdom of Heaven by force;
pressing into it, by a sort of Violence; such as may Consist with waiting,

[3.] Submissively: As neither length of time, nor seeming denials and
desertions, should make you give over waiting for this Vision, which is for an
Appointed time; So there must be Submission as to the Thing it self, together
with the Time Manner and Measure of this Revelation. If the Lord will Save my
Soul alive, it shall live, for ever glorifying God in the highest; if not, I
can but die, in missing the right Door of Mercy, after all my seeking and
waiting; and Die I shall, most certainly, if I sit still. I will go to the King
of Sion, in my rags and sores, and plead Guilty, as well as Miserable; and if I
perish, I perish. And that you may not fail in this important Article, of
Justifying the LORD and Condemning thy self, how ever it shall please his
Sovereign Majesty to deal with thee; Renew acts of Self-Resignation, a thousand
times over.

I conclude with certain Considerations, full of Encouragement to such as are
willing to be Directed in the Way to Christ; and resolved, under the Spirits
Conduct, to follow the Counsel given.

1. Before ever Man Sinned or had a Being, the Saving of a Remnant, through
Christ, was Proposed, Agreed to, and Resolved on, as what would bring Glory to
God in the Highest, Ephesians. 1.3 -- 12. Luke 2.14. So that by coming to Christ, the
Believing Sinner falls in with the most Pleasing Design that, for all what
appears, ever came into the Eternal Mind: And can your coming off from the
Creature, and coming out of your selves, and coming over to the Lord Jesus
Christ, then, be Unacceptable?

2. Christ Jesus, your Surety, has already paid all your Debts, who are coming
unto him; and has Received a Discharge for the greater as well as lesser Sums,
that were owing to Divine Justice; and you put the Lord to no difficulty; for
he has, as it were, Numberless Blank-Pardons lying by him; it is but putting in
your Name; which he will be Infinitely more ready to do, than you can be to
give it up to him, Psalm. 32.5.86.5. Luke 15.20; and on. Jer. 13.27. Rev. 22.17.

3. Your very coming to Christ, and casting all the Burden of Sin, and guilt,
and fear, and shame Upon him, does more glorify God, than if you had never
Sinned; or could, now answer the Law for your selves, in your own Persons: and
the more Guilt you are laboring under, the more Honor you put upon Christ, by
believing his Righteousness to be Responsible, and his Blood Meritorious for so
great a Sinner; Romans 4.16 -- 22.

Finally; My Young Brethren, and Dearly Beloved; What shall I yet further
offer, for your Encouragement in coming to Christ; that may, by the Blessing of
Heaven, DraW you the faster and the sooner to him.

Here you have it, on the Word of an Immortal King; and he speaks it on his
Eternal Honor, That He will in no wise cast out, the Soul that comes to him.

You are, the most of you, I trust, the Children of Praying, believing Parents;
and so are under the Life giving Promise of Divine Teachings: No man can come
to me, except the Father which has sent me Draw him: -- It is written in the
Prophets, and they shall be all Taught of God. Every man therefore that has
heard and has learned of the Father comes unto me. v. 44, and 45 in the
Chapter of our Text.

You are found in the way wherein God is wont to meet with the Soul that seeks
him, thus Early: and herein you are willing to suffer Reproach for Jesus sake;
which is highly pleasing to him, Prove. 8.17. 1 Pet. 4.14.

Yea, is not the Good Spirit of God Now Striving with many of you? Such as are
gone before you have had their Day: Some improved it, and are happy; others
slip't it, and are lost and Damned for ever. For, ye know, how that afterward
when he would have inherited the Blessing, he was rejected: for he found no
place of Repentance, though he sought it carefully with tears. Behold now is the
Accepted time; behold now is the Day of Salvation. Now even Now thou may be
on the Turning Point for Life or Death Eternal: Deuteronomy. 30. 15, 19. See I have,
this Day set before thee Life and Good, and Death and Evil: -- Therefore choose
Life, that thou and thy Seed may Live.

The Church Covenant of York in the Province of Main.
WE do this day, in the Strength of CHRIST; humbly and heartily avouch the
Lord, whose Name alone is JEHOVAH; Father, Son, and Spirit; to be Our GOD, and
the GOD of our Seed; Entirely, and Everlastingly Devoting, and Dedicating both
our Selves, and Ours, unto His holy Fear, and Service, according to His Word;
Promising and Covenanting to Walk with GOD, and One another, as GOD's Chosen
People and a particular Church of CHRIST, ought to do: Complying with the whole
Will of GOD, so far as He has been pleased, or shall further please to discover
His Mind to us by His Spirit, Word, and Providence; Acknowledging, Embracing,
and Submitting unto the Lord JESUS CHRIST God-Man, as Head of the Church,
Prophet, Priest, and King of out Souls; the Only Mediator between GOD, and Man,
and Surety of the New Covenant; that He may of GOD be made unto us Wisdom,
Righteousness, Sanctification, and Redemption; Looking for Acceptance of our
Persons, and Services only in the Beloved. We do also expressly take GOD the
HOLY GHOST to be our Sanctifier, Teacher, Guide, and Comforter, by whose
gracious Influences we do more particularly Covenant, and Promise to attend
Family, and Closet, as well as Public Duties, and Means of Grace: That we will
also maintain Subjection unto CHRIST in the Officers which GOD has set in the
Church, attending the Seals, and Censures, according to the Orders, and
Discipline of His House: That we will Watch over our Fellow Members, and be
Watched over by them, according to Scripture Rule: That we will Endeavor to
bring up our Children, in the Nurture, and Admonition of the LORD. And in all
things labor to Carry it toward those that are without, as well as toward
those that are within, as becomes the Gospel of CHRIST; that so GOD may dwell
among us, and be for us; and that we may be peculiar People to His Service, and
Glory.

NOW that we may Keep Covenant with our GOD, we desire from the bottom of our
Hearts, to deny all Self-Wisdom, Righteousness, and Strength; and to depend
Wholly, and Only on the Divine All Sufficiency. And wherein, after our best
Endeavors, we shall fail, and fall short: We would Penitently, Believingly,
and with sincere renewed Purposes, be Waiting on Sovereign Grace, (through the
Blood of the Covenant, and Intercession of our Advocate with the Father, JESUS
CHRIST the Righteous) for Repeated Pardons to be Sealed unto us by the Holy
Spirit of Promise. To which FATHER, SON, and HOLY GHOST, One GOD, the same in
Substance, Equal in all Divine Perfections, Be Dominion and Fear, with Eternal
Glory. Amen.

FINIS.

