A VINDICATION OF THE Governor and Government Of His MAJESTY'S Colony of
Rhode Island, etc.

From the unjust Aspersions and Calumnies of John Menzies, Judge of His
Majesty's Court of Vice-Admiralty in the same: Relating to the Proceedings of
said GOVERNMENT, in the Affair of several Slaves, and other Goods Imported into
said Colony, from a Ship lately lying at Tarpawlin-Cove, etc.

A Vindication, etc.
WHEREAS John Menzies Esquire Judge of His Majesty's Court of Vice-Admiralty in
this Colony, having by way of ADVERTISEMENT, in the Boston Gazettes, and
Newspapers, Falsely, and Opprobriously charged the GOVERNOR and COUNCIL of
this His Majesty's Colony of RhodeIsland and Providence Plantations, with
Proceeding Illegally, and Unwarrantably in setting aside the said Judge's
Decree on several Slaves, etc. as Unjust; thereby endeavoring to Scandalize
and Reproach the said GOVERNOR and GOVERNMENT, to Cover his own Arbitrary and
Lawless Decrees: And His Excellency SAMUELSHUTE Esquire Governor of the Province
of the Massachusets-Bay, not suffering this Government to Vindicate themselves
by way of ADVERTISEMENT in the Boston Prints; Therefore are Obliged to Publish
a true State of the Case, for their own Justification, and for the better
Information of those who have Read Judge Menzies's Advertisements, and have
been abused thereby.

UPON the twenty fourth or twenty fifth of April last, Capt. Benjamin Norton of
Newport, arrived at Tarpawlin Cove, in a Ship of about two hundred and fifty
Tons, Laden with White Sugar, Cocoa, and Negroes: the which Ship, (by the
Testimony of the Sailors that did belong to her) was a Dutch Guinea Trader,
that lay at Anchor at the Island of Dominico, one of the French Carribbee
Islands, and was there disposing of their Cargo of Slaves among the French of
(...), in Exchange for Sugar, Cocoa, etc.

WHEN one Roberts a Pirate took her at said Island, and after about two Months
Possession of her, (at the Island of Hispaniola) gave the said Ship and Cargo
to the abovesaid Benjamin Norton, who was then their Prisoner, and had been
taken by them some time before they took the aforesaid Ship.

AND this Government being informed of said Norton's Arrival at Tarpawlin-Cove
with said Ship, and that he had broke Bulk, and put on Board several Sloops and
Boats, several Negroes, and great quantities of Sugar and Cocoa; and also that
several of said Slaves, and some of the said Sugar and Cocoa was Imported into
this Colony, out of the said Ship, in a small Sloop belonging to Newport; His
Honor the Governor immediately issued forth a PROCLAMATION, Requiring all
Persons within this Colony, that had Received any of the sail Negroes, Cocoa or
Sugar, or was knowing to the same; should forthwith Discover and Deliver the
same into the Hands of the Authority of this Government; And that on the
Contrary, he or they so Concealing the same, should be Prosecuted as
Accessories of PIRACY: Which PROCLAMATION was Published in every Town in the
Colony, and a Warrant granted forth to the Sheriff, to Search for the same.
WEEREUPON, Nineteen Negroes, Twenty Bags of Cocoa, and Seven Hogsheads of Sugar
were delivered up to the Government, and by them Secured, until the Council and
Assembly should give further Order for the same.

ON the twenty seventh of May, during the Recess of the General Assembly,
between their May Sessions, and Adjournment in June, Judge Menzies (without the
Knowledge of this Government) opens his Court of Vice-Admiralty, and Decrees,
That the twenty Bags of Cocoa, and seven Hogsheads of Sugar, were Forfeited to
the KING, the GOVERNOR and the Informer: But before any Copies were given of
that Decree, the said Judge made another Decree, of the same Date, different
from the Former, and orders the same to be Sold by Public VENDUE, and the
Price to be Lodged in the Collector's Hands, for the space of three Months; and
if no Claimer in that time, then to be Forfeited. (As was ordered in his first
Decree that was stifled) The Negroes likewise were ordered to be Sold, and the
Price to be Lodged with the Collector; and if no Claimer within the time of
three Months as aforesaid, then to be Forfeited to the Vice Admiral, or as His
Majesty should Determine; or to the King, the Governor, and the Collector: But
before the time appointed for the Sale, the Judge makes two other Decrees of
the same Date, (out of Court, and never Published) much different to the two
former; wherein he orders the Price of the Cocoa and Sugar, to be Lodged twelve
Months and a Day in the Collector's Hands, without any Claimer appear to Avouch
the same, or to the Vice Admiral, or others Authorized by His Majesty, or to
the Informer, as in Case of Seizures. And falling of any such Claimers within
the twelve Months, then the same was declared Lawful Seizure, and to belong to
the King, the Governor and Collector. The Price of the Negroes was to be
Lodged in Mr. Augustus L ucas his Hands, until the Judge should otherwise
Determine: The which was to be conveyed out of the Colony, as the said L ucas
did Declare some time after.

ON the thirteenth of June, the Assembly Met according to Adjournment, and they
being Informed of the Judge's indirect Proceedings, Recommended the Matter to
the Governor and Council; desiring them to take the same into their
Consideration, and to take such proper Measures as would be for the Profit of
the Owners of said Goods, and the Credit of the Government.

THE Governor and Council taking the Premises into their serious
Consideration, and upon due Debate of the Matter, it was Voted, That whereas
the Honorable John Menzies, Judge of the Court of Vice-Admiralty in this
Colony, had without their Knowledge, Advice or Concurrence, Ordered, and
Decreed, that the Disposition of the aforesaid Negroes, Cocoa and Sugar as he
thought fit, and to Convey the Price of the same out of the Colony, was a
Contempt of the Government.

AND the Governor and Council was at the same time informed, that in some of
His Majesty's Governments in the West India Islands, Piratical Goods, etc. had
in the like Nature (though not with the like Contempt) been Condemned and
Disposed of by the Admiralty Courts, whereby the said Governments have, and are
Exposed to Satisfy and make good the same.

IT was therefore Resolved by the Governor and Council, That as Judge Menzies
had acted in the aforesaid Premises without their Knowledge, Advice or
Approbation, so they would have no Reference to what he had done; but to
prevent his further Proceeding in the like Nature, gave Orders to the Sheriff,
not to Deliver the Negroes, Cocoa and Sugar, without their Directions: And on
the fifteenth of June, the Governor and Council Ordered, That the aforesaid
Nineteen Negroes, Twenty Bags of Cocoa, and Seven Hogsheads of Sugar, being
bona peritura, should be Sold at Public Vendue, on the twenty third of June;
and that the Governor, Deputy Governor, and Collector of His Majesty's
Customs, should Order the Conditions of Sale, and Receive the Price, to be
Secured for One Year and a Day for the Claimers: And if none Appeared in that
Time, till His Majesty's Pleasure should be known thereon.

ON the twenty second of June, about Ten of the Clock before Noon, the
aforesaid Judge Menzies, Mr. Augustus Lucas, Deputy Judge, and Mr. -- Boydell,
Register of said Court, came to the Governor's House, and soon after them, the
Deputy Governor and three Assistants. (After the usual Complements) Judge
Menzies said, That the Governor and Council had interrupted him in the
Execution of his Office; and demanded the Delivery of the aforesaid Negroes,
etc. and that he might Proceed according to his Decrees without Interruption:
And then produced his Commission, and Read a Paragraph thereof Relating to
Pirates, Amplifying upon the same; and one other Paragraph, wherein the
Government was to give him Assistance in the Execution of his Office: After
which Mr. Boydell, having a Paper in his Hand, Read it; wherein the Judge
Required sundry Things, much as he had done by Word of Mouth* Upon which, the
Governor Requested a Copy of what was Read, that he might be capable to Answer
it: Judge Menzies Replied, That we had heard it, and that was sufficient.

THE Governor told the Judge, That his Proceeding was without the Knowledge or
Approbation of the Government; and that he designed (as they were informed) to
carry the Price, or Produce of the Negroes, etc. out of the Colony; and that
the Government deemed themselves Responsible for the same: For which Reasons,
they had taken Methods to Secure themselves, and Read a Copy of the Council's
Order to the Judge. After which, the Judge requested the Governor to give him
that Copy which had been Read: The Governor told him, it was a Copy he kept
for his own Service; and that if he pleased, he might have a Copy from the
General Recorder.

THEN the Judge said, That the Price of the Negroes, etc. in case of no Owners,
belonged to the Vice Admiral, and that he designed to secure it for him. The
Governor then asked the Judge, Who he deemed to be Vice Admiral of this
Colony? Who replied* His Excellency Colonel SHUTE. The Governor told the said
Judge, that Matter had often been Debated, and particularly in Col. Dudley's
Administration, but it was never granted by this Government. Then the Judge
Replied, For which Reason it was incerted in his Commission, and he deemed
himself to be ViceAdmiral here. The Governor told him, Though our Charter did
not expressly say any thing about the Vice-Admiralty, notwithstanding he
presumed there was the like Authority given, and that the Power of Vice Admiral
was vested in him, during his present Capacity, throughout the Jurisdiction of
this Colony. The Deputy Governor told the Judge, that by our Charter, all
Fines and Forfeitures were given to the Colony; and Read that Paragraph to the
Judge, the which caused some needless Discourse, foreign to the Matter then
before us; but it was not insisted upon, nor once mentioned, that the Price of
the Negroes, etc. or any other Fines or Forfeitures belonged to the Governor
as Vice Admiral. This is the Truth and the Substance of what passed at the
Governor's House. About two of the Clock in the Afternoon, the Marshal of said
Court delivered to the Governor from said Judge, a Paper wherein (after
setting forth how he had Read his Commission under the Great Seal before the
Governor, etc.) the said Judge Desires and Requires the Governor in his
Majesty's Name, to deliver up the Negroes, etc. and that he might not be
interrupted in the Sale thereof; and that the Courthouse and Town School-House
be ordained for the holding his Court, and that he might have Access therein at
all seasonable Hours.

ABOUT four of the Clock Post Meridiem the same Day, the Governor returned
Answer to the Judge, That as he had done, so he should upon all Occasions, give
all due Aid and Assistance, as well as Encouragement to him in the due
Execution of his Office, according to his Commission, so far as he kept within
the Bounds and Limits of the same, and did not Entrench upon the Liberty and
Property of this His Majesty's Colony: And for what he Required in the several
Paragraphs, he had no Authority as Governor to make any Answer to the same,
until he had advised with the Council and Assembly, and received their
Instructions thereon. That as to the Courthouse and Town School-House, he had
not the Disposing of either; but that as he had not met with any Obstruction
therein, so he presumed he would meet with no other Treatment for the Future:
PROVIDED he did not meddle nor set up any Court there that should any ways
Entrench upon the Acts and Orders of the General Assembly, or General Council;
in which Cases, he was advised to Obstruct his Accession into either of said
Houses.

JUDGE Menzies made no further Application for the said Houses, but opens his
Court at a Public House; and on the same Day, passes a Fourth Decree about the
Cocoa and Sugar, and at the same time Decrees the Survey (...) and Searches to
pay a Fine of Ten Pounds, for not giving him in S^^ple of the Cocoa and Sugar,
which was in the Possession of the Sheriff.

ON the twenty third of said June, early in the Morning, a Citation came out
against the Deputy Governor and Collector, citing them to appear before him,
to answer for some Contempt (as he said) by them committed against his Court,
upon the Penalty of Fifty Pounds each. The Governor being informed thereof,
advised with such of his Council as was near at Hand, and it was thought
Advisable to grant forth a Prohibition, to prohibit the said Judge from
proceeding in Opposition to, and Contempt of the Governor and Council's Acts
and Orders. A Prohibition was thereupon drawn up, and Read in the Presence of
the Judge and his Officers, (by the Sheriff) before the Judge opened his Court
that (...). Notwithstanding the said Prohibition, the Judge opened his Court,
and in Contempt of said Prohibition. Decreed that the Deputy Governor and
Collector should each of them pay a Fine of Fifty Pounds for their Contempt, as
is set forth in said Decree: And upon passing said Decrees, he immediately
mounted his Horse, and Rode the Back Way out of Town in a Violent Rain, (...)
-- At two of the Clock in the Afternoon of said Day, the Negroes, Cocoa and
Sugar, were Exposed to Sale at Public Vendue, pursuant to the Council's Order;
and in a few Hours was all Sold at a good Price, and is Secured according to
the Governor and Council's Order.

AFTER the Judge's Departure, the Governor was informed, That the Deputy
Register was seen to out a Leaf out of the Register Book* The Governor upon
the said Information, sent for the said Deputy Register* and upon his
Examination, he readily confessed that he had cut a Leaf out of said Book by
the Judge's Order. The Governor then demanded of the said Deputy Register, the
Copies of all the said Judge's Decrees about the Negroes, Cocoa and Sugar; and
in two or three Days after, the said Deputy Register delivered several Copies
to the Governor; who upon Examination, and Perusal thereof, found that the
first and second Decrees were missing, with the first Conditions of Sale. The
Governor then Demanded Copies of them also; to which the Deputy Register
answered, That he had given his Honor Copies of all the Decrees that he had
Registered in his Office, and that he could give no other. The Governor then
told the Register, that the Collector had Copies of the second Decrees Attested
by him. (The first as the Governor was informed, was stifled before any Copies
were given out) The Deputy Register made answer, He might make the best of them
he could, for they were not Registered in his Book; so that the Governor could
not obtain the said Copies any other ways than from the Collector's Copies; by
which it may justly be presumed, that the Judge's first and second Decrees were
cut out of the Register Book; for he that will cut out one Leaf, will not
scruple to cut out more to serve the like Turn.

THIS is a true and exact NARRATIVE of the Governor and Council's Proceedings,
relating to Judge Menzies, about the Negroes, Cocoa and Sugar, which the said
Judge has so Unfairly and Erroniously set forth by way of Advertisement in the
Boston (...) Papers; to the which in the next place is answered.

1 st. JUDGE Menzies in his said Advertisements, Charges the Governor and
Council, That they Illegally and Unwarrantably Obstructed his Sale of the
aforesaid nineteen Negroes, Cocoa and Sugar, expressly contrary to His Majesty's
Commission, etc.

Answer. The Governor and Council were at great Trouble, Charge and Expense,
in Recovering and Securing the said Negroes, etc. for the Lawful Owners, or in
Default thereof, as His Majesty should Dispose of the same; and that Judge
Menzies was never possessed of the said Negroes, etc. nor did he ever apply
himself to the Government for their Advice, Approbation or Concurrence therein;
but on the contrary, in an Arbitrary and Contemptuous manner, Condemns the
same, in such manner as his several Decrees set forth; thereby to Defraud the
Owners, and impose upon the Government, (by Clandestinely conveying the Price
out of the Colony) who deemed themselves Responsible for the same, in case of
any Imbezelments, which they had just Grounds to suspect was designed; so that
we presume it will appear, that Judge Menzies has Illegally and Unwarrantably
intr^^^^ upon the Government, and Erroniously Represented them.

2 dly. Judge Menzies in his Advertisement, charges the Governor and Council
with refusing him a Copy of their Act, when demanded by him, on Pretense that
the Ordering and Disposing of such things did belong to them by their Charter;
and that the Governor as Vice Admiral, has a Right to the Value thereof, etc.

Answ. THE Governor Affirms to the Contrary, that the Judge was not denied a
Copy; but that he told the Judge in his own House, that he might have a Copy
out of the Recorder's Office* But the Deputy, as he has informed since, did
say, That if the Judge would not give a Copy of his Demands (by Words) in
Writing, that he ought not to have a Copy of the Council's Act. However, if
that had been Concurred with by the Governor, and Council, (as it was not) it
would not have amounted to a Denial, as the Judge unfairly Affirms: Neither was
there any Pretense made by the Governor and Council, that the Ordering and
Disposing of such belonged to them by their Charter; or that the Governor had
a Right to the same as Vice Admiral: Neither was any such thing insisted on,
any other ways than Transiently by the Deputy Governor as is aforesaid.

3 dly. THE Judge Affirms in his Advertisement, That John Wanton and Nathaniel
Kay Esqrs; had ordered two Parts of the Produce of said Negroes, etc. to be
Lodged in their own Hands, and the third to be given to the Governor.

Answ. THE Council requested the Governor to Receive the whole Price and
Secure it, as was ordered; but the Governor Refusing, without some other was
joined with him, the Council therefore to gratify the Governor, added the
Deputy Governor and Collector with him; so that his asserting that Wanton and
Kay (...) the Governor one third part, (...) False and Scandalous.

4 thly. THE Judge says this Day and the Day proceeding, (but does not say in
what Month or Year) the Doors of the Courthouse were shut, and the Judge of
the Admiralty: (it would have been Decent to have said Vice-Admiralty) denied
Access thereunto, unless he would comply with their Acts of Council.

Answ. THIS Article is very unfairly and unhandsomely Represented; for the
Judge had no positive Denial of Access into the Courthouse, but as the
Governor intimated to the Judge, as (...) before Rehearsed, ( viz.) That if he
the said Judge held any Court in said House, any ways to Meddle or Entrench
upon the Acts or Orders of the General Assembly, or General Council, in that
case he was advised to deny him Access. Besides, the Courthouse Doors were
shut every Day, but in the times of the Sitting of the Courts or some Public
Meetings; so that it is no ways strange to have (...).

Woe unto them that Decree Unrighteous Decrees, and ^^ite (...) which they have
Prescribed.

Signed by Order of the Governor and Council R. Ward, Secretary.


