A SERMON Showing the Suitableness, and the Benefit of PRAYER IN Affliction.

By Jeremiah Wise, A. M. Pastor of the Church in Berwick.

Hos. 5.15 In their Affliction they will seek me early.

2 Chronicles. 33.12, 13. When he was in affliction, he besought the Lord his God,
and prayed unto him, and he was entreated of him.

Boston, Printed by John Allen, for Nicholas Boon, at the Sign of the Bible in
Cornhill, 1717.

TO THE Reader.
TO Pray to God is a Duty incumbent on every man in the World. An External as
well as an Internal Adoration is due to him, on the account of his being our
Creator. Psalm. 95.6. O come let us worship and bow down; Let us kneel before
the Lord our Maker.

It is true concerning Unregenerate men, that they sin in their Prayers.
Nevertheless, Prayer is their Duty. They sin because they do not Pray from a
right Principle, nor for a right End, nor after a right manner; yet the Act is
not a sin but a duty. Simon Magus who was a very wicked man, was bid to pray
God if perhaps the thought of his heart might be forgiven. And the Gracious God
does sometimes so far regard the Prayers of Ungodly men, as to remove Temporal
Afflictions and Judgments upon their Praying to him; as we see in Ahab,
Rehoboam, and in the Men of Niniveh. Notwithstanding which, there are many
Prayerless Ones in the World. It were well if there were none such in
New England. They will have their doom with the Workers of Iniquity at the Last
Day. Psalm. 14.4. Have the Workers of Iniquity no knowledge, they call not on
the Lord. A Prayerless man is most certainly an Ungodly man. Psalm. 32.6. Every
one that is godly will pray. A man does no sooner begin to be a real Christian,
but it will be said of him, Behold he prays, Acts 9.11. Yet it is reported
there are many Prayerless Families. There was a time when there were few such
Families in New England. Whether there are any such in the Town where this
Sermon was Preached, the Lord knows. If there are such, this Word will be a
Witness against them another day. And there is a Scripture which may strike
Terror into the heart of every Prayerless Master of a Family; It is that, Jer
10.25. Pour out thy fury upon the Heathen that know thee not, and upon the
Families that call not on thy Name. Such Families, although they may call
themselves Christians, are no better than Heathen. Nay, they are less
Religious. For the Heathen had their Penates, their Household Gods.

Prayer is always a duty, but especially in a time of Affliction. Some that
never Prayed before, when Distress and danger has attended them, have betaken
themselves to their Prayers. Hence it has been a Proverbial saying, Qui nescit
orare, discat Navigare. It Is noted of Jonah's Mariners, that when they were in
danger of being Cast away, they Cried every one to his God, and said to Jonah,
Call upon thy God, if so be God will think upon us, that we perish not. It
argues great stupidity and hardness of heart, when it can be said of any, the
People turn not to him that smiles them, neither do they seek the Lord of
Hosts, Isa. 9.13.

To Excite and Direct Afflicted Ones in Prayer to God, is the Pious Design of
the Author of this Discourse. His Modesty made him unwilling to grant a Copy of
his Sermon for Publication; but the Importunity of the principal of his
Hearers, has at last obtained it from him, who has also desired my perusal of
it. I find a serious Spirit in it, and a godly design to promote the Interest
of Religion, and the good of Souls, and hope it will prove beneficial not only
to those that heard it, but to others likewise.

It was a signal Favor of God to his People, that he raised up of their Sons
for Prophets, and of their Young men for Nazarites. This has he done for his
New England People, whereof the Writer of this Sermon is an encouraging
Instance.

I am leaving the World, having been a very Unprofitable Servant therein, and
an unworthy Preacher of the Gospel, for the space of Threescore Years. Most of
the present Ministers in New England, have come into the World since that; Many
of them, (and this Author in particular) were once under my Inspection and
Praesidentship. If the Words of one that is (so far as I can understand) the
Oldest Minister now alive in New England, may be of any regard, I would say to
the Younger Ministers, Be Steadfast in the Profession and Practice of that Faith
and Order of the Gospel, which your now Glorified Predecessors have left as a
Legacy to their Posterity.

Boston, July 6. 1717. Increase Mather.

The Suitableness and Benefit of PRAYER in Affliction.
Jam. 5.13. Is any among you afflicted? Let him Pray.


AT the seventh verse foregoing, the Apostle exhorts the Christians to whom he
wrote this Epistle, and together with them, all the Saints and People of God,
in all Succeeding. Ages and Generations, to be patient under the Sufferings it
should please their Sovereign Lord and Master, to exercise them with. Be
patient Brethren -- As though the Apostle had said, bear up with Christian
Courage and Fortitude, under all the sore and heavy Trials; undergo the most
pressing Calamity, with a firmness and stayedness of mind, becoming the
Character of Christ's Servants: Neither manifest any uneasiness under the
Cross, or impatience under any affliction which is unbecoming the Relation you
stand in to the meek and lowly Jesus; and the Profession you have made of
taking up the Cross, and following him: Of looking more at the things that are
Unseen and Eternal, then at visible, temporal or sensible things.

And to quicken them thus to be patient until the Coming of their Lord, which
he also in the same verse advises them of; he further tells them in the next
verse, That the time was drawing on apace, when their Lord and Head, who at
present sympathizes with them, will appear the second time without Sin unto
Salvation; when he will deliver them out of all their Distresses, wipe all
tears from their Eyes; take away the Body of Sin, as well as the burden of
Sorrow; and make them Everlastingly Blessed and Happy.

Again, He endeavors further to fortify their minds against all
Discouragements, by the Example of the holy Prophets, which have spoken in the
Name of the Lord, verse. 10. who though they were very dear to God, were yet
notwithstanding maligned, traduced and persecuted by men; and are Exemplary for
their unfainting perseverance under the most grievous Sufferings from the
tongues and hands of men. Take the Prophets -- for an Example of suffering
affliction and patience; they are set forth as Examples of both; that if
Christians suffer the same things, they may suffer with the same minds.

Lastly, He Encourages them by the Consideration of the present, as well as
future Happiness, that does accrue to Christians by their Sufferings;
especially by their patience under them, Ver. 11. Behold we count them happy
which endure. Which Assertion, he Exemplifies in the Case of afflicted patient
Job; Ye have heard of the patience of Job, and have seen the end of the Lord.
The good issue that God gave to all his troubles, in restoring him to his
former State, and doubling his Prosperity. Which instance of Goodness and
Mercy, (for it is God here ascribed to his merciful Nature) should Encourage
his People to trust in him, ( being the same yesterday, to day and for ever) to
expect and hope for a good end to all their troubles, whatever they be, and
therefore to wait with patience for it.

Now our Text comes in as a word of Advice, under the foregoing Exhortation,
wherein the Apostle directs Christians under Afflictions, what method to take
to obtain Grace whereby to Glorify God, and carry it becomingly under them; and
that is by believing fervent Prayer, as you may see by comparing the Text and
Context. -- Is any among you afflicted? let him Pray. Where the Apostle
supposes there might be those among them, that were afflicted: And this he
might well, since the People of God especially are liable to trouble in this
World. Is any among you Christians, Professors of the Name of Christ, the
Servants of the true and living God, afflicted Personally, or Relatively, by
inward or outward Trouble? This Question implies a strong affirmation, that as
such are liable to, so they may be under Affliction; they may be Exercised as
well as others, with Sickness, Poverty, Disgrace; with the loss of dear
Relations, and the like. Now in this Case, what method shall a Christian take,
what shall he do, when afflicted in any of these, or any other Regard? The
Apostle answers in the next words: Let him pray, as though the Apostle had
said, let him seek unto God, and commit his Cause unto him, who does great
things, and unsearchable, mavelous things without number; who sets up on
high those that be low, that those which mourn may be exalted to safety. Job
5.8, 9.11, 15. Let him Pray. It is expressed in the Imperative Mood, and denotes
duty; this is a Christian's duty, and very suitable at such a time. When a
Christian is under the Smiles of Divine Providence, then it is suitable for him
to Rejoice. Is any merry, let him sing Psalms? and thereby express and give
vent to his Spiritual and Religious Joy. But when he is under a dark Cloud,
(like one of those, which in Winter days intercepts the Beams of the Sun) that
deprives him of all present Comfort; it becomes him then the cast himself down
and Worship God (as Job did.) Then he should speak out of the Ground, and his
Speech should be low out of the dust, as the Prophet speaks. The Doctrine which
the words afford, is this, viz.

Doct. That Prayer is a Duty very suitable and necessary in a time of
Affliction.

This is a Duty suitable and necessary at all times; for the Light of Nature
teaches it, as well as Divine Revelation Enforces it. The Fundamental Reasons
of which flow from the Divine Perfections and Excellencies, and that Relation
we stand in to God, as our Creator, Preserver and Benefactor; which strongly
Infer an indispensible Obligation lying upon us, to Worship Him. Hence the very
Heathens, who had only the dim Light of Nature to Guide them, paid a Natural
Homage unto him (though in a blind manner;) and since we have the super-added
Light of Revelation (which they had not) we can be no ways Excused in the
neglect of a duty, which is so strongly Enforced therein. But though this Duty be
so suitable and necessary at all times, yet it is peculiarly so in a time of
Affliction; then God calls us to it more especially, and our own necessities
put us upon it. The Doctrine may be Explained and Confirmed under two
Propositions.

As Namely,

Proposition I. That Christians are liable to, and do often meet with
Affliction in this World.

Proposition II Prayer is a Duty very suitable and necessary in a time of
Affliction.

Proposition I. Christians are liable to, and do often meet with Affliction in
this World. This is the settled Portion and Inheritance of all men in this
Life: Who are born unto trouble, as the Sparks fly upward. Though man's life in
this World, be but of few days, yet it is full of trouble. And the best men in
the World meet with so much as may justly cause them to cry out with the Wise
man, Vanity of Vanities, all is vanity and vexation of Spirit. The Psalmist
tells us, That the afflictions of the Righteous are many. Psalm. 34.19. And we
many instance in some of them. As namely,

First, in Poverty, which the Godly have no more security against, than any
others: But they as often fall into low, mean, abject Circumstances, as any
other men. Many that are rich in Faith, are however the poor of this World,
James 2, 5. And this Condition has great temptation accompanying it, as well as
a full and plentiful Estate; and therefore Agur deprecates them both, lest
being full he should deny God; or being poor, he should be tempted to take
indirect ways to maintain himself and his; and so take the name of God in vain.
Prove. 30.8, 9.

Again, Bodily Sickness is another Worldly Trouble, which they are not freed
from by Christ, but are as liable to as others: It being appointed unto all men
once to die, and Sickness being Death's Harbinger, or Forerunner. Yea, many
times, they are Exercised with lingering, pining Sickness, with constant and
strong pain all their Lives, which take away the Comfort of Life. It Is the
portion of many Godly Persons to have this thorn in the flesh. Thus it was with
Gaius, who had a healthy Soul in a weakly Body. 3 Epist. Joh. v.2. And on this
account, they may say, that they are in deaths often.

Further, God sometimes suffers them to be afflicted with Reproaches and
Disgrace: Who have been more vilified and contemned, than the Servants of God?
Whose Names have been more laden with contumely or reproach, than theirs? and
as this is a great trial, ( Reproach has broken my heart, says the Psalmist,
Psalm. 69.20.) so it is a great aggravation of it, when they have given their
Enemies too much cause to Reproach them, by their imprudent or sinful Carriage*
Every man has a tender Regard to the honor of his Name. A Good One is rather
to be chosen than Great Riches; yea, it is next to life, and when that is
touched, a man is touched in a very tender part. And though a man's Innocence is
a good support to him, and the hope that some time or other, it will be cleared
up to the World; that this Good Name will be taken out of the dirt, and be
win'd clean; yet in the mean time, a man cannot but be uneasy under this
shocking Trial.

Once more, God sometimes Exercises his Children (and that very frequently)
with the loss of dear Relations, or with their miscarriages, which is near as
bad; God sometimes afflicts his People with the Death of dear Relations. And
though there be those Considerations to be fetched from the Word and Covenant of
God, which should still and quiet them under such trials; as that it is the Will
of God it should be so; and that as to godly Deceased Friends, it is better for
them to be absent from the Body, and to be present with Christ; their Death
being an outlet to the troubles of this World, and an inlet to the Joys of
the next: Yet notwithstanding, when the parting time comes, it is a great trial
to them, a sore fight of affliction. The Natural Affections and Passions will
have vent, they will take their turn as well as Grace. Patient Job could not
help giving vent to his grief and sorrow of heart, at the Death of his
Children; he rent his Mantle, and shaved his Head; which actions were tokens of
grief in use amongst those Eastern Nations.

Next to this Trial by the Death of Relations, is that other; when those that
are dear to them, take up with a licentious course of Life, and give up
themselves to commit all Iniquity with greediness, especially when they are
irreclaimable; so that the Advice, Reproofs or Counsels of Friends, or any
means that can be used with them will not do, to prevent their running
headlong to destruction. This cuts them to the quick, and makes their very
Souls bleed within them. This is in some sort more grievous than to bury them;
for hereby they are continued as living Crosses, and they are mourned for every
day.

Lastly, The Godly sometimes meet with inward as well as ouward Trouble. God
sometimes hides his face from them, and they are troubled, as it was with the
Psalmist, Psalm. 30.7. Sometimes they suffer his terrors, as Heman did; who
says, in Psalm. 88.15, 16. I am afflicted, and ready to die from my youth up;
while I suffer thy terrors, I am distracted. This the Godly are liable to, and
do meet with more or less* They have their ups and downs, in respect of Inward
Spiritual Peace and Comfort; their Spring and Fall, Summer and Winter. This is
their state of probation, and therefore not their Rest: God sees it best
sometimes thus to Exercise them, to bring them to a more immediate Dependence
upon himself, in whom all their springs are. And this they must not think
strange of, nor think it hard dealing, since it is agreeable to the tenor of
the New Covenant of Grace, and no ways inconsistent with the faithfulness of
God, who though he will and does Correct them when there is need of it; Yea,
sometimes to show his Sovereignty: Yet he will not suffer his Faithfulness to
fail, nor alter the thing that is gone out of his mouth, Psalm. 89.30, 31, 32,
33.

Prop. II. That Prayer is a Duty very suitable and necessary in a time of
Affliction.

Here we may show two things.

1. That Prayer is very suitable and necessary in time of Affliction. And,

2. How the Duty must be then managed; or how Afflicted Christians must Pray.

1. We are to show, That Prayer is a very suitable and necessary Duty in
Affliction. Afflicted Christians should then go to God by Prayer.

1. Because God is the Author of Affliction. I make Peace, I Create Evil, (says
God) Is there Evil in the City, and the Lord has not done it? Ames 3.6. Which
is not to be meant of the Evil of Sin, for that is an Evil, which the perfectly
infinitely Holy God can never be the Author of; But it is meant of the Evil of
Punishment, or Affliction; for of this God is the Author. Affliction, (let the
immediate Causes be what they will) is from the Hand of God. Some look upon
afflictions as the productions of Natural Causes, or as Casualties, or as the
Effects of the displeasure or injustice of men: If they are Sick, they are
ready to attribute it to the Heat, or Cold; if a Loss comes in their Estates,
they asscribe it to the carelessness or falseness of their Servants, but they
overlook the Hand of God. Now to whom should Christians have Recourse, for
relief and help under Affliction, but to the Author of their troubles; for he
that sends trouble, can remove it again. That hand that strikes, can cause it
self to cease from striking. Remove thy stroke from me* I am consumed by the
blow of thy hand. Psalm. 39.10.

2. Because this is one end God aims at in afflicting his, that they may be
thereby stirred up to this Duty; they should therefore pray and seek his face
at such a time, in compliance with his design therein. Many times when his
Children grow remiss or negligent in this duty, he afflicts 'em for it; it may
be they are visited with Sickness, or with some loss in their Estates; their
Outward Affairs don't prosper though managed with never so much prudence; or they
may be deprived of desirable Relations, etc. Now the peculiar intent of God in
those afflictions and troubles, which light upon careless and slothful
Christians, is to humble them, for their neglects, and to quicken them to duty.
Agreeably, says God, I will go, and return to my place, (i. e.) withdraw my
gracious Presence, or carry it in my Providence toward them, as though I had:
till they (my People) acknowledge their offense, and seek my face; in their
affliction they will seek me early, Hos. 5.15.

3. Because their own benefit and interest obliges them to it. In this way only
can they expect support under, a sanctified improvement of, and deliverance out
of their afflictions; for God only can do this for them, and for this he will
be enquired of to do it for them. God only is able to support a Christian under
affliction: The least Evil being too heavy for him to bear up cheerfully under,
unless the Everlasting Arms be underneath him; Otherwise a Christian will soon
grow impatient and disontented, or sink under discouragement. How little a
thing made Jonah angry, and wish to die, when his Spirit was out of frame. Jon.
4.9. But what will a Christian do when he comes into the swellings of Jordan?
When he meets with great and sore Trials, which he must expect, unless his
hands be made strong by the hands of the Mighty God of Jacob. Surely God's
Grace only is sufficient for him, and therefore he must (...) to God for his
help, that he may neither slight his hand, nor faint under his rebukes. Heb.
12.5.

Again, God only can and will make the Affliction turn to our Benefit, through
Prayer and the supply of the Spirit; whatever affliction a Christian meets
with, the Almighty designs it for good and advantage to him. The Fathers of our
flesh correct us many times for their pleasure only; but whom the Lord
corrects, he does it for our benefit, that we may be partakers of his Holiness,
Heb. 12.10. He has promised, that all things shall work together for good to
them that love God, Romans 8.28. and afflictions are some of those things; they
will not alone do us any good, it is not so much from any natural property, or
inherent Virtue, that they do us good, as from the sanctifying Grace of God,
and therefore when Christians are under God's afflicting hand, they should pray
for a sanctified Improvement thereof.

Lastly, God only can deliver the Afflicted Christian out of his troubles: This
God assumes to himself, as his Prerogative. I kill and I make alive, (says God)
I wound and I heal; neither is there any that can deliver out of my hand. Unto
God the Lord, belong the issues from death. Psalm. 68 20. He knows how to
deliver the Godly out of temptations. 2 Pet. 2 9. Many are the afflictions of
the Righteous, but the Lord delivers him out of them all. Psalm. 34.19. But this
he will be sought unto for; accordingly we may and should pray for deliverance.
As we may deprecate afflictions, so we may pray to have them removed. So the
Psalmist prays to God, to remove his stroke away from him. Psalm. 39.10. The
Apostle prayed that the trouble he was under, which was a Thorn in the flesh,
might be removed. 2 Cor. 12.8. God expects that such should call upon him in
the day of trouble, and has promised he will deliver them. Psalm. 50.15.

4. Because God has so expressly required, that Christians should pray to him,
as at other times, so particularly in time of Affliction. Is any among you
afflicted? Let him Pray in their affliction, they will seek me early.

2. We come to show how afflicted Christians should pray. And here I would say.

1. They must pray in the Name of Christ, relying on his Oblation and
Intercession for a gracious answer of Prayer for all they ask agreeably to the
Will of God; particularly for support under, deliverance from, and a sanctified
improvement of their afflictions; it is only in the Name of Christ, that God
will be sought unto. Whatever ye do in word or deed, do all in the Name of the
Lord Jesus; giving thanks to God and the Father by him. Col. 3.17. So we must
pray to the Father by him; and our blessed Lord has told us, that whatsoever we
ask the Father in his Name, believing, we shall receive. Joh. 16.33, 34. If we
would pray in a time of affliction, or indeed at any other time, so as to be
heard and answered; we must pray with Faith in the Name of Christ. We can be
heard in no other Name, nor in his Name except we believe. If any man lack
wisdom, let him ask it of God, -- but but let him ask in faith. Jam. 1.5, 6.
The holy Spirit of God must help our Infirmities, and make Intercession for us,
with groanings that cannot be uttered, who know not what to pray for as we
ought. Romans 8.26.

2. Afflicted Christians must pray with Fervency. The fervent effectual Prayer
of the Righteous man avails much. v. 16. Context. But then this Fervency must
be more, than a mere natural earnestness of Expression, even vehemence of
Spiritual Affections; an earnestness springing from a sense of a persons need,
and the worth of the Mercies he is praying for. One that is sensible of these,
will be earnest indeed; will wrestle with God as Jacob did, and not give over
till he has obtained the Blessing. Cold and dead Prayers argue indifferency,
and tempt God to deny; but fervent prayers argue persons to be in good earnest;
they will turn to account. It Is the Fervent Prayer that is Effectual.

3. Persons at such a time, must pray with Frequency and Constancy. Their
troubles should send them often to the Throne of Grace. Our Lord Jesus returned
upon his Father, he prayed thrice that the Cup might pass. And the Apostle,
that God would remove that affliction he was under. And as they should be
frequent, so they should be constant in Prayer; Praying always, says the
Apostle, Ephesians. 6.8. Pray without ceasing. 1 These. 5.17. Where the Apostle don't
intend, that Christians should spend their whole time in this Duty; there being
other Duties of great Consequence also to be attended: Some time must be spent
in Reading, Hearing, Meditating; and not only our General, but our Particular
Calling must be attended in their season. One Duty must not justle with, or
thrust out another. The Apostle therefore intends only this, that Christians
should persevere in Prayer, be frequent and constant therein. In this sense the
Psalmist is to be understood, in Psalm. 109*4. I give my self unto prayer. As
though he Devoted himself wholly to it. But he means no more, than that he did
abound in this duty. He prayed several times in a day: Evening, Morning, and
Noon will I pray. Psalm. 55.17. As he was a man of many sorrows, so he was a man
of many Prayers. Our Blessed Lord spoke a Parable to this end, that men ought
always to pray, and not to faint. Luke 18.1. There is the same reason they
should persevere in Prayer, as engage in it at first; and that is because God
is our Sovereign Lord; he is thy God, and worship thou him. This is the way to
speed; in due time ye shall reap, if ye do not faint. It is indeed a great
trial to a Christians faith and patience, to have the answer deferred; yea, to
be treated by God, as though he did not hear or regard him in his affliction;
this is a temptation to him to give over the duty: But this should make a
Christian the more earnest; and if through the help of Divine Grace, he holds out
and perseveres, and obtains, it will be infinite Mercy.

4. Afflicted Christians should pray will all prayer. Ephesians. 6.18. Praying
always, with all prayer, (i. e.) with all the kinds, and with all the parts of
Prayer. They should pray with Public, Private, Secret, and Ejaculatory Prayer;
with others, and alone. Prayer is more powerful, when many join and unite
together in it. In solitary Prayer, a person may be more free in opening his
Case to God. Psalm. 119.26. I have declared my ways, and thou heardest me. A
person may by Ejaculatory Prayer, or prayer in the heart, dart up his desires
to God many times in a day; yea, in the midst of his Worldly Business, or in
Company. Hannah thus eased her mind* in 1 Samuel 1.13. Again, a person must
Confess his Sins at such a time, as well as Petition for Mercy; and this is the
way to obtain it. Prove. 28.13. He that covers his sins, shall not prosper;
but whosoever confesses and forsakes them, shall find mercy. And as he should
confess his Sins, so give God thanks for his Mercies, which he remembers in
Judgment. There is no Christian so low and mean of (...), so afflicted and
distressed, but he has cause of Thanksgiving; if on no other account, yet on
this, that God punishes him less than his deserts, as (...) acknowledges.
Chap. 9.1^.

5. They should pray with Submission to the Will of God. God is the Creatures
Sovereign, and therefore he should not dare to prescribe to him; as he would,
if he did not pray with submission; he must therefore submit it, whether the
Lord will please for the present only to support him under, and afford his
gracious, sanctifying presence in, or deliver out of affliction: Whether he
will give the Christian ease and deliverance, or only patience to bear his
afflicting Hand. He must also leave it to him, when and how to deliver him;
waiting for deliverance in God's time and way: Then it is likely to come in
Mercy. God may delay out of love and kindness: He mill take the fittest time,
wherein his Glory may shine forth, and the mercy be most conspicuous. The
Christian must not venture upon any unlawful means for help, nor escape at some
backdoor of sin; but should stand still and see the Salvation of God. 2 Chronicles.
20.17. and wait upon Him in the use of means; seeking with submission.

Improvement.
Use I. Of Information in two Inferences.

Inference I. Hence we Learn, that it is Unsuitable; yea, sinful to neglect
Prayer in a time of Affliction; so it is indeed at any time: But to do it in
Affliction, is an aggravation of the Crime. Eliphaz blames Job, because (as he
supposed) he neglected this duty, when he was so sorely afflicted. Chap 15.4.
Yea, thou castest off fear, and restrainest prayer before God. To neglect
Prayer, when God is Correcting a Person or a People to stir up a Spirit of
Devotion in them, and to quicken them in their Addresses to God; it is very
criminal. It Is a sad thing, when afflictions find us in the neglect of this
Duty, when we don't meet them, as our Lord did his, in a praying posture; but
it is more sad and awful for them to leave us, as they found us; as negligent of
our Duty, as regardless of God, and our Souls, as we were before; it is a sign,
that either the Christian is not duly humbled; for if he were, he would be
brought down to God's foot; it is a sign that God's Rod has been spent in vain,
as on his People of old; whose afflictions served only to discover their pride
and obstinacy, whilst they did not return to him, nor seek him after all. Hos.
7.10. Or it is a sign that the Christian is over pow'rd with Temptation, and
Discouragement, which is as great an Evil on the other hand, and will as
effectually take him off from his duty; therefore the Apostle cautions against
both. Heb. 12. Despise not thou the Chastening, etc.

Infer. II. Hence we learn the Excellency of Divine Grace, which can cause
Afflictions (that are part of the Curse) to turn to our benefit. Temporal
Afflictions are Paenal Evils, part of the Curse which Sin has subjected Mankind
unto. But though they be, and are not desirable in themselves, but are Evils to
be deprecated; yet by the Grace of God, they may turn to our benefit. Indeed,
(as has been hinted already) they can do us no good in themselves, but as they
are improved by God's Grace for this end. We see many Wicked men that are
emptied from vessel to vessel, and harrassed with all sorts of afflictions,
continue as bad as ever; it may be whilst God's Chastening was upon them, they
promised fair, and poured out a Prayer to God. Isa. 26.16. But when the
affliction is removed, they are as regardless of God as ever, and thereby
evidence that they flattered him with their mouth, and lied unto him with their
tongues. Psalm. 78 34, 36. But when the Sanctifying Grace of God co-operates
with Afflictions, they then turn to the Benefit of those that are Exercised
with them. The Grace of God can bring meat out of this Eater, extract treacle
out of this poison; and turn the very Curse into a Blessing. When the
affliction is sanctified, it makes persons more humble, holy, watchful,
prayerful, obedient. Before I was afflicted I went astray, but now I have
learnt to keep thy Commandments. Psalm. 119.67. In their affliction they will
seek me early.

Use II. Of Conviction, and Awakening, to those that do not Pray, when under
Affliction; or are remiss and negligent in this Duty. Consider,

1. That this shows a very stubborn and incorrigible frame of Heart: When God
corrects a Christian, he stands over him (as it were) as a Parent over a
disobedient Child, and says, ask my Pardon, and confess your fault, and I will
spare you, as a Father does his Son. Psalm. 103.13. Like as a Father pitieth his
Children, so the Lord pitieth them that fear him. Mal. 3.17. And I will spare
them, as a man spares his own son that serves him. And they that are
negligent of this Duty, under affliction, they do (as it were) say, they will
not beg, they will not pray though they die and perish; as some stubborn Children
will say when they are Corrected. The Wicked through the pride of his Countenance
will not seek after God.

2. Consider, That this is high Contempt of God; not only of his Authority, but
his Power and Justice: By neglecting Prayer, persons contemn God's Authority in
the Command; by neglecting it in affliction, they contemn his Justice and Power
also; for hereby they dare him to do his worst: hereby they run upon the point
of his Sword, charge upon the the thick bosses of his buckler. What horrid
Contempt is this? Wherefore should the Wicked contemn God? Are they stronger
than He?

3. Consider, That this is very provoking to him. It Is very provoking to
Parents, when their Children slight their authority, and contemn the rod of
Correction. But how much more provoking must it needs be, for God's Children or
People to contemn His Authority, Justice and Power: as they do, when they are
not humbled, reclaimed, or brought on their Knees by his Afflicting Hand? There
is a Woe denounced against such in Zeph. 3.1, 2. which denotes God's Anger. Woe
to her that is filthy and polluted -- she obeyed not the voice (i e.) the voice
of God in affliction; she trusted not in the Lord; she drew not near to her
God. Hereby God will be provoked to do one of these two things; either to
Correct such the more, or to leave off Correcting of them. If the still walk
contrary to God, he will walk contrary to them, and punish them yet more. Lev.
26.21. If not, he will cease Correcting of them. Why should ye be stricken any
more? Isa. 1.5. And though this may be pleasing to such (ease being what they
desire) yet nothing can be more fatal to them; for hereby they are given over
to a reprobate mind, and vile affections to go on undisturbed in their Sins,
which is the greatest Judgment in this World: it is better to be afflicted, yea
with the greatest Soul Conflicts, for these may issue in Conversion and
Salvation; but the other is a black mark of Reprobation.

Use 3. Of Examination or Trial in two Respects.

1. As to the End of God in Affliction. Affliction comes not out of the dust,
neither does trouble spring out of the ground: But it is ordered by an
Infinitely Wise God, and therefore for some wise End. Let Afflicted Christians
Examine what the End of God therein may be. Show me says Job, wherefore thou
comendest with me? Chapter 9, 10. So let Christians Enquire, what it is that God
aims at in afflicting them; whether it be to scourge them for their Sins, or to
try them; sometimes God afflicts to try the Grace of his Children, as in the
Case of Job, though his Friends though it otherwise, and he himself could not well
tell what to make of his afflictions at first. But mostly, he does it to
scourge and chastise them for their sins. Let us then Examine, whether the
Afflictions we have been under by the Wasting Sickness that has been in this
place, and by the Death of so many amongst us, especially of Leading and
Principal Men: There Dyed in our Town, by that fatal Distemper; upward of
thirty grown persons, mostly (...): Hon. Ichabod Praist^d and John Hill, Esqrs.
(No sooner was the Sword of the Wilderness sheathed in its Scabbard, but a
just and holy God has drawn the Sword of Pestlilence against us, whereby
possibly many more persons have been cut off, than by the late War; yea, than
by all the Calamities that have been in this place many years:) Now has God
done this merely to try us, how we could submit and stoop to his Sovereignty,
and bear his Afflicting Hand? Or has he not done it also and chiefly, to humble
us for our Sins? And what Sins has God thus Corrected us for? May we not
conclude, that he has herein been avenging the Quarrel of his Covenant,
according to Rev. 26.25. That our abuse of Gospel Mercies, our slighting God's
Instituted Worship, our Neglect of Prayer in our Families, and Closets, and our
Lukewarmness and Indifferency in the things of God; have had a peculiar hand
(as the meritorious Cause) in bringing this sore Calamity upon us, which we
should never forget* (nor the mixture of Mercy with the Judgment*) And when we
remember the Wormwood and the Gall, our Souls should be humbled within us: We
have been often warned for these and our other Sins, from the Word of God, (I
trust with faithfulness) for these God has been doubtless Correcting us. Let us
therefore search and try our ways, and turn unto the Lord. Lam. 3.40

2. Let it put us upon Trying our selves, as to our Carriage under, and the
Improvement we have made of Affliction, that we may know whether God's End has
been attained. And this we may know by these things.

1. When Affliction serves to Embitter Sin to a Christian, and to Mortify his
Corruptions. There is a tendency in Affliction to do this, as it shows the Evil
Nature of Sin, in the ill Effects; and if men's Eyes were opened to see this,
they would hate Sin more than ever they loved it: There is nothing like
sanctified afflictions to Mortify Sin, and to Crucify the Flesh* with the
corrupt affections and (...). Is Sin embittered to us? Are our Lusts mortified
by our Afflictions?

2. Have they served to humble us under God's mighty Hand? This is another sign
of their being beneficial: Men's hearts are apt to rise against God, when he
Corrects them by his afflicting Hand; when it is so* not only at their first
meeting with affliction, (for then there may be too little difference between
the Saint and Sinner) but in their parting with it, it is a sign that the
Affliction don't work kindly; but when it serves to bring the Christian to the
foot of God, and to purge out the remaining rebellion and stubornness of the
heart, then it works kindly indeed.

3. If Grace be Excited, and a Christian thereby quickened to Duty. Afflictions
tend to quicken Grace, to draw it forth into Exercise. Tribulation works
patience, patience experience, etc. Romans 5.3, 4, 5. If there be any Grace in
the heart, it will be discovered at such a time, as well as Corruption. Have
your Afflictions, Christian, stirred up and exercised your Grace? Have they
also quickened you to Duty, in which you might be remiss or negligent? Have you
made one Prayer the (...)? Or have you prayed at all? Have you prayed more
earnestly, and constantly? If it has been thus, it is to be hoped that
Affliction has been sanctified, and God's People have not been Corrected in
vain.

Use IV. Of Exhortation to the Afflicted to Pray. Farther, to quicken to Prayer.

1. Consider the Relation you stand in to God. The Rod is in the Hand of a
Father. It Is your Heavenly Father, Christian, that Corrects you. Whatever
Instrument is made use of, it is God that orders it. He makes use of it to
Correct you; and he does it out of Love and Compassion to your Souls. Whom the
Lord oves he chastens, and corrects every son whom he receives. He Corrects
them to prevent their Everlasting Ruin; therefore says the Apostle, in 1 Cor.
11.32. But when we are judged, we are chastened of the Lord, that we should not
be condemned with the Word. Be not discouraged therefore by the Afflictions;
but let them rather quicken and encourage you to go to God by Prayer, with all
holy Reverence and Confidence, as Children to a Father, able and ready to help
you.

2. Consider, That Christ has merited for you all you need, he Offers your
Prayers with the Incense of his Merit; yea, he ever lives to make Intercession.
Christ has not only Redeemed you from the Curse, by being made a Curse for
you, but has purchased Grace, Glory, and every good thing for Believers: all
that is needful to carry them well through this World, and to Crown them in the
next. So that you may go boldly to the Throne of Grace, and ask for all the
fruits of Christ's purchase; for though you are not worthy, Christ is; and in the
virtue of his own merit he presents your Addresses, and intercedes with the
Father, to grant your Petitions: He is therefore represented as standing at the
Golden Altar with much Incense, to offer it with the Prayers of the Saints; And
the smoke of the Incense, which came up with the Prayers of the Saints ascended
up before God. Rev. 8.3, 4. Having therefore Brethren, boldness to enter into
the Holiest, by the Blood of Jesus, by a new and living way, which he has
Consecrated for us, through the (...), that is to say his flesh; and having an
High Priest over the House of God* let us draw near with a true heart, in full
assurance of Faith. Heb. 10 19 -- 22.

3. Consider the Advantage and Benefit of Prayer in a time of Affliction, to
get and keep a good frame of heart, to strengthen Faith and Patience to bear
the burden of it. It Is beneficial,

1. To get and keep a good frame of heart, even a humble, resigned, composed
frame. This frame of heart is needful for all Christians, when under
Afflictions. This brings Glory to God, and makes the Cross sit easy. Now Prayer
tends to beget and keep up this frame, by bringing the Soul to God's presence,
and awing it with his Sovereign Power, Wisdom and Authority. It Is meet to be
said unto God, I have born Chastisement; this makes the will submit, and the
tumultuous passions are kept under a due regulation. Hereby it is made sensible
of its own vileness, and ill deserts, which stop the mouth of Complaint. Shall
a living man complain? Man for the punishment of his Sin? Nay by Prayer the
Soul breaths out its troubles. Griefs (as one says) are eased by Groans: The
heart is cooled and disburthened by Spiritual Evaporations. The Mind is by this
means made and kept calm and easy. There is an Halcyon Calm within, many
times, when it is all stormy and tempestuous round about.

2. Prayer is needful to strengthen Faith and Patience: To strengthen Faith.
Faith is the Souls prop under Affliction. I had fainted unless I had believed,
says the Psalmist. Psalm. 27.13. This will buoy up the Soul, when the breaking
Billows of Affliction go over its head, ready to swallow it up. Unless thy Law
had been my Delights, I should then have perished in mine affliction. Psalm.
119.92. The meaning is, That if he had not believed in, and laid hold of God's
gracious Promises, which were his comfort and delight, he could not have been
carried through his Afflictions. Now Prayer serves to strengthen Faith in Christ,
and the precious Promises, that are Yea in him, and in him Amen; hereby new
strength and vigor is derived from the Fountain to the Soul. Thus doubtless it
was, with respect to Peter's Faith upon our Lord's Praying for him, that his
Faith might not fail. Luke 22.31, 32. Though he fell, his faith did not utterly
fail. Thus Paul's Prayer in his affliction, brought new and fresh supplies of
Grace* though he had not present speedy deliverance, yet he had support,
strengthening Grace, which was better. My Grace shall be sufficient for thee. 2
Cor. 12.9.

Again, Prayer is necessary to strengthen and increase a Christian's Patience.
This is also a very useful Grace under Affliction: This makes a Christian easy
in his mind, even when God's hand presses him fore. Impatient, discontented
persons, they are so far from being easy, that their uneasiness (...) other
troubles* Now Prayer is useful to strengthen patience, and perfect it; it must
have its perfect work. Jam. 1.4. in making Christians absolutely subject to
God's Will, and constant to the end, under afflictions; and the way the Apostle
directs to, for the strengthening of it, is by Prayer, in the ^th verse. If any
of you lack Wisdom? Let him ask it of God: Where (as one says upon the place)
Wisdom is to be restrained, according to the Circumstances of the Text, and
taken for wisdom or skill to bear Afflictions* so. as to Rejoice in them. Our
Lord prefaces his Sufferings* with Prayer, to show us the benefit and necessity
of it in Affliction: and who so patient, meek, and lamb-like as He: Go then,
(thou poor afflicted Christian, go) to God in the Name of Christ, and tell him,
how hard thou art put to it, what a grievous burden lies upon thee, how weak
thou art in thy self; that thou do not desire ease and a release, so much as
Faith and Patience, to bear what he is pleased to lay up. on thee; and wait
thus upon him, and surely it will not be in vain.

Use V. Of Consolation, to those under Affliction; who are thereby quickened to
Prayer; that find on experience, that their hearts go out to God, for his
Presence and Grace, as well as for deliverance; for faith and patience to bear
his Afflicting Hand, as well as for ease and relief under it; who pray more
earnestly, constantly, and believingly, than ever. This is matter of Comfort to
you: In that,

1. You have therein a good evidence, a sure token that God is with you, and
will never leave nor forsake you. It is the fruit of his Gracious Presence to
quicken your hearts to, and in this Duty. If then you feel your hearts begin to
move Godward, and Christ-ward in the way of Duty; or to move more livelily
than ever: If your troubles cause you to look up in good earnest, to the Throne
of Grace, it is a sign that God is present with you by his Grace, and what a
comfortable Consideration is this. We count it a great privilege to have our
Friends near us when we are Sick, or under any other Affliction; but what is
this to the having GOD present with us, at such a time, enlivening, quickening
and comforting us? As it is a great aggravation of trouble, for the Lord to
withdraw the comfortable sense of his Presence and Love: This puts an edge upon
Affliction* So on the contrary, his favorable, gracious, comforting,
quickening Presence, is a great alleviation thereof. Therefore the Psalmist
prays God not to be far off, because trouble was near. Psalm. 22.11. Now this is
a good Token that he is present with such, when their hearts are quickened by
his Grace; And it should be a Comfort to such. This was the Psalmist's Comfort
in his Affliction: That God's Word had quickened him. Psalm. 119.50. And as this
is a sign that God is with such, so that he will never leave them, nor forsake
them utterly. Indeed he may hide his face from them, or forsake them for a
moment, as he speaks. Isa. 14.7, 8. But with great Mercies will he gather them.
In a little wrath I hid my face, -- But with everlasting kindness will I have
mercy on thee, etc. So that God will not leave such utterly, and so he has
expressly engaged. Heb. 13.5. And this is evident from their sanctified
afflictions, wherein they may read their Heavenly Father's Love. And those whom
he once loves, he always loves. The gifts and calling of God being without
Repentance. What a comfort may this justly be, to an Afflicted Soul! Well may a
Christian say. Though God afflicts me, yet he will not forsake me, nor cast me
off for ever; and as long as I am sure of this, I can the better bear what he
is pleased to lay upon me.

2. This is a sign that their Afflictions shall do them good, and end well. The
chief thing that gracious Souls should look at under Affliction is, that they
may Glorify God, and get good by it. And they should be afraid of nothing so
much, as the contrary. Now when they see the present fruits, in a humble
resigned frame of Spirit in a Soul quickened to Duty: Why, this gives them
comfortable encouraging grounds to hope, that it shall turn to their benefit.
Yea, this shows them that it is so already. Now what a Comfort is this, to an
afflicted Christian; who may be ready sometimes under temptation to fear and
say, as Job did, in his Calamities, Wherefore hidest thou thy face, and hold
me for thine Enemy? Job 13.24. They may be ready to fear that God is punishing
as a Judge, and not correcting as a Father; and indeed if a Christian were to
bear Affliction only as the punishment of his Sins, or the beginning of it, and
were to receive no benefit by it; this were a killing Consideration: But this
no humble prayerful Soul has any reason to fear. He has no reason to look thus
upon his Afflictions, how grievous soever; but as a Rod in the hand of a
Father, who is seeking his benefit, and not his ruin: Who does not willingly
grieve the Children of men, much less his own; and who, when he does it, aims
at their profit, that they may be partakers of his Holiness: And the afflicted
Christan finds the truth of this, in God's causing Afflions to work for his
good already, and not afflicting him in vain.

And such Afflictions will end happily. How grievous soever they are at
present, they will in the end, yield the quiet and peaceable fruits of
Righteousness to them which are Exercised thereby. They that sow in tears,
shall reap in joy: Weeping may endure for a night, but joy comes in the
morning. Psalm. 30.5. Though a Child of God has (...) among the pots, yet he
shall be as the wings of a Dove, covered with silver, and her feathers with
yellow gold: Psalm. 68.13. Though none can tell how long God may please to
Exercise the Christian with this or that Affliction, yet the Scripture assures
us, that the troubles of God's People shall End happily: And this light
Affliction which is but for a moment, shall work out a far more exceeding and
eternal weight of Glory. 2 Cor. 4.17. The question being asked. Rev. 7.13.
What, or who are these, which are arrayed in white Robes? And whence come they?
The Answer is, verse 14. -- These are they which come out of great tribulation,
and have washed their Robes, and made them white in the Blood of Lamb. Amen.

FINIS.

