AN ANSWER TO A BOOK Entitled, The Lords Day proved to be the Christian
Sabbath, etc. By B. Wadsworth, A. M. Pastor of a Church in Boston. And also, An
Answer to a Pamphlet, Entitled, Thesis concerning the Sabbath.

As Also, Some Part of what has passed through the General Courts in
Connecticut Colony, relating to the Sabbath.

As Also, Some Court Sentences in that Colony.

By JOHN ROGERS.

BOSTON: Printed for the Author 1721.

An ANSWER TO A BOOK, etc.
I Having taken some Remarks upon said Book as follows. In his Preface he
seems to limit the Worship due to God, more at some certain times than at other
times; and to carry a long, as if Prayer was one of the greatest Part of
Worship to God, quoting Mat. 6.6. which Scripture contains the whole Doctrine
of Prayer, which Christ taught in a general way to his Disciples, as appears in
the beginning of his Sermon to them, Mat. 5.1.2. His Disciples came unto him,
and he opened his Mouth and taught them. Compare this with the Conclusion of
his Sermon Mat. 7.14. Therefore whosoever hears these Sayings of mine and
does them, I will liken him unto a wise Man, etc. So that this contains a
general Doctrine to all his Disciples relating to Prayer, not to be as the
Hypocrites are, as in the 5th Verse, for they love to pray standing in the
Synagogues, etc. Verily I say unto You, they have their Reward, that is, the
Praise of Men. Thus Christ singles out his Disciples from the Multitudes of
Hypocrites, (as appears Mat. 5.1.2.) as God did his People Israel. Exodus 20.2,
3. I am the Lord thy God, etc. thou so (...) have no other gods, etc. Thus, as
God singles out Israel as being his peculiar People, so does Christ his
Disciples, Mat. 6.6. But thou when thou prayest, etc. speaking to his peculiar
Disciples, in the singular Number, singling them out from Hypocrites, as God
did Israel from other Nations, saying, Thou shall have no other god, etc. Even
so says Christ unto his Disciples, When thou prayest thou shall not be as the
Hypocrites.

When God's Children were in a Holy Frame, and agreed to Fast and Pray, they
did it not with a mixed Multitude, in public Assemblies, as Hypocrites are wont
to do; as appears, Neh. 9.1, 2. The Children of Israel separated themselves
from all Strangers, in time of offering up their Prayers unto God. Acts
1.13.14. And when they were come in, they went up into an upper Room, etc.
These all continued with one accord in Prayer, etc. And we no where read,
throughout the whole Bible, that God's Children ever prayed in a public
Assembly with a mixed Multitude, in a customary way, as Hypocritical Israel was
wont to do; as throughout the whole Scripture does appear, Romans 8.26.

And Secondly, The Scripture makes a Distinction between Fasting and Prayer,
and Worship to God, as appears, Joh. 9.31. Now we know that God hears not
Sinners, (that is, their Prayers) but if any Man be a Worshiper of God, and
does his will, him he hears. Here the Scripture makes a Distinction between
the Worship of God and Prayer, showing that he that worshipeth God and does his
Will, such an one God hears his Prayers, Zech. 7.5. When ye fasted and
mourned etc. did ye at all fast unto me? And when ye did eat, and when ye did
drink; did ye not eat, and did ye not drink for your selves? But the true
Worship of God is expressed in the 9th and 10th Verses. Mic. 6. 6th and 7th
Verses speaks of Prayer, but the 8th Verse speaks of Worship to God.

And,

Thirdly, The Worship of God is not limited to any particular Place, as
appears, Joh. 4, 21, 22. compared with the 23d Verse. The hour comes, when
ye shall neither in this Mountain, nor yet at Jerusalem worship the Father: Ye
worship ye know not what, etc. But the hour comes and now is, when the true
Worshipers, shall worship the Father in Spirit and in Truth, etc. Romans 14.17,
18. For the Kingdom of God is Righteousness, Peace, and Joy in the Holy Ghost:
For he that in these things serves Christ, is acceptable to God, etc. For the
Service, or Worship we owe to God, is to present our Bodies a living Sacrifice,
holy and acceptable to God, which it the reasonable Service we owe to him, Romans
12.1. No Man can serve God while he is in the Spiritual Egypt, or under the
Power of Sin, nor till the Son of God sets him free from that Bondage, as Moses
did Israel, before they could serve God, as appears, Joh. 8. comparing the 34th
Verse with the 36. Whosoever commits Sin is the Servant of Sin: If the Son
therefore shall make you free, ye shall be free indeed.

And all Prayer that proceeds from an unclean Heart, is an abomination to the
Lord, Prove. 15.8. Isai. 1.11. compared with the 16th, 17th, and 18th Verses.
Psalm. 66.18. And all Prayer that is offered to God, and not in Faith, is but a
Delusion: For without Faith it is impossible to please God, Heb. 11.6. For
every Prayer that is offered up to God, and not in Faith* is but a vain
Babbling, and will avail nothing, as appears Jam. 1. comparing the 6th Verse
with the 7th. But let him ask in Faith, etc. For let not that Man think that he
shall receive any thing of the Lord, i. e. if his Prayer be not in Faith; and
this Faith cannot be but to a pure Conscience, 1 Timothy 3.9. Chap. 1.19.

This have I written that People may not be misled, by thinking they worship
God in Forms, and set Times of Prayer, while they are in a State of Sin; and
that they may consider, the Publican, upon his first Prayer, accompanied with
true Repentance, went away rather justified than the other, that was zealous in
his often Fasting and Prayers, Luke 18.10, etc.

And in the next Place I shall enter upon his Scripture Proof about his First
Day Sabbath, seeing the Scripture is profitable for Doctrine, for Reproof, for
Correction, for Instruction, that the Man of God may be perfect, etc. 2 Timothy
3.16, 17. For if they speak not according to this Word, it is because there is
no Light in them, Isai. 8.20. For where no Law is, there is no Transgression,
Romans 4.15. And therefore I shall examine his Scripture Proof, and see what Law
he produces out of the holy Scriptures for his First Day Sabbath.

In Page 5th says he, The Apostle does not oppose the keeping one Day in a
Week holy to God. To which I answer, It is not what the Apostle does not
oppose, but what the Apostle commands, 1 Pet. 1.16. Be ye holy for I am holy.
An unholy Man cannot do one holy Act, no more than a corrupt Tree can bring
forth good Fruit: But I have no where read in the Books of the New Testament,
that we are commanded to keep one Day more holy than another.

And in the same Page says he, Christ came not to destroy the Law, Mat. 5.17.
This is very true, for what the Law could not do, etc. God sending his own Son,
etc. for Sin, or by a Sacrifice for Sin, condemned Sin in the Flesh, that the
Righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled in us, who walk not after the
Flesh, but after the Spirit, Romans 8.3.4. Thus Christ fulfills the Law in us,
for there is no Law against the Fruit of the Spirit. And thus Chiist came to
fulfill the Righteousness of the Law in us, who walk not after the Flesh, but
after the Spirit, beause the Love of God is shed abroad in our Hearts by the
Holy Ghost which is given unto us, Romans 5.5. And by this Love we keep the Law
perfectly, as appears, Romans 13.8, 9, 10. Gal. 5.14. So that Christ did not come
to destroy the Law, but to fulfill the Righteousness of it in us, for Christ is
the end of the Law for Righteousness, to every one that believes, Romans 10.4.

And in the same Page he quotes Mat. 24.20. Pray that your Flight be not in the
Winter, nor on the Sabbath Day. This was spoken of a Time that was to come,
which came to pass (as he says) about Forty Years after, which is very true.
Now we are to consider, that these Jews had a Zeal for God, but not according
to Knowledge, for we find by Record of Scripture, that in Christ's Time they
were very zealous in the Observation of the Seventh Day Sabbath, having a very
plain Commandment for it, and often judged our Savior as being guilty of the
Breach of it, in bidding the Man that was healed to carry his Bed on it, with
several other Things which he did upon it, and therefore did the Jews persecute
Jesus, and sought to slay him, because he had done these Things on the Sabbath
Day. Joh. 5.16. Therefore said Some of the Pharisees, This Man is not of God,
because he keeps not the Sabbath Day, Joh. 9.16. But at this time they were
under the Roman Government, who did not allow them to put any Man to Death,
Joh. 18, 31. But Forty Years after, they rebelled against the Romans, and then
put in Execution their own Laws: And though it was no greater Sin to take their
Flight on the Sabbath than in the Winter to sa^e Life (for it was a Deed of
Mercy, and a Duty as much to be done on the Sabbath Day as on any other Day,)
but more danger of Death by the Jews, than to take their Flight in the Winter;
for possibly they might escape in the Winter, but if taken by the Jews in their
Flight on the Sabbath Day, there was then nothing to be expected by them but
Death, without Mercy: Therefore our Lord exhorted his Disciples to pray to him
that was able to cause them to escape those two Dangers, upon their Flight
which he exhorted them to take, Luke 21.20, 21. Mat. 24.16.

And in the same Page he quotes Isai. 66.22, 23. and says, New Testament
Worship is here foretold in Old Testament Phrase, which I will not deny: But I
say, from one New Moon to another measures the whole Month, and from one
Sabbath to another measures the whole Week, and limits no time one more than
another, and carries in it a continual Worship to God: for they that worship
him in these Gospel Times, must not think to worship him in New Moons and
Sabbaths, as it was under the Law, which were only Shadows and Signs, but the
body is of Christ, Ezekiel. 20.12, 20. Col. ^. 16, 17. For they that worship him
now in Gospel Times, must worship him in Spirit and in Truth, in their inward
Man, without Regard to Time or Place, having a circumcised Heart, Phil. 3.3.

In Page 6. he quotes Genesis 2.2, 3. which speaks only of God's resting from the
Works of Creation, when all things were finished, and was very good, as they
came from the Hand of God: and this God's Sabbath, or Rest from his Works of
Creation, had no Evening or Morning ascribed to it, because it was his Eternal
Rest or Sabbath, all things being now finished: And it could be no Rest or
Sabbath to Adam, for he had done no Work to rest from, for he was the finishing
Work, or last thing God created: So that God's finishing Work, and Adam's first
becoming a living Creature, began at one and the same time: So that Adam in his
first Creation, entered into God's Sabbath, and so continued, till he by Sin
brought Labor upon himself. The Apostle quotes this very Place, Genesis 2. 2. as
is to be seen Hob. 4.4. which speaks only of God's own Rest from the Works of
Creation, and we have* to Account in Scripture of any Sabbath commanded or kept
from Adam till Moses time; for God did not make that Covenant of the Ten
Commandments till Moses time, as appears Deuteronomy. 4.13. compared with Deuteronomy. 5.2,
3. and compared with the 15th Verse, which gives the Reason of the 4th
Commandment, why Israel was commanded to keep the Sabbath: For when God
delivered the two Tables of the Ten Commandments, he gave Moses a particular
Account about the Seventh Day Sabbath, how it was a Sign, as is to be seen,
Exodus 31.12, etc. compared with the last Verse. In the 13th Verse says the
Lord, Verily my Sabbaths ye shall keep, for it is a Sign between me and you.
Verse 17. It is a Sign between me and the Children of Israel. And a Sign is not
the thing signified by it, no more than the Shadow of a thing is the Substance.

In Page 7. is quoted Mark. 2.28. The Son of Man is Lord also of the Sabbath:
But he adds to what is there written for Christ did not there speak as he was
the Son of God, but Son of Man; for the Reason that Christ there renders to
them how the Son of Man came to be Lord of the Sabbath, is, because the Sabbath
was made for Man, and not Man for the Sabbath; therefore (says he) the Son of
Man is Lord also of the Sabbath, for it was commanded to be kept for a Sign
between God and Israel, so that it was made for Man to be a Sign to him, and
therefore (says he) the Son of Man is Lord also of the Sabbath. He does not
speak here, as if he had any Power as he was the Son of Man to change it, for
he as Son of Man, was made of a Woman, made under the Law, as much as any other
Son of Man, Gal. 4.4. But what he said, was to convict them of their Blindness,
in preferring the Sanctification of the Sabbath before the satisfying the
hungry Soul, whenas the Sabbath was made only for a Sign to Man. So that
Christ's Argument was good, to prove that every Son of Man that it was made
for, was Lord of it, it being made for him, to be a Sign to him: for the Lord
of any thing is to be preferred before the thing made for him. The Man was not
made for the Woman, but the Woman for the Man, therefore the Man is Lord of the
Woman, so called in Scripture, Genesis 18.12. Judge. 19.26. But this is no Argument
therefore, that a Man may change his Wife, because he is her Lord.

In Page 8. he quotes Heb. 4.10. which speaks of the Antitype of the Weekly
Seventh Day Sabbath, which it was a Sign of, as appears in the foregoing and
following Verses, There remains therefore a Rest, or keeping a Sabbath to the
People of God; for he that is entered into his Rest (which is Christ) has
ceased from his own works, as God did from his. Let us labor therefore (says
he) to enter into that Rest. This is the everlasting Sabbath that Christ is
entered into, and we are exhorted in this place, to labor to enter into it,
which the Seventh Day was a Sign of; and this place relates nothing to any
First Day Sabbath, but to that Rest or Sabbath spoken of Rev. 14.13.

In Page 11. says he, The First Day was prophesied of, etc. Psalm. 118.22, 23,
24. The Stone which the Builders refused, is become the Head Stone of the
corner. This is the Lord's doings, and it is mavelous in our eyes. This is
the Day which the Lord has made, we will rejoice and be glad in it. This was
fulfilled in David, as he was a Type of Christ, and fulfilled in Christ, as he
was the Antitype of David; and relates nothing to any rejoicing in a natural or
artificial Day, but in God, who had brought David out of the Day of his
Troubles, who was the Stone that Saul and the Builders of Israel had rejected,
and sought to destroy, but now God had brought him to the Kingdom, and made him
the Head of Israel: Even the Stone which the Builders refused, was now become
the Head Stone of the Corner, and was the Day that David and his Servants
rejoiced in the Lord, even the Day that the Lord had made him the Head Stone of
the Corner, but his Joy was not in any one natural or artificial Day, but in
the Lord, who had made it the Day of his Prosperity and Exaltation, the Day of
his Adversity ^^ing now over: It is a Scripture Phrase, not intending any
particular Day, but a Day or Time of Gladness. And was also fulfilled in
Christ, who was a Man of Sorrows, and rejected and put to Death, but God raised
him from the Dead, and has exalted him, and given him a Name above every Name,
so that at the Name of Jesus every Knee should bow, etc. And this is the
everlasting Day of rejoicing with the Saints in God that has made it, and not
in a natural Day, either to observe the Day of his Birth, or the Day of his
Resurrection, when no such thing is commanded of God, for that is worshipping
the Creature, and not the Creator.

In the next place I shall show, that the First Commandment, that both the
Angel of God and Christ himself gave forth to his Apostles, was to make the
First Day of the Week (the Day of his Resurrection) a Day of Labor, by
traveling out of one Province into another, as appears, Mat. 28.5. compared
with the 10th and 7th Verses, And the Angel answered and said to the Women, go
quickly and tell his Disciples, that he is risen from the Dead, and behold, he
goes before you into Gallilee, there shall ye see him. Then said Jesus unto
them, go tell my Brethren, that they go into Gallilee, there shall ye see me.
And in the 8th Verse it is said, And they departed quickly, and did run, to
bring his Disciples Word. Compare this with Luke 24, 10, 11. It was Mary
Magdalen, etc. which told these things to the Apostles, and their Words seemed
to them as idle Tales, and they believed them not. Thus it appears, that had
they believed them that was sent by the Angel of God, and by Christ himself,
they should have set out on their Journey early in the Morning for Gallilee,
which was in another Province, and by all Probability, more than one Days
Journey, as appears in the second Chapter of Luke, which shows, that Christ's
Parents went a Days Journey toward Gallilee before they mist him; and his
Apostles not believing, and thereby not obeying his order, he did not appear to
them all that Day, but traveled with Two of his Disciples that were going from
Jerusalem to Immaus, which is Sixty Furlongs, which contains Seven English
Miles and Half, as appears, Luke 24.13. And it appears Verse 28, 29. that he
made as though he would have gone further, but they constrained him to abide with
them, for it was toward Evening, and the Day was far spent, so he went in to
tarry with them; but their Eyes were holden, that they knew him not, Verse 16.
But as they were eating he gave them Bread, Verse 30. And their Eyes were
opened. Verse 31. And he vanished out of their sight, and the same Hour they
returned back the Seven Mile and half, and they went and told it to the
Residue, neither believed they them, as appears, Mark 16.12, 13. It was after
this, that Christ appeared to the Eleven, as appears in the 14th Verse. So that
it appears, that Christ had no regard to the Day, otherwise than to make it a
Day of Labor; but the Apostles that would not believe that he was risen, were
assembled together for fear of the Jews, as appears, Joh. 20.19, Then the same
Day at Evening, being the first Day of the Week, when the Doors were shut,
where the Disciples were assembled for fear of the Jews, Christ appeared to the
Eleven; Mark. 16.14. As they sat at Meat, and upbraided them with their
Unbelief and Hardness of Heart, because they believed them not which had seen
him after his Resurrection. This is the first time that he appeared to them
after his Resurrection, and before this time they would not believe that he was
risen. Thus have they left it upon Record behind them, that through their
Unbelief, they were disobedient to the Message that Christ sent them, and did
not make it a Day of Labor by traveling, as they were required by the Angel
of God, and by Christ himself; which Journey, according to History, was above
Forty Mile, and the Message was sent to them in haste, to set out upon this
Journey, upon the First Day of the Week, the Day of Christ's Resurrection, for
Gallilee, for this was the Place he had appointed to appear unto them, the
Night before his Suffering, as appears, Mat. 26.32. But after I am risen again,
I will go before you into Gallilee. Compare this with Mat. 28.16. Then the
Disciples went away into Gallilee, where Jesus had appointed, as before is
expressed, Mat. 26.32. But some doubted, to wit, Thomas, as appears, Mat.
28.17. compared with Joh. 20.26, etc. And after eight days again, his Disciples
were within. This is the second Time that Christ appeared to them, after his
Resurrection, which was in Gallilee. And in Joh. 21.1, etc. compared with the
14th Verse, shows the third Time that Christ appeared to his Disciples after
his Resurrection, as they were a fishing in Gallilee. His second appearing to
them after Eight Days of his first appearing, make it no more a Sabbath, than
his third appearing to them (as they were a fishing) made that Day a Sabbath.
His first appearing to them was in the Evening, which divided the First Day
from the Second Day of the Week, for the Evening and the Morning was the Second
Day ( Genesis 1.8.) of the Week. So that his second appearing, which followed his
first appearing to them, was more than Nine Days after the first Day of the
Week, and there can be no eighth Day in the Week.

In Page 19. he quotes Rev. 1.10. I was in the Spirit on the Lords Day, says
John, that is, I was spiritualized on the Lords Day of his Revelation, for that
work he employed me in, but here is no account what day or days it was of the
Week, or Month, this God has not revealed to us, Deuteronomy. 29.29. The secret
things belong unto the Lord our God, but those things which are revealed,
belong unto us, and to our Children for ever* So that what is revealed in this
Book of the Revelation, belong to us and to our Children forever; and John
calls it the Lords Day, in respect that it was the Lord's Day of his
Revelation: So the Bread and Wine which he communicated unto his Disciples,
while he was at Supper, is called the Lord's Supper, though we have no Account
that he did eat of the Bread, or drink of the Wine himself. But for any to
assert it to be on a First Day of the Week is presumption, seeing no such Name,
in Scripture was imposed on the First Day of the Week, in any other Place of
the Scripture, nor ever in the holy Scripture honored with any other Name than
the other Five working Days of the Week.

In Page 25. he quotes 1 Cor. 16.2. It is needful to express this Collection in
order, to open it by Scripture Testimony. The Reason of this Collection is to
be seen, Act. 11.28, 29, 30. From hence it appears, that it was a Gathering or
Collection for the poor Saints that were in Judea, and sent by the Hands of
Barnabas and Saul, it being Alms for the poor Saints, as appears, Act. 24.17.
And it was a Collection of some considerable time standing, as appears, 2 Cor.
8.10. chap. 9.2. before it came to be a Contribution, as appears, Romans 15.2^.
for Paul wrote this Epistle to the Romans from Corinthos, as is to be seen in
said Epistle, at the end of it, and signifies in his Epistle to the Romans 15.25,
26, 27. that then the Collection was come to be a Contribution. And it appears
in this Text, 1 Cor. 16.1. that as Paul had given Order to the Churches of
Galatia, so did he the like to this Church, as in the second Verse, Upon the
first Day of the Week (says he) let every one of you lay by himself in Store
(for so Beza translates it) as God has prospered him. This I understand to be
intended; as God had prospered him the Week before, and now a new Week
beginning even the first Day of it, and they now entering upon a new Weeks Work,
should consider how God had prospered them the Week past, and so upon this new
Weeks beginning, every one of them in particular, should lay by him, or by
himself in Store, that there might be no Gatherings when Paul come, who was to
receive it; for then every one that had laid it up in Store by himself, might
bring it in by way of Contribution, into the Hands of Paul and Barnabas, who
was to recive it, and see it transported to Jerusalem, for the poor Saints in
Judea. And the Gathering of this Alms, was ordered, and attended, according to
Christ's Doctrine, Mat, 6.1, etc. and not according to the Practice of
Hypocrites, who give their Alms in the Synagogues, or public Assemblies; but
these were by an Order, every one of them Weekly* to lay by himself in Store,
as God had prospered him; for the Words are plain, Let every one lay by himself
in Store, according to Christ's Doctrine, so that their left hand might not
know what their right hand did, that their Alms might be in secret, as says
Christ. Thus we see, here is nothing spoken of any Meeting or Assembly in this
Place, but it makes to the contrary, and shows it to be the first Day of the
Week, or beginning of a new Week, and to think of this good Work upon the first
Day of the Week, upon their entering upon their own new Weeks Work, and that
this good Deed might be their first Meditation upon the beginning of a new
Week. And this Collection might be the removing Corn, or other Provision, for
it was that which was wanting, as is to be seen, Act. 11.27, etc. And here is
no Title put upon the Day, above the other Five working Days neither Sabbath,
Lord's Day. nor any Assembly asserted to be upon it; so that all these
Scriptures make strongly against all his Arguments and Reasoning for it to be
any Sabbath or Assembly that was upon it, but to the contrary: But when Paul
wrote this Epistle to the Romans, he had then received it; for every one that
had laid it up in Store by himself, brought it unto Paul, by way of
Contribution, as appears, Romans 15.25, 26.

In Page 27. he quotes Acts 20.7. And upon the first Day of the Week, when the
Disciples came together to break Bread, Paul preached to them, etc. The best
Interpreter of Scripture, is Scripture, therefore I shall examine into this
Place of Scripture, by other Scriptures. This Text tells us, the Disciples
coming together was to break Bread; it does not say, to celebrate a Sabbath, or
give the Day any Name of Pre-eminence, above the other Five working Days of the
Week; but upon the first Day of the Week, they came together to break Bread,
which Word is a Scripture Phrase, and frequently used in common Eating, as for
Instance, Act. 27.35. In this Verse we see the word breaking of Bread is used
in common Eating, Act, 2.46. Breaking Bread from House to House, did eat their
Meat with Gladness, etc. Luke 24.30. Here Christ brake Bread to two of his
Disciples in common Eating; and the word breaking of Bread is used, when Christ
fed Five Thousand Men, and the same word is used when he fed Four Thousand Men.
Thus we see, this Word breaking of Bread in Scripture is frequently used in
common Eating, and there is no further Account given us in this Place, but
coming together to break Bread. And we find by Scripture Testimony, that in
them times, the Churches had Feasts of Charity, Jude 12. These are Spots in
your Feasts of Charity. 2 Pet. 2.13. Spots they are, etc. while they feast with
you. Luke 5.29. Here we read, that Levy made Christ a great Feast in his House,
and there was a great Company, etc. that sat down with them. And in this place
it is said, they came together to break Bread, rendering no other Reason of
their Meeting, and Paul was at this time tending on a Ship, as appears in the
6th, or foregoing Verse. And we sailed, etc. and came unto them at Troas. This
Troas was the Place of their Meeting to break Bread; and it was the Day before
the Ship intended to sail, as appears in the 13th Verse, and in the 25th Verse,
we have an Account, that Paul signified to them, that it was the last time that
ever they should see his Face. Compare this Verse with the Two last Verses of
this Chapter, which shows, how they fell on his Neck and kissed him, sorrowing
most of all for that they should see his Face no more. These Scripture Proofs,
I produce to show by all Probability, it was a Feast to welcome Paul and those
that were with him; for their coming together is expressed only to break Bread.
Some have immagined it to be the Lord's Supper, but I shall give Scripture
Reasons to the contrary; but if it were, it makes no Matter relating to a
Sabbath, or holy Time. But as to the Lord's Supper, it was always attended at
Supper-time: It was first instituted by Christ at Supper, as appears, Mat.
26.20. Now when the Evening was come he sat down: Thus Three of the Evangelists
testify. And Paul the Gentile Apostle, has left it upon Record, that he did
deliver it to the Gentiles, to be attended in the Night, as appears, 1 Cor.
11.23. compared with the 25th Verse, For I have received of the Lord that which
I delivered unto you, that the Lord Jesus, the same Night in which he was
betrayed took Bread, etc. After the same manner also he took the Cup, when they
had supped, etc. And Thirdly, The Gentile Churches attended the Time and
Season, though they got into a disorderly Way of partaking of it, yet they
attended the Season, as appears in the 21st Verse, For in eating, every one
takes before other his own Supper. This shows they attended the Season in
the appointed Time; and made a Supper of it. God was very strict in requiring
Israel to attend the Figure of Christ's offering himself, in its Season, as
appears, Numb. 9.2, 3. And though in some Cases, they might alter the Mouth,
but not the appointed Season of the Evening, as appears in the 10th and 11th
Verses, and much more does he require us to attend the Gospel Ordinance, of
Christ's offering up his Body for our Sins, in his appointed Season; for in
that very Night of the Passover, he instituted this Ordinance: And if it be
said of the Figure, Exodus 1^.42. It is a Night to be much observed unto the
Lord, etc. This is a Night of the Lord, to be observed of all the Children of
Israel, in their Generations, how much more then should the Ordinance of Christ
our Passover, who was Sacrificed for us, be attended in its appointed Season.
Thus it appears, that they did not come together, to partake of the Lord's
Supper, for that was commanded and attended always in the Evening: And Paul
took the Opportunity of the Night following to preach to them, which shows,
the Day time was improved in breaking of Bread, it being a Feast of Charity,
and Paul continued his Speech till midnight; and had not the young Man fell
from the Third Loft, and been taken up dead, we know not how much longer his
Sermon would have continued: So that we see, this coming together to break
Bread, on the first Day of the Week, was not for Preaching, for that was
attended the Night following; nor for the Lord's Supper, for that was commanded
and attend, always in the Evening, after the Work of the Day was over. Thus it
appears, that there could not be a plainer Scripture to disprove the First Day,
being either a Sabbath or Holy Time, seeing no Religious Thing was observed
upon it, excepting only a Feast of Charity, or breaking of Bread, which might
be done on any Day of the Week, except it were a Day of Preaching, Fasting, or
Prayer. And in the 11th Verse it says, And when he was come up again, and had
broken Bread, and eaten, and talked a long while, even till break of Day, so he
departed. Thus it appears, this breaking of Bread, to be common Eating, and not
the Lord's Supper; and in all Places of Scripture, where breaking of Bread is
expressed for the Lord's Supper, it is expressed under such Terms as to
distinguish it from common Eating, or breaking of Bread, but not in this Place,
because it was for common Eating; and what Preaching was, was in the Night
following, being out of the common Season of Preaching, because the first Day
of the Week before, was improved in breaking of Bread; for this Place of
Scripture does not say, they came together to hear the Word preached, or to
pray, but that their coming together, was to break Bread, and shows that Paul
took that Opportunity, the Night following, to preach to them, according to his
Doctrine to Timothy, Preach the Word, be instant in Season, and out of Season.

In Page 37 says he, Therefore the Fourth Commandment required to keep one Day
in Seven holy to God. This is a gross wresting of the Scripture, to mislead
People, for it required and limited the keeping of the Seventh Day, and
commanded Work to be done on the other six Days. But what he asserts is to open
a Door of Confusion, in leaving it to every Man's Liberty, which Day of the
seven he will keep for a Sabbath: so that one Man may say, I will choose the
first Day of the seven, another, I will choose the second of the seven to keep
for a Sabbath, etc. throughout the whole Week, Luke 6.39.

And in Page 52. says he, Such Considerations as these, should move and
quicken us, very carefully, constantly, consciensciously, to sanctify the
Sabbath, even to obey the fourth Commandment. Here he overthrows all that he
has been saying in his Book before, about his first Day Sabbath; for if we
obey the fourth Commandment, we must work upon the first Day of the Week, it
being one of the six working Days by it commanded to work upon; and we must
strictly rest from Labor on the seventh or last Day of the Week; for so that
Commandment commands us. This puts me in mind of Christ's Words, Mat, 23.3. All
therefore whatsoever they bid you observe, that observe and do, but do not ye
after their Works, for they say and do not. If this Doctrine be good, what a
miserable Condition is New England in, that prophanes this Fourth Commandment
with both Hands (if it stand good) in not only working upon the Day it forbids,
but also resting from Work upon one of the Six Days, of which it says, Thou
shall labor. But the Fourth Commandment, commanded only a Sign to be observed,
of the Saints everlasting Sabbath, that the second Adam will bring them unto,
Ezekiel. 20.12, 20. Exodus 31.13, 17. Col. 2.16.17, compared with Heb. 4.9, 10, 11.
And so was the seventh Year Sabbath, which was commanded, Lev. 25.4. though it be
not expressed to be a Sign in so plain Words as the Seventh Day is: for as the
first Adam, by his Transgression, brought Labor upon us, so the second Adam
will bring the Saints into an everlasting Rest or Sabbath, when God shall have
created and finished the new Heavens, and the new Earth, and made it habitable
for the Saints, then shall be fulfilled what is written, Rev. 14.13. Blessed
are the dead which die in the Lord, from hence forth, yea says the Spirit,
that they may rest from their Labors, and their Works do follow them.

SInce what is above written, a Pamphlet is come to my View. The Author is
nameless: The Title of it is, Thesis concerning the Sabbath. Printed by Timothy
Green in New London. It contains Nine Articles by way of a general Argument or
Position, built upon no Foundation of Scripture, being sophistical Sophistry.

The first Argument is, Jesus Christ is Lord of the Sabbath. If he thus says
intentially from any Place of Scripture, I conceive it must be from what is
written, Mark 2.28. Therefore the Son of Man is Lord also of the Sabbath. This
was spoken of the Seventh Day Weekly Sabbath, and is answered before in this
Book, Page 6, 7. But it is needful to examine into this Place of Scripture, and
see in what respect the Son of Man is to be understood Lord of the Sabbath. It
is to be seen in the 24th Verse, how the Pharisees blamed Christ's Disciples,
for doing that which was unlawful on the Sabbath, as they judged: And in the
25th and 26th Verses, Christ signifies to them, what David did when he had
need, and was an hungered, as his Disciples were at that time, Mat. 12.1. And in
the 27th he sets before them, how that the Sabbath was made for Man, and not
Man for the Sabbath: So that upon this reason they must confess that the Son of
Man is Lord of it, according to Christ's Words. This was to convict them of
their blind and ignorant Zeal, in preferring the Sanctification of the Sabbath
before the satisfying the hungry Soul, seeing the Sabbath was made for Man, and
not Man for the Sabbath, therefore (says he) the Son of Man is Lord also of
the Sabbath: Seeing it was made for him, he must needs be Lord of it; so that
the reason he here renders to them, is to convince them, how the Son of Man
comes to be Lord of the Sabbath, to wit, because it was made for him, so that
the satisfying of his Hunger was to be preferred before the Sanctificaiion of
the Sabbath: And his Argument is good on the behalf of every Son of Man, for
whom it was made for; for he himself, as Son of Man, was made of a Woman, and
made under the Law, as much as any other Son of Man, Gal. 4.4. and had no more
Power to alter or change it, than any other Son of Man for whom it was made:
And I can find no other Weekly Sabbath instituted in the holy Scriptures, or
any other Weekly Day commanded, called or kept for a Sabbath throughout the
Bible. The Acts of the Apostles was written many Years after Christ's Ascension
into Heaven, and calls no other Day the Sabbath, but the seventh Day of the
Week, and shows that it was the Day that Paul preached and reasoned upon, both
to the Jews and to the Gentiles every Sabbath Day, as appears, Acts 18.
comparing the 4th Verse with the 11th Verse, And he reasoned in the Synagogue
every Sabbath, and persuaded the Jews and the Greeks. And he continued there a
Year and six Months, teaching the Word of God among them. Acts 13. comparing
the 42d Verse with the 44th, And when the Jews were gone out of the Synagogue,
he Gentiles be sought that these Words might be preached to them the next
Sabbath, and the next Sabbath Day came almost the whole City together to hear
the Word of God. We have here no account that Paul said to the Gentiles, come
to Morrow, for to Morrow, the first Day of the Week, is the Christian Sabbath.
But this Seventh Day Sabbath which was made for Man, to be a Sign to him, as
appears, Exodus 31.13. Ezekiel. 20. 12. compared with Deuteronomy. 5.15. was abolished, as
appears, Col. 2.16, 17. and not changed; for Jesus Christ God blessed for
evermore, did not give Signs and Shadows under the Law to be changed, but to be
fulfilled by Christ under the Gospel, by bringing in the Substance they
shadowed out.

The second is, That Day of each Week, which it is the Will of Christ, should
be the Sabbath Day, ought to be observed as such.

To which I answer, No Day of each Week, since the abolishing of the Seventh,
is revealed to be the Will of Christ to be kept for a Sabbath, and therefore no
Day to be observed as such, but to the contrary, Gal. 4.10, 11. So that here is
no Foundation to the Thesis, concerning the pretended Weekly Sabbath, and
therefore the Thesis must fall, having no Foundation to stand upon.

John Rogers.

THese following Questions was presented as they are underwritten, but when I
saw I could obtain no Answer but Persecution, I then presented them to a
Superior Court held in New London, and from them to the next General Court in
that Colony, and so to the Elders and Messengers of the Churches of the Colony
of Connecticut, requesting of them an Answer, upon the consideration of the
Confession of their own Faith, and the good Counsels there given, and printed
in New London, in the Year 1710. And here follows an Account of some Part of
what I presented to them, taken out of the Confession of their own Faith.

In Page 6. First Counsel, That you be immoveably and unchangeably agreed in
the only sufficient, and invariable Rule of Religion, which is the Holy
Scripture, the fixed Canon, incapable of Addition and Diminution. You ought to
account nothing ancient, that will not stand by this Rule, nor any thing new
that will. Do not hold your selves bound to unscriptual Rites in Religion,
wherein Custom it self does many times misguide* Isai. 8.20. To the Law and to
the Testimony, if they speak not according to this Word, it is because there is
no Light in them.

Second Counsel, That you be determined by this Rule in the whole of Religion.
That your Faith be right and divine, the Word of God must be the Foundation of
it, and the Authority of the Word the Reason of it, etc. For an orthodox
Christian to resolve his Faith into Education, Instruction, and the Persuasion
of others, is not an higher Reason than a Papist, Mohammedan or Pagan, can
produce for his Religion.

Page 7. Believe, in all Divine Worship, it is not enough that this or that Act
of Worship is not forbidden in the Word of God; if it be not commanded, and you
perform it, you may fear you will be found guilty, and be exposed to divine
Displeasure. Nadab and Abihu paid dear for offering in divine Worship, that
which the Lord commanded them not. It is an honor done unto Christ, when you
accout that only decent, orderly and convenient in his House, which depends
upon the Institution and Appointment of himself, who is the only Head and
Lawgiver of his Church.

Page 65. God alone is Lord of the Conscience, and has left it free from the
Doctrines and Commandments of Men, which are in any thing contrary to his Word,
or not contained in it: So that to believe such Doctrines, or to obey such
Commands out of Conscience, is to betray true Liberty of Conscience; and the
requiring of an implicit Faith, and an absolute and blind Obedience, is to
destroy Liberty of Conscience and Reason also. Acts 4.19. Whether it be right
in the sight of God, to hearken unto you more than unto God, judge ye. Acts
5.29 We ought to obey God rather than Men. Jam. 4.12. There is one Lawgiver,
who is able to save and to destroy: Who art thou that judge another? Mat.
15.9. But in vain they do worship me, teaching for Doctrines the Commandments
of Men. Col. 2.22, Which all are to perish with the using, after the
Commandments and Doctrines of Men. Joh. 4.22. Ye worship ye know not what. Hos.
5.11. Ephraim is oppressed, and broken in Judgment, because he willingly walked
after the Commandment.

These are the Scriptures they quote for their Proof, with many more. All these
quotations, quoted out of the Book of the Confession of their own Faith, with
much more, was presented to the abovesaid Courts, Elders and Messengers of said
Churches, with the following Questions, grounded upon the said Confession of
their own pretended Faith, but can obtain no Answer but Violence to compel us
to rebel against it, as will appear by said Questions as follows.

To Richard Christophers Assistant, and from him to Gov. Saltonstal, and
Eliphalet Adams.
I Request of you, as you profess yourselves to be Christians, and the
Scripture to be your Rule, to give me a direct Answer to these Scriptural
Questions, Romans 4, 15. For where no Law is, there is no Transgression.

My Question is, Has God any Law to forbid Labor on the first Day of the
Week? If he has, quote Chapter and Verse for it, to convict us of our Error,
or be convicted that you will be found Fighters against God, in striving to
compel us to worship the works of your own hands, which would be Idolatry in us.

And consider, the Age and Antiquity of an Idol, does not make the Sin one whit
the less, but the greater; for God's Patience and Long Suffering toward
Idolaters, should lead them to Repentance.

A Second Question I crave of you is, Whether the Name Sabbath (which you
impose upon the first Day of the Week in your Law Book) be a Title that God by
his Word has put upon it? If it be, pray quote the Chapter and Verse, where it
is so named by God's Word, If not, judge your Selves.

A third Question I crave your Answer to is, Whether the Name Lords Day (which
you impose in your Law Book upon the first Day of the Week) be a Scripture Name
peculiarly to that Day? And how you prove the Revelations of Jesus Christ to
John was upon the first Day of the Week?

And if you cannot answer the said Questions by the Holy Scriptures, then I
request of you to read and to consider what is written, Psalm. 94.20, 21. Shall
the Throne of Iniquity have Fellowship with thee, which frames mischief by a
Law? They gather themselves together against the Soul of the Righteous, and
condemn the innocent Blood. From New London Prison, the 17th of the 9th Month.
1719.

John Rogers.


And here follows a Copy of my Request to Court Elders and Messengers, wrote
under the above Questions as it is here.

MY Request to you is, That you will be pleased to see that an Answer to my
Questions may be returned, by you or your Elders, as you will answer it before
God, the Judge of Heaven and Earth, and that we may not be compelled by the
Authority, to offer to God in divine Worship, that which he has not commanded,
against our Consciences, and contrary to the Confession of your own Faith; and
if God has commanded the first Day of the Week to be kept for a Sabbath, to
quote to us the Place in Scripture where it is so commanded, and send it to us:
And if there be no Command of God for it in the Holy Scriptures, and only your
own Law in your Law Book, and your Ministers Doctrine for it, then I desire you
to read and to consider what is written, Mat. 15, 7th, 8th, and 9th Verses, Ye
Hypocrites, well did Isaiah prophecy of you, saying, This People draws nigh
unto me with their Mouth, and honors me with their Lips, but their Heart is
far from me, but in vain do they Worship me, teaching for Doctrines the
Commandments of Men.

New London, the 7th of the third Month, 1721. From him that wishes you well,
and desires to see your Salvation and not your Destruction.

John Rogers.


But I could obtain no Answer from them; for every one that does Evil hates
the Light, neither comes to the Light, lest his Deeds should be discovered,
Joh. 3, 20.

And now my Request to you the said Courts, Elders and Messenders is, in the
Presence and View of the World, to show us Chapter and Verse or Verses, where
God's Command is, which commands the keeping the first Day of the Week for a
Sabbath, by which you are not in the same Danger as Nadab and Abihu was, that
we may escape with you, if we keep it with you; for I can find no such
Commandment throughout the whole Bible: For you in the Confession of your
Faith, set before us the great Danger we are in, if we offer to God that in
Divine Worship, which he has not commanded; not only the Loss of our Lives, as
Nadab and Abihu did theirs, but eternal Damnation also; as appears in your
Confession of Faith, Page 7. and in your second Counsel. Believe, that Worship
not divinely commanded is in vain, nor will answer the Necessities and
Expectations of a Christian, and is a worshipping you know not what. Believe, in
all divine Worship, it is not enough that this or that Ast of Worship is not
forbidden in the Word of God; if it be not commanded, and you perform it, you
may fear you will be found guilty, and exposed to Divine Displeasure. Nadab and
Abihu paid dear for offering in Divine Worship, that which the Lord commanded
them not.

Upon this Consideration, I request this Favor of you, so that we may venture
in with you in keeping of it, by a Commandment from God, if you know of any,
for this will be more for your Honor than to compel us against our own
Consciences, and (your own Counsels) by your own Law, accompanied with your
Whips, Stocks, Fines and Imprisonments, which hitherto you have been using to
compel us to offer in Divine Worship, that which God has not commanded; and
besides this, we are ashamed (I do not say you) to pretend to be orthodox
Christians, and to resolve our Faith into Education, Instruction, and the
Persuasion of others, seeing you say in your Confession, Page 6. That this is
no higher a Reason, than a Papist, Mohammedan, or Pagan can produce for their
Religion; for we would not be like such spoken of in Zeph. 3.5. The unjust
knows no Shame.

Thus it appears nakedly before your Eyes, and to your Consciences, that either
your Counsels, in the Confession of your Faith is very erroneous, or else your
first Day Sabbath, if it have no command of God for it, which I can find no
where throughout the whole Bible; and that which can be found no where, may
well be concluded not to be at all; and the said Counsels in the Confession of
your Faith is so substantially grounded on the holy Scriptures, that I think it
most safe to conclude, that it is your Sabbath that is Erroneous and Idolatry,
except you have a Commandment from God for it, by the Confession of your own
Faith.

I having been treating upon your Sabbath, the Foundation almost of all your
Worship, which is the Works of your own Hands, by your own Confession, except
you can find a Commandment from God for it.

I shall now conclude with that which is called your Civil Government. The last
Fine you fined me was Ten Shillings. All that I did was expounding upon a
Chapter in the Bible, between your Meetings, after the People were gone to
Dinner, which you call a Riot. I went into no other Seat but that which I was
seated in, by them whom the Town appointed to seat every one. The building of
the Meeting House cost me Three of the best fat Cattle I had that Year, and as
many Shoes as was sold for Thirty Shillings in Silver Money; for which said
Fine of Ten Shillings, the Officer took Ten Sheep, as some told me that helped
to drive them away. The Sheep were half my Sons: They were marked with a Mark
that we marked Creatures with that were between us, which said Mark had been
recorded in the Town Book, I suppose for above Twenty Years; and after they
were sold, the Officer went into my My Sons Pasture unbeknown to him, and took
a Milch Cow which was between us, (my Part he hired) all upon the same Fine of
ten Shillings. The Pasture had stood recorded to him above Seven, if not above
Eight Years, and not any Overplus returned. Such things as these has been
frequently done upon us; and Purpose is Brevity, and such things as these would
contain a great Volume, and therefore I think to mention but one more. I was
fined 20 l. by a Superior Court, for charging an Inferior Court with
Injustice, for trying upon Life and Death without a Jury. The Judge of the
Superior Court that fined me, was this present Governor, who also denied me a
Jury, though I chose the Jury then pannelled, for which 20 l. and the Charges, an
Execution was laid upon Land which I bought for my Son, with his own Money, and
after it was took away by said Execution, he went and bought it of you this
present Government, and gave you the Money down for it, and you gave him a
Patent for it, I think as substantial as your Patent from the Crown of England
for your Government upon all Accounts, being sealed with your Seal, and with
your present Governors Hand, and your Secretary's to it. The Patent cost 19 s.
12 s. to the Goverdour for signing it, and when you had got his Money for it,
and given him said Patent, then you took this very individual Land from him,
and keeps his Money also, and left him nothing but said Patent in his Hand; for
said Governor kept the Deed which the Man of whom I bought it gave, and keeps
it to this Day, I think for that end, that my Son may not help himself by his
said Deed; for the Man of whom I bought it lives in another Government. I
prosecuted the Judges of your said Inferior Court, before your General Court,
for judging upon Life and Death without a Jury, it being by your own Law out of
their Jurisdiction to judge in so high a Fact with a Jury; the Fact also being
charged to be done in New York Government, to wit, the stealing of three
Servants out of a Man's House on Long Island in the Night: But you nonsuited
me in your Court of Chancery, and laid all the Charge upon me, and fined me 20
l. So that if the poor Man had not obtained Justice in Boston Government, he
had lost his Wife and Children by you, as I had mine, for he had tried in
Rhode Island Government before, and had got Bondsmen to answer all Damages, if
he did not make good his Right and Title to his Wife and Children: But said
Governor of Rhode Island sent them back to this present Governor, but by the
good hand of God they were after transported into Boston Government, by which
Means the poor Man came at Justice.

I thought to have concluded with what is above written, but upon Consideration
that it is but two things among many, I shall set before you this last to the
end of it.

The said Inferior Court, did proceed and pass Judgment in a Case that was
upon Life and Death, by the Law of God, the Law of England, and your own Law,
upon a Fact charged in another Government as abovesaid, and without Witness;
And when I saw they would proceed, I then drew up the following Protest, and
gave it into your Court.

THe Protest of John Rogers Senior of New London, against the Proceedings of
this present Court, against my self and John Jackson, being a pretended Fact
done upon Long Island, within the Bounds and Limits of the Government
established there, for to do Justice and Judgment within their Limits and
Territories, and do appeal to their Court of Justice for a Trial, where I have
Evidence to clear my self of any such Fact.

John Rogers Senior.
June 11. 1711. A true Copy, Test. George Denison, County Clerk. June 28. 1711.


And I do declare unto you in the Presence of God, That I was not at that time
upon Long Island, when the Fact was charged to be done, though I was at that time
within the Government of New York. But when I heard the said Court's Sentence,
I did declare it to be Injustice, and Rebellion against the Laws of the Crown
of England; upon which Charge the said Court demanded of me a Bond of two
Hundred Pounds to answer it at the next Superior Court: And when the Superior
Court came, I desired to be tried by a Jury, and chose that Jury then sitting;
but this present Governor being Judge of this Superior Court, denied me a
Jury, and fined me 20 l. as abovesaid, and required of me a great Bond for my
good Behavior till the next Superior Court, which I refused to give, upon this
Reason, that I would not reflect upon my self, as if I had misbehaved my self
when I had not* Whereupon I was committed to Prison, and kept a close Prisoner
in the inner Prison, where no Fire was allowed me, and that Winter was a
violent cold Winter, and there was no Jailer, but the Sheriff kept the Keys,
who lived (I suppose) half a Mile distant from the Prison, and my own
Habitation (I suppose) full two Mile distant, so that it was a difficult thing
for my Friends to come at me; the Prison new, and not under-pinn'd, and stood
upon Blocks some distant from the Ground, the Floor being Plank'd with green
Plank, shrunk much, and let in the Cold. My Son was wont in cold Nights to come
to the Grates of the Window to see how I did, and contrived privately in cold
Nightss to help me with some Fire (for the Sheriff said, he had Order that no
Fire should be allowed me) but could not find any Way to make it do, by giving
it in at the Grates, they being so close, and no place to make it within; but
he coming in a very cold Night, called to me, and perceiving that I was not in
my right Senses, was in a Fright, and ran along the Street, crying, the
Authority has killed my Father, and cried at the Sheriffs, you have killed my
Father, upon which the Town was raised, and my Life was narrowly preserved, for
forthwith the Prison Doors was opened and Fire brought in, and hot Stones wrapped
in Cloth and laid at my Feet and about me, and the Minister Adams sent me a
Bottle of Spirits and his Wife a Cordial, whose Kindness I must acknowledge,
and the Neighbors came about me, with what Relief they could, all which
Kindness I acknowledge, but when those of you in Authority saw that I
recovered, you had up my Son, and fined him for ^^king a Rout in the Night, and
he desired to be tried by a Jury, but you dismissed the Jury that was in being,
and pannell'd a Jury purposely for him, as I was informed, and since have seen
it to be so by your own Court Record, and took for the Fine and Charge Three of
the best Cows I had. My Blood was so chilled and jellied with the Cold, that it
after purged away with a noisome Smell: But some of you in Authority would have
possessed the People, that it was some Distemper that was upon me.

In which Prison I lay till the next Superior Court, and in the Sheriffs House*
The time of the Bond demanded by them being out, I was dismissed, and after I
was dismissed, I think the next Day, I was going to baptize a Person, and as I
was going to the Water the Sheriff came to me, and desired to speak with me:
His House being close by, I went in with him: He went through two Rooms* and came
to the Door of the third, and then told me, the Superior Court had orderd him
to shut me up; upon that I made a Stop, and desired him to show me his Order,
he said it was by Word of Mouth: He keeping a Tavern, there was many present
who told him, he ought not to shut me up without a written Order: He then laid
violent Hands on me to pull me in, but the People rescued me; and then he told
me* he would go to the Court, and get it in Writing, and so he left me, and
brought this following Mittimus, this present Governor being Judge of this
Superior Court also.

To the Sheriff of the County of New London, or to his Deputy.
BY special Order of her Majesty's Superior Court, now holden in New London,
you are hereby required in her Majesty's Name, to take John Rogers Senior of
New London, who to the View of said Court, appears to be under an high Degree
of Distraction, and him secure in her Majesty's Goal for the County aforesaid,
in some dark Room or Apartment thereof, that proper Means may be used for his
Cure, and till he be recovered from his Madness, and you receive Order for his
Release. Signed by Order of the said Court, March the 26th. 1712. In the 11th
Year of her Majesty's Reign.

Jonathan Law, Clerk.
Vera Copia, Test. John Prentis, Sheriff.

And upon this Mittimus, he carried me to Prison and put me into the inner
Prison, and had the Light of the Window stopped. Upon this the common People was
in an Uproar, and broke the Plank of the Window and let Light in: And one of
the Lieutenants that came out of England, told me, he had been with the said
Superior Court, and desired that I might be brought forth to their View; and
they would see that I was under no Distraction, and that they had ordered that
I should be brought out to the Governor in the Evening; but when it was dark
Night, I was taken out by the Sheriff, and carried to the Governor's House,
into a private Room, and the Sheriff sent out by the Governor, to see that the
Yard was clear: But it is too much to write what was done to some that was
found standing there; but the Body of them did run away. The Governor ordered
the Sheriff to take me home with him, and keep me at his House, accordingly he
did, and gave me a charge not to go out of his Yard, but set no Body to look
after me; but he himself tended on the said Court, but about two Days after, I
was told that the Sheriff told a Friend of his, that he was ordered after the
Court was broke up, and the People dispersed, to carry me up to Hartford
Prison, and to see me shut up in some dark Room, and that one Laboreell a
French Doctor was to shave my head, and give me Purges to recover me of my
Madness. I hearing of this, I desired the Sheriff to give me a Copy of the
Mittimus, and after I told him what I heard privately, he owned the Truth of
it, and that Night following, I got up, and got a Neighbor to acquaint my Son
how Matters was circumstanced, who brought 10 l. of Money for me, and hired
hands to row me over to Long Island, and pulled off his own Shirt and gave me,
and I got to Southold on Long Island in the Night, and early in the Morning,
(it being the first Day of the Week) I went to a Justice to give him an Account
of the Matter, having told him that I got away from under the Sheriffs Hand at
New London: But he replied, It is the Sabbath, it is not a Day to Discourse
about such things. So I returned to the Tavern, and I suppose it was not above
an Hour, before the Constable came and set a Guard over me, 'till about Nine or
Ten of the Clok, the next Day, and then came for me,, where three Justices was
sitting at a Table, with a written Paper lying before them, and read a Law to
me, That it was to be counted Felony, to break out of a Constables Hand. I then
presented a Copy of the Mittimus: They read it and desired to be in Private;
and being brought before them again, they told me, they did not look at me to
be such a Person as I was there rendered, and so discharged me without any
Charge: I told them, my design was to their Governor for Protection; and that
I did expect Hue-and-cries to pursue me, and requested of them to stop them if
they did, they promised me they would, and after I heard they did stop them. I
got a Man and Horse to go with me to York with all the speed I could, and the
first House I went into, was Governor Hunter's in the Fort, and showed him the
Mittimus, and gave him an account of matters; he told me he would not advise me
to venture thither again, and that I should have safe Protection. I told him I
did expect Hue-and-cries to come after me: He told me I need not fear that at
all, for said he, I have heard you differ in Opinion from them, and they will
be glad to be rid of you, and it is evident you are no such Man as they
pretend: But the next Day about 10 of the Clock, there came 2 printed
Hue-and-cries in at the Tavern where I was, and I got them both, and went
directly to the Governor, who was walking alone on the Wall of the Fort, and
delivered one of them to him, who read it, and then called to a little Man
walking on the Pavement in the Fort, saying, Mr. Bickly, Mr. Bickly, come
hither, and when he was come, he read it, and said he, I grant Protection to
this Man, he shall not be sent back upon this Hue-and-cry, and said he, I will
write to the Governor of Connecticut, and to me he said, you are safe enough
here, I will grant you Protection. I told him, I did believe no Answer would be
returned him, accordingly he found my Words true, and advised me to go for
England, and make my Complaint, and told me there was a Ship then going from
Pensilvania. A Merchant being then present, told me if I wanted Money, he would
lend it me, and if I should never be able to pay him, he never would trouble me
for it. All this Kindnefs have I met with from Strangers, but have thought it
my Wisdom to commit my Cause to the All seeing God, and after I had continued
in York about three Months, I returned home, and after I was recruited, with
great difficulty I prosecuted the Judges of your said Inferior Court, for you
had made it so difficult to Summon them, that none could give forth a Summons
but your General Court, in such a Case, but when I with great difficulty
brought it to your Court of Chancery, you nonsuited me, and ordered me to pay
all the Charges, and fined me 20 l. as abovesaid. All which Causes me to
suspect your pretended care expressed in your printed Hue-and-cries to cure me of
my Distraction, and here follows a Copy for you to view.

Advertisement.
WHereas John Rogers Senior of New London, being committed to the Custody of
her Majesty's Goal in the County of New London, which is under my Care, with
special Orders to keep him in some dark Appartment thereof, until proper Means
be used for the Cure of that Distraction which he appeared (to her Majesty's
Superior Court in and for the said County) to be under in a very high degree,
has by the assistance of evil Persons, made his Escape out of the said Custody.

These are therefore to desire all Persons to seize and secure the said Rogers,
and return him forthwith unto me the Subscriber, Sheriff of the said County,
and they shall be well satisfied for the Trouble and Charge they may be at
therein.

Dated in New London, March 31st 1712. John Prentis.
After I returned home, I went to the Printer to know who it was that drew this
Advertisement up, and he showed me the Copy, and I took it to be Governor
Salt^nstal's own Hand. New London, 15th of the ^th Month, 1721.

John Rogers.



Isai. 1.^0, 11. Hear the Word of the Lord, ye Rulers of Sodom; give (...) unto
the law of our God, ye People of Gomorrah. To what purpose is the multitude of
your Sacrifices unto me, says the Lord Chap. 9.16, 17. For the leaders of this
People cause them to err, and they that are led of them are destroyed;
therefore the Lord shall have no joy in their Young Men, neither shall have
Mercy on their Fatherless and Widows; for every one is an Hypocrite and an Evil
(...). Chap. 29.13, 14. Wherefore the Lord said, Forasmuch as this People draw
near me with their mouth, and with their lips do honor me, but have removed
their heart far from me, and their fear toward me is taught by the precept of
man* therefore ^^^ld, I will proceed to do a mavelous work amongst his
People, (...) mavelous work and awonder; for the wisdom of their wise (...)
perish, and the understanding of their prudent Men shall be (...) Mat. 10.26.
Fear them not therefore, for there is nothing covered, that shall not be
revealed, and hid, that shall not be known.

FINIS.

