COPY of a LETTER by a Gentleman in New England, to his Friend and
Correspondent at London, containing REMARKS on a late Pamphlet Entitled, Some
Considerations on the French Settling Colonies on the Mississippi, in so far as
concerns the Court of Admiralty within the Limits of Col. SHUTES Government in
New England.
SIR,
I Acknowledge it was a most Valuable present you sent me by the last Ships, for
which I shall ever account my self singularly obliged: We in this Country being
in great measure ignorant of, and anxious to know what passes among you in
London concerning Us, in these Remote Parts of the World, especially in the
Winter Season; yea and fond of all New Occurrences. Amidst the other Papers and
Pamphlets, That Entitled, Some Considerations on the French Settling Colonies
on the Mississippi; was what I did Read most deliberately, expecting. The
Advantages or Disadvantages that might thereby accrue to the Dominions of Great
Britain, would have been set in a clear light. But after all, I observe, What
was written therein with reference to that Settlement, was the Work of some
Frantic and Self-conceited Scribler: That Subject being treated of much more
accurately in some of the Other Papers: and that the Author had embraced that
Inscription or Title to his Pamphlet, As a convenient way to Publish the
Aspersions and Reflections which he had in View, not only against Col. SHUTE
the Governor and Vice Admiral of Massachusetts Bay etc. in New England, and
the whole Officers of the Court of Admiralty therein established; but also
against the Lords Commissioners for executing the Office of Lord High Admiral
of Great Britain, and which are contained therein, Namely, That he had given to
their Lordships some grounds of Complaints (as he calls them) against Col.
SHUTE the Governor, Master Menzeis the Judge, and other Offcers of that Court
of Admiralty, and which their Lordships had not allowed to be Read. etc. And
because you are desirous to be informed, What truth is in these Suggestions,
and that I incline to continue a Correspondence with you, I shall give you as
far as I have been capable to observe, not only my own thought, but also the
general Sentiment of the Country concerning these Reflections Published by that
Author under Mask, and yet not so cunningly screened, as not to be known who he
is, or (at least) whom he Personats; and you may depend upon it, I shall
advance nothing herein, but what can be made plain by Vouchers. Omni exceptione
majores: if necessary.

I shall pass by what therein concerns the Right Honorable the Lords
Commissioners of Admiralty, it being beyond doubt in this place, That if the
Author have persevered in his Delirium, and discovered himself to their
Lordships, he has received his just reward from them. Neither shall I insist
on a Vindication of Col. SHUTE, whose Wise and Prudent Conduct in all the steps
of His Administration amongst us, is so firmly established, as puts him beyond
the reach of Malice, and sufficiently able to clear himself of all these false
Accusations charged upon him: And I presume has already done it to their
Lordships of the Admiralties satisfaction.

As to the Judge, Register and Marshall of the Court of Admiralty in this
Province: In regard the Charge against the Judge consists of sundry Articles,
and of weight (if true) That I might be able to answer fully your desire, by a
just and true account of these Matters, I have not depended on, my own private
knowledge and opinion of that Gentleman; though I have endeavored very narrowly
to observe his deportment in that Station ever since he came into the Country,
and could not discover any failour therein though frequently conversant with him.
And I may to you say, I would with as much pleasure have Published any
blemishes in him, as any others, if I had observed any thing in his Conduct
blameworthy. But I have also at sundry times taken occasion to Discourse with
some of the most considerable Persons in this Town, Such as Judges, Justices,
Counselors, Churchmen, Lawyers and Merchants, not a few, that I might have
their Sentiments of him: Whose Testimonies do all agree in this, That he
behaves himself very Prudently and Discreetly; is a firm adherer to His
Majesty's Interest, as by Law established, a Lover and Promoter of the
improvement of the Country: And that as his Station affords him opportunity, he
gives sufficient proof of his Qualifications; and was never tainted with being
guilty of any of the Articles wherewith that Pamphleteer charges him. And
moreover, the Articles of Charge are by the generality of Residenters in this
Town considered as the Invention of One Mr. Smith, who was some time ago
Advocate General in that Court, and the produce of his Vindictive Malice and
Passion, in regard the Judge by advice of the Governor had suspended him ab
Officio, for his rude and unbecoming behavior in Court toward the Judge, the
Lawyers, and others Members of Court; yea, and Scurrolous Language to a great
many of the Leidges resorting thereto. etc. And who thereupon (as I am credibly
informed) Swore to be Revenged on him; and now (as it seems) has taken this
Method, if possible to defame, and so to accomplish his pernicious design
against him. Neither have I relied wholly on the abovementioned Testimonies,
and my own proper knowledge of the Judge, but proceeded and obtained particular
Information of the several Cases mentioned in the Pamphlet, and of the Judges
actings in these Cases; And after a most strict inquiry and exact scrutiny
concerning the same; I observed as follows: And therefore that I may give you
an impartial account of his actings therein, and do him justice in the case,
albeit his opinion and decrees did not always suit with my interest.

Whereas in Page 33 of that Pamphlet it is said, The Judge was unwilling to
proceed in the Governors absence on the trial of Capt. Smart seizour, until he
got a promise of Forty Pounds, a Hogshead of Claret, and a Cask of Brandy; and
that then he gave decree, and allowed all to be disposed of by the Captain, for
his Majesty's use.

I have observed from the Records of Court, that any small delay therein, was
occasioned by the Captains, not producing of the Writts found in these Vessels,
when seized. And that the Court was continued and Twenty-four Hours allowed
that these writings might be produced in Court as the Laws directs. I also
endeavored by all means possible to discover if with Capt. Smart, or any other
Person, the Judge had in that case or any other case made bargain for the Fees
or Costs of Court before Sentence; or was in use to defer pronouncing of his
decrees on any such account; and could not find so much as one single Person
either in Town or Country to assert it as true, or so much as to say, They had
at any time heard it alleged against him. And I also observed, That the Judge
in that case of Capt. Smarts had exacted no more for the dues of Court than is
allowed by Act of Parliament. 6. Anne Cap. ult. And which was divided as the
Law directs. As to the Hogshead of Claret and Cask of Brandy, mentioned. I
observed, That sometime after the trial was over, and Capt. Smart had got the
decree, and was disposing upon his Wines, he made Presents of some Part thereof
to his friends and acquaintance in the Town, that commodity being somewhat rare
in this Place; and amongst others be sent to the Judge his House a Hogshead of
Claret; and to the others some more, some less, as he thought proper to bestow.
As to the Brandy, The Author of the Pamphlet can find out what way it went if
he please, for the Vapors thereof seem as yet to affect his brain.

Whereas in Page 57 the Judge is charged with Ignorance of the Maritime Laws,
and Unintelligible kind of Speech. I observe the Judges and Lawyers here are of
a contrary opinion: As also I have occasionally seen his Act of Admission as a
Barrister in Scotland, which testifyeth, That he is a Gentleman who after a
solemn trial upon the Civil Law, which I presume comprehends the Maritime Law,
Many Years ago, was found sufficiently qualified; which you may easily be
informed of where you are, by His Majesty's Advocate for North Britain, or
other Gentlemen of that Country. And whereas it is Insinuated in the same Page,
That the Judge is guilty of Corruption, and in most Cases frames his decisions
in favor of the highest bidder. The Author, I observe, is at a loss in not
having special Instances to condescend on, For I have with great application
endeavored to find out if there was any such thing true in Fact, and have not
been able to discover any case that had the least tendency thereto: And the
best and most eminent in this Place will readily assert his Innocence and
Vindicate him from that Aspersion. And as to the Story contained in that Book
or Pamphlet of the Judge his having taken one Whale as costs of Court, for
dividing another between two contending Parties: It is altogether Chimerical,
without any shadow of foundation, hatched by the Author.

As to the acquittal of the Ship called King GEORGE mentioned, Page 58,
unjustly (as is alleged) when brought to trial for Unlawful Importation of
Iron, French Brandy and Irish Prizes, Anno 1718. And that for pronouncing the
decree Absolvitor; the Judge received assignment to two Servants time, valued
at 22 l. each. It consists with my own proper knowledge, That the decision in
that case made a little noise, and the Informers alleged, That Mr. Smith the
then Advocate General had not done his part fairly; but however be that as it
will, I also know that the Judge did exincontinenti, order the proceedings in
that case to be exemplified, and the exemplification thereof transmitted to the
Lords of Admiralty, that their Lordships might be apprized with the
circumstances of that Case; which accordingly was done, and neither have the
Lords Commissioners expressed their dislike of that Sentence, nor has the
Informer obtained the decree to be reversed, which he had sufficient time and
opportunity to have done, either by Appeal or Review, if the decree had been
unjust. And as to the two Servants time mentioned in the Article, I must say
the Author speaks without Book: For I have discoursed the Merchants who had the
disposal of these Servants time; they are Men of good Credit, and I presume
well known to the late Advocate General, Who are ready if called thereto to
make Oath that the Judge paid 32 l. in Province Bills for them, which was the
full Value, as others of the like kind were Sold.

And whereas the Pampleteer goes on and persists in a Billinsgate way of
arguing, That the Judge his conduct is unbecoming, and inconsistant with the
Character of an Upright Judge in so far as he solicits and draws vexatious
Suits before him, for the sake of Costs, and encourages Attorneys, etc. To
create Quarrels between Sailors and Masters, and gives advice to Parties, both
before and during trial, how to proceed, and altering the Sentences after
pronounced, upon applications made to him.

I have to a Nicity searched for the Truth of these bold and arrogant
Allegations, and all I can inform you of is that every branch of these
Assertions are void of proof, unless it be taken for granted upon the
Pamphleteers word: But I observed in the course of my search that Mr. Smith
when Advocate General, did endeavor to Propogate such Practices, and to take
Money from both Parties, which how soon discovered was one of the Motives that
induced the Judge to Suspend him.

Whereas in Page 59, it is said, That the Court is made up of such Members,
with whom one honest Man would think it a Scandal to act in Society.

All I shall say is, That the Author it seems is not as yet informed, That Mr.
Smith the bane thereof, whilst Advocate General therein is now turned out of
that Society, for the causes mentioned in the decree of Suspension pronounced
against him; and an other Gentleman much more deserving put in his Place, by
Commission under the Great Seal of Admiralty. So that he must be altogether a
Stranger to the Members of that Court as now Constituted, (or not Compos
Mentis) who talks so of them.

As to the Register of Court, all I shall inform you of, is, He is a very
ingenious Gentleman, of pleasant Conversation, behaves very well in his Office,
and most assiduous in his application, and gives great dispatch in all cases to
the Satisfaction of all Parties except to Mr. Smith, when a Member of that
Court, by whom he would not be imposed upon: and who as I formerly represented
to you is of all Men the most Unsatisfiable, where his Notions, however absurd
are not received and acquiessed in as Maxims of Law. And albeit it be true,
That the Register is also Secretary to Col. SHUTE the Governor; I cannot
observe any inconveniency to the Leidges that way, for it is most certain the
Governor does not in any Manner take upon him to divert or influence him in
the Sation as Register of Admiralty; and the Register is capable and has time
abundantly to execute both Trusts.

As to the Marshal of Court, He was about twelve Months ago also an Officer of
the Customs by Commission from thence, which being Notified to the Lords
Commissioners of Admiralty, Their Lordships did consider these two Offices as
incompatable in One Person, and therefore required the Governor to call for
and intimate to him their Lordships pleasure, viz. That he should make choice
of one of these and abandon the other: This was complied with, and he made his
election to retain the Marshals Commission, and has ever since acted as such,
without having any complaints laid in Court against him, for misdemeanour or
unwarrantable exactions.

To Conclude, I observe, and cannot in justice to the Judge, The other Members
of Court, and Leidges who are concerned in Cases brought before it, forbear to
declare, That since Mr. Smith was laid aside, business is carried on with great
Moderation and Dispatch, sine strepitu as the Law directs; whereas whilst he
was one of the Members of that Society it was much otherways.

P. S. (...), If Lying, Swearing, Backbiting, Whoring and Dissimulation be by
the Law of Nations declared the agreeable Qualifications of a GOOD FELLOW of a
Society: And if otherways. THEN, from such, Libera not domine.



FINIS.
BOSTON: Printed in the Year. 1720


