A DISCOURSE Showing Who is a true Pastor of the CHURCH of CHRIST.
I AM fully satisfied, that the good and well-meaning People, for whose Sake
this short and plain Discourse is now published, are thoroughly convinced of
the great Necessity and Advantage of making Use of a Spiritual Guide; and that
they are always ready to consult Him, and to commit the Care of their Souls to
him.

BUT then they may justly ask, -- WHO, WHERE is He? -- Since there are so many
false Teachers gone out into the World, how shall I know WHICH is a true One?
Among so many different Pretenders to the Ministry, how shall I find out, WHICH
are indeed the Ministers of Christ? Are all Apostles? Are all Prophets? Are all
Teachers? 1 Cor. xii. 29. Saint Paul plainly determins, that they are not so;
as also, Christ himself says to the Angel of the Church of Ephesus, Thou have
tried them, which say they are Apostles, and are not, and have found them
Liars. Rev. ii. 2. And if in the Days of Saint John the Apostle, there were
false Deceivers, who said, that they were Ministers of Christ, and were not,
much more are there such in our Days. How then shall I be able to know and find
them out?

THIS indeed is a Question of grand Importance; for Christ, who has appointed
an Order of Men to teach his People, has forbidden them to heap to themselves
Teachers; warned us against those who come in Sheep's Clothing, and yet are
ravenous Wolves; and assures us, that if the blind lead the blind, they shall
both fall into the Ditch. It is to Them only who derive their Authority from
Him, through the Hands of the Apostles, and their Successors; and are his
commissioned Ministers, that He has promised his Presence and Assistance to
the End of the World. So that if he confirms the Acts, and blesses the Ministry
of any others, it is more than He has promised in his holy Word.

BUT though this Question is of such weighty Concern, yet the solving of it has
not such Difficulty in it, but that every One might of himself judge what is
Right, if without Partiality, and without Hypocrisy, he would consider the
following Particulars, and the Texts of Scripture annexed to them.

1. THAT none ought to act as Ministers of Christ in his Church, but they who
have received a Commission from him. -- And Jesus came and spoke unto them,
saying, all Power is given unto Me in Heaven and in Earth. Go ye therefore and
teach all Nations, -- and lo, I am with you always even unto the End of the
World. Matthew. 28.18, 19, 20. And no Man takes this Honor unto himself, but he
that is called of God, as was Aaron. Heb. v. 4. And how shall they hear without
a Preacher? And how shall they preach except they be sent? Romans x. 14, 15.

2. THAT none can be said to receive a divine Commission from Him, but Those
who are either mediately or immediately called and appointed by him See the
Texts cited under the Letter Rom x. 15. Heb. v. 4.5. Acts xiv. 23. Rev. ii. 2.


3. THAT they who pretend to an immediate Call, ought, as the Apostles did, to
prove the Truth of their Mission, by working of Miracles; 'till which Time no
Regard is due to their Pretenses. Mark. xvi. 20. Matthew. vii. 15 and ix 6 30,
31. 1 John iv. 1.


4. THAT therefore the only standing regular Way of having this Honor, is the
deriving of it mediately through the Hands of others, from Christ himself.

5. THAT Christ himself, whilst on Earth, had two Orders of Men under Him, the
twelve Apostles, and the Seventy; gave the Power of sending, or ordaining
others, to the Apostles; and to them only, and those that succeed them, did He
give the Promise of his Presence and Assistance unto the End of the World. Luke
ix. 1. vi. 13. x. 1 and xxii. 29, 30. John xx. 21. Matthew. xxviii. 16.20. Acts
xxii. 17. xv. 13 and xxi. 18. Gal. ii. 9.1 Tim. v. 19.22. Tit. i. 5. Rev. ii. 2.


6. THAT after Christ's Ascension into Heaven, there were still three distinct
Orders set apart to the Ministry, viz. Deacons, Presbyters, or Elders; and a
still higher Order, which were superior to, and had Authority over both these,
such were, besides the Apostles, Timothy, Titus, St. James, Sur-named the Just,
and the Angels of the Seven Churches. (d)

7. THAT therefore, in the Beginning of the Christian Church, there was not a
Parity, but Inequality, or Prelacy in the Ministers of it.

8. THAT farther from the holy Scriptures it is evident, That the Power of
Ordination was lodged in those of the highest Order, Timothy and Titus, and in
them alone without any others being mentioned with them. 1 Timothy v. 22. Tit. i. 5.


9. THAT we have no Warrant from Scripture to conclude, that this Power was
given by the Apostles to those of the second Order, now called Presbyters; the
chief Text upon which this Warrant is supposed to be grounded, being that of
the Apostle to Timothy, Neglect not the Gift that is in thee, which was given
Thee by Prophecy, with the laying on of the Hands of the Prosbytery.

AND as Mr. Roberts judiciously observes, to make this Place any Thing to the
Purpose, these three Things at least must be proved. 1. That by Presbytery, is
here meant a Company of Persons. 2. That these Persons were all mere
Presbyters. 3. That none but such gave Timothy his Ordination. The first of
which is uncertain, the second improbable; and the third absolutely false.

AND here I cannot but take Notice of the Ignorance or Disingenuity (not to
call it a pious Fraud) of some Gentlemen in New England, in their Discourse HAD
(as they elegantly term it) of Presbyterial Ordination. The Design of the
Gentlemen is to prove from Scripture, that mere Presbyters had the Power of
Ordination. And thus they go to work. Page 11. We cannot but apprehend their
[the Presbyters] Power of Ordination from Scripture Precedents. I shall name
two famous Instances. Paul and Barnabas were set apart by the Hands of ordinary
Elders. Acts xiii. 1, 2, 3. This is false. They were not ordinary Elders, for
they were Prophets and Teachers immediately commanded by God to send these Men
on that particular Errand, as is plain by the Text. Besides, St. Paul says of
Himself, that He was an Apostle, (not of Men, neither by Man, but by Jesus
Christ, and God the Father, -- Gal. i. 1. And moreover, it appears by the Text
to be an extraordinary Act, for it is said to be done by the Holy Ghost. Acts
xiii. 1, 2, 3.

BUT to let the Gentlemen go on. So was Timothy ordained by the Imposition of
the Hands of the Presbytery: 1 Timothy iv. 14. And what was then valid is now. --
Upon the whole, if Scripture be the Rule then we cannot but safely conclude for
the Right of Presbyters, or ordinary Gospel Ministers, to ordain others.

THUS they. Now, before I answer it, I desire the Reader to take Notice, that
they call it a famous Instance, which implys thus much, that they thought it a
very good One for the Proof of the Validity of Presbyterial Ordination; and
indeed, it is the chief Text upon which the Dissenters build their unhappy
Mistakes. But these Gentlemen might have been better informed by their great
Master John Calvin, whose Opinion I suppose will have some Weight with them.
These are his Words upon the Place. Paul himself elsewhere declares that he
(without any others) laid Hands on Timothy: I admonish Thee (says He) that thou
stir up the Gift that is in thee, by the laying on of MY HANDS; for what is
said in the other Epistle of the laying on the Hands of the Presbytery, I don't
take it as if Paul spoke of the College of Presbyters, but by that Name I
understand the Ordination it self: As if he should say, see that the Grace
which thou did receive by the laying on of MY HANDS when I made thee a
Presbyter be not in vain: Calv. Institut. L. 4. C. 3. Thus Mr. Calvin.

THE Sum of the Dispute betwixt these Gentlemen and us on this Head is this.
We affirm (and are sure) that Timothy was not ordained by ordinary Gospel
Ministers inferior to the Apostles. They affirm, that ordinary Gospel
Ministers inferior to the Apostles ordained Timothy. And they produce this
famous Instance (as they call it) to prove their Assertion. Now, nothing is
more certain than this; that it is the current Opinion of great Numbers of good
Divines, both ancient and modern, that by Presbytery is not meant a Number of
Men, but the Office; and in particular Mr. Calvin, you see, has given it up.

BUT nothing is (or can be) more plain than the Scripture it self, therefore to
the Law and to the Testimony. Let it be decided by Scripture. There Saint Paul
expressly says to Timothy. 2. Tim. 1.6. Wherefore I put thee in Remembrance,
that thou stir up the Gift of God, which is in thee by the putting on of MY
HANDS. Thus the Scripture. Now if Saint Paul was an ordinary Gospel Minister
inferior to the Apostles, then those Gentlemen, for once, are in the right.

BUT this Text, I fear, was industriously omited, the Beams of Light darting
from it, and so directly pointing at their unhappy Error, they could not bear
the Sight of it, but hid it under a Bushel. But let them take care, for it is a
standing Maxim, That He is as much a false Witness who keeps back any Part of
the Evidence, as He who produces that for Evidence which is not Truth.

10. THEREFORE, that since it does not appear, that the Commission to ordain,
which the Apostles received from our blessed Savior, was ever granted by them
to those who are now called Presbyters, they cannot justly lay claim to the
Power of Ordination: Every Commission necessarily supposing a Conveyance, and
being exclusive of all Persons, except those to whom it is given.

11. AND lastly, that they who had the Power of Ordination lodged in their
Hands by the Apostles, had many Presbyters, and many Congregations under their
Jurisdiction, as may be seen by these Texts of Scripture. Tt. i. 5. 1 Timothy i.
3. and v. 19, 23. Acts xix. 10. and xx. 17. compared with Rev. ii. 1.2.


So far we may conclude from the holy Scriptures themselves; and from primitive
Antiquity it is farther evident.

1. THAT immediately after the Death of St. John, these three Orders, Bishops,
Presbyters and Deacons, were established in every Church; and the Power of
Bishops over Presbyters universally owned and acknowledged to be of divine
Right. See the Epistle of St. Ignatius at the End of this Tract.

2. THAT down from the Beginning of Christianity, unto the Time of the
Reformation, the Power of conferring Orders was supposed to be lodged, not in
the Hands of Presbyters, but of Bishops; nor can so much as one Instance be
produced of Presbyters laying claim to this Power, and of its being allowed by
the Church of Christ. For the Truth of this Proposition, we have the same
Evidence that we have for the Canonicalness of several Books of the new
Testament, the concurrent Testimony of the Church of Christ.

3. THAT at the Time of the Reformation, this Power of our Church still
continued in, and was appropriated to those of the highest Order.

4. THAT those Presbyters who first broke off from the Communion with their
Bishops, and first pretended to this Authority of ordaining others, did not
receive it; only a Power to preach the Word, and administer the Sacraments,
according to the Rules of the Gospel, and the Canons of the Church, and this in
Subordination to their Bishops; much less did they receive Authority to ordain
others, in Opposition to THEM to whom they owed, and had sworn Obedience.

5. THAT therefore, since none can give that which he did not receive, they
amongst us, who have received their Orders only from the Hands of Presbyters,
have no valid Ordination, no Authority, to act in Christ's Name, as his
commissioned Ministers, and to be spiritual Guides of the People.

I shall only add farther under this Head, that though it was only a doubtful
Case, whether Presbyterian Ordination was valid, or not; yet, since it is
confessed on all Hands, that they of the National Church who are Episcopally
ordained, are lawful Ministers of Christ, it is the Christian's Duty and
Interest to obey and submit to them, and to acknowledge them ONLY as their
Guides that watch for their Souls; since in all doubtful Cases the safest Side
is to be chosen.

AND now, having said thus much, I shall once more take Notice of those New
England Gentlemen before mentioned. But, before I animadvert upon them, I must
confess I am at a loss, and know not what Name to give to something I find in
their celebrated Performance; whether I shall call it Ignorance or Sleight of
Hand: For I am perfectly amazed! that Gentlemen of such Figure (as I have been
informed they were) among the Dissenters, that such Rabbis of the Party should
betray such finished, such consummate Ignorance in Church History; and if it
must not be imputed to their Ignorance, I assure you, that my Astonishment is
increased, to think that Men, who call themselves the Guides of Souls, should
be so daringly wicked, as to assert THAT for Truth, which they knew to be
false, and in a Cause too where the Souls of Men were concerned.

THEY affirm, Page 7. That we have nothing in primitive or later Antiquity but
what may be reconciled hereto, (that is to the Practice of Presbyters ordaining
of Presbyters) and much to confirm this Practice. And to show you that this was
not dropped from them through Inadvertency but by Design, They are at it again Page
11. where they assert very roundly that, We find much in Antiquity primitive
and later, that favors this Power of Presbyters, and nothing but what may be
reconciled to it.

THESE Gentlemen were resolved to do Business, they scorned to mince the Matter.

I confess seriously, that I never met with any Assertion more surprising than
this, nor more false. Surely these Gentlemen could not think to impose upon all
Mankind with their Ignorance, or their Legerdemain. But it is plain, their
sinking, dying Cause requires such mean, such little Tricks to support it. They
perceived, that the People were resolved for the future to see with their own
Eyes, and were universally inclined to enquire into Antiquity, being desirous
to understand the State of the Primitive Church, and resolving to pay Obedience
to that Church which was most Apostolic.

THEREFORE they thought it necessary to assert, that we have much in Antiquity,
primitive and later, that favors this Power of Presbyters ordaining of
Presbyters, and nothing but what may be reconciled to it.

THAN which nothing is more False. Here we will join Issue. And if these
Gentlemen will produce any one Instance of a Presbyter's ordaining a Presbyter,
for the Space of 1500 Years after Christ, which was not condemned by the
Catholic Church, I assure them, for my part, I Will give up the Cause. There are
but two Instances of such Ordinations for 1500 Years after Christ, that of
Ischyras and Colluthus; one of which was not done upon a Principle that
Presbyters have a Power to ordain; nor was it done in Opposition to the Bishop,
who was present, but being indisposed, ordered a Priest to read the Words of
Consecration, the Bishop laying on his Hands. But the primitive Church would
not suffer even this to pass, but severely condemned this as well as the other.
And it was a principal part of the Heresy of Aerius, his affirming, that there
was no Difference between a Bishop and a Presbyter by divine Right, and for
which (among other Things) he was condemned for a Heretic by the Catholic
Church of Christ.

Now, if these Things are true, (and I call upon these Gentlemen to disprove
them if they are not) you may see what little Ground they had to assert, that
they had much in Antiquity to confirm their Practice. Oh, to what despicable
Arts are Men driven in defending a bad Cause!

BUT the other Part of this monstrous Assertion is as much beyond this, as this
is beyond all Modesty, viz. That they have nothing in Antiquity but what may be
reconciled to it, that is, to their Practice. What! -- Nothing but what may be
reconciled to it! -- Why, Sirs! Were all the Bishops of the Catholic Church
for 1700 Years after Christ, no more than common Presbyters? What! Can all the
Ordinations, the Thousands, the Millions that have been performed in the
Catholic Church, in all that space of Time, by Bishops, and upon this
Principle, that Bishops alone had the Power of Ordination; can all these too be
reconciled to your Practice!

CERTAINLY these Gentlemen were out of their Senses when these unaccountable
Absurdities were were suffered to come abroad.

IN the second Page of their Rhapsody, they assert, (nay, they say, it seems
evident to a Demonstration) the Necessity of an uninterrupted Succession from
the Apostles. They were obliged to do this from the Nature of the Thing; it
being so plain that the meanest Capacity understands it. The short Method has
demonstrated it. But notwithstanding ten thousand Demonstrations, they found
that it was their Interest to deny it; and accordingly knowing that they were
not in the Succession, at page 14, they tack about, and wiping their Mouths
very demurely tell us, that they don't believe the Necessity of an
uninterrupted Succession from the Apostles.

THESE Men make a great Noise, and amuse the People with the great Names of --
our first Reformers the foreign Churches, etc. -- thereby intimating as if the
foreign Churches approved of their Practice.

WHEREAS nothing is more plain, than that our Dissenters have departed from
Calvin as well as from Luther, in their Abhorence of Episcopacy, from all the
Christian World, in all Ages; and particularly from all our late Reformers,
both of one Sort and another.

Calvin would have anathematized all of them, had he lived in our Days. He says
there were none to be found in his Time, who opposed the Episcopal Hierarchy,
but only the Papal. But say H, if hey would give us such an Hierarchy, in which
the Bishops should so excel, as that they did not refuse to be subject to
Christ, and to depend upon Him as their only Head, and refer all to Him; then I
will confess that they are worthy of all Anathemas, if any such shall be found,
who will not reverence it, and submit themselves to it, with the utmost
Obedience. Calvin de Necessitate Eccles, Reformand.

AND Beza supposes as positively as Calvin had done, that there were none who
opposed the Episcopal Hierarchy, but only the Papal, or that opposed the Order
of Bishops; and condemns them as Madmen, if any such could be found. For thus
says he,

IF there be any (which you shall hardly persuade me to believe) who reject the
whole Order of Episcopacy; God forbid that any Man in his Wits, should assent
to the Madness of such Men. Beza. id Tractat. de Minist. Ev. Grad. ab Hadrian.
Sarav. Belga. Edit. C. 1.

AND particularly as to the Church of England, and her Hierarchy of
Archbishops and Bishops, He says, that he never meant to oppugn any thing of
that; but calls it a singular Blessing of God, and wishes that she may ever
enjoy it. Ibid. C. 18

PRAY take Notice, Calvin says, -- if there shall be any such, -- and Beza
says, -- if there be any who will not submit to Episcopacy as it is in England.
which supposes that THEY knew none such amongst their Reformers: And that if
any such should arise, THEY thought there were no Anathemas which they did not
deserve.

So that our modern Dissenters are disarmed of the precedent of Calvin, Beza,
and all the Reformers abroad, by whose Sentence they are anathematized, and
counted as Madmen.

Those who have a Mind to see the Propositions in this small Tract proved
beyond the Possibility of a Reply, are desired to read a Discourse concerning
Episcopacy, which they may have at the Crown and Gate opposite to the West End
of the Townhouse in Boston. Where likewise may be had Barclay's persuasive,
printed in London, by Jonah Bowyer, with other Books of the like Nature.

THE EPISTLE OF St. IGNATIUS TO THE TRALLIANS.
IGNATIUS, who is also called THEOPHORUS, To the Holy Church which is at
Tralles in Asia; Beloved of God the Father of Jesus Christ; Elect, and worthy
of God; Having Peace through the Flesh, and Blood, and Passion of Jesus Christ
our Hope; in the Resurrection which is by Him: Which also I salute in its
Fullness, continuing in the Apostolical Character; Wishing all Joy and Happiness
unto it.

I HAVE heard of your Blameless and Constant Disposition through Patience,
which not only appears in your Outward Conversation, but is Naturally rooted
and grounded in you: In like manner as Polybius your Bishop has declared unto
me; Who came to me to Smyrna, by the Will of God and Jesus Christ; and so
rejoiced together with me in my Bonds for Jesus Christ, that in Effect I saw
your Whole Church in Him. Having therefore received the Testimony of your Good
Will toward me for God's sake, by Him, I seemed to find you, as also I knew
that ye were the Followers of God.

II. For whereas ye are subject to your Bishop as to Jesus Christ, ye appear to
me to live not after the manner of Men, but according to Jesus Christ; who died
for us, that so believing in his Death, ye might escape Death. It is therefore
necessary, that as ye do, so without your Bishop, you should do nothing: Also
be ye subject to your Presbyters, as to the Apostles of Jesus Christ our Hope;
in whom, if we walk, we shall be found in Him. The Deacons also, as being the
Ministers of the Mysteries of Jesus Christ, must by all means please all. For
they are not the Ministers of Meat and Drink, but of the Church of God.
Wherefore they must avoid all Offenses, as they would do Fire.

III. In like manner, let all Reverence the Deacons as Jesus Christ, and the
Bishop as the Father; and the Presbyters as the Sanhedrim of God, and College
of the Apostles. Without these there is no Church. Concerning all which I am
persuaded that ye think after the very same manner: For I have received, and
even now have with me the Pattern of your Love, in your Bishop. Whose very Look
is Instructive; and whose Mildness Powerful: Whom I am persuaded, the very
Atheists themselves cannot but Reverence. But because I have a Love toward
you, I will not write any more sharply unto you about this Matter, though I very
well might; but now I have done so; lest being a Condemned Man, I should seem
to prescribe to you as an Apostle.

IV. I have great Knowledge in God; but I refrain myself lest I should perish
in my Boasting. For now I ought the more to fear; and not hearken to those that
would puff me up. For they that speak to me in my praise, Chasten me. For I
indeed desire to suffer, but I cannot tell whether I am worthy so to do. And
this Desire, though to others it does not appear, yet to my self it is for that
very reason the more Violent. I have therefore need of Moderation; by which the
Prince of this World is destroyed.

V. AM I not able to write to you of Heavenly things? But I fear lest I should
Harm you, who are yet but Babes in Christ; (Excuse me this Care;) And lest
perchance being not able to receive them, ye should be choked with them. For
even I my self, although I am in Bonds, yet am not therefore able to understand
Heavenly Things: As the Places of the Angels, and the several Companies of
them, under their respective Princes; Things Visible and Invisible; but in
these I am yet a Learner. For many things are wanting to us, that we come not
short of God.

VI. I Exhort you therefore, or rather not I, but the Love of Jesus Christ;
that ye use none but Christian nourishment: abstaining from Pasture which is of
another Kind, I mean Heresy. For they that are Heretics, confound together
the Doctrine of Jesus Christ; with their own Poison, whilst they seem worthy of
Belief: As Men give a deadly Poison mixed with Sweet Wine; which He who is
ignorant of, does with the treacherous Pleasure sweetly drink in his own Death.

VII. Wherefore guard your selves against such Persons. And that you will do if
you are not puffed up; but continue inseparable from Jesus Christ our God, and
from your Bishop, and from the Commands of the Apostles. He that is within the
Altar is Pure: But he that is without, that is, that does any thing without the
Bishop, and Presbyters, and Deacons, is not Pure in his Conscience.

VIII. NOT that I know there is any thing of this Nature among you; But I
fore-arm you, as being greatly Beloved by me, foreseeing the Snares of the
Devil. Wherefore putting on Meekness, renew your selves in Faith, that is the
Flesh of the LORD; and in Charity, that is the Blood of Jesus Christ. Let no
Man have any Grudge aganst his Neighbor. Give no Occasion to the Gentiles;
left by means of a few Foolish Men, the whole Congregation of God be Evil
spoken of. For woe to that Man through whose Vanity my Name is Blasphemed by
any.

IX. Stop your Ears therefore, as often as any one shall speak contrary to
Jesus Christ; who was of the Race of David, of the Virgin Mary. Who was truly
Born, and did Eat and Drink; Was truly Persecuted under Pontius Pilate; Was
truly Crucified and Dead; Both Those in Heaven, and on Earth, and under the
Earth being Spectators of it. Who was also truly raised from the Dead by his
Father, after the same manner as he will also raise up us who believe in Him,
by Christ Jesus; without whom we have no true Life.

X. BUT if as some who are Atheists, that is to say Infidels, pretend, that he
only seemed to Suffer: (They themselves only seeming to exist) why then am I
Bound? Why do I desire to fight with Beasts? Therefore do I die in vain:
Therefore I will not speak falsely against the LORD.

XI. FLEE therefore these Evil Sprouts which bring forth deadly Fruit; of which
if any one taste, he shall presently Dye. For these are not the Plants of the
Father; Seeing if they were, they would appear to be the Branches of the Cross,
and their Fruit would be Inccorruptible: By which he invites you through his
Passion, who are Members of him. For the Head cannot be without its Members,
God having promised a Union, that is Himself.

XII. I Salute you from Smyrna, together with the Churches of God that are
present with Me; who have refreshed me in all things, both in the Flesh and in
the Spirit. My Bonds, which I carry about me for the sake of Christ,
(beseeching him that I may attain unto God) exhort you, that you continue in
Concord among your selves, and in Prayer with one another. For it becomes every
one of you, especially the Presbyters, to refresh the Bishop, to the Honor of
the Father, of Jesus Christ, and of the Apostles. I beseech you that you
hearken to me in Love; that I may not by those things which I write, rise up in
Witness against you. Pray also for Me; who through the Mercy of God stand in
need of your Prayers, that I may be worthy of the Portion which I am about to
obtain, that I be not found a Reprobate.

XIII. The Love of these who are at Smyrna and Ephesus salute you. Remember in
your Prayers the Church of Syria, from which I am not worthy to be called,
being one of the least of it. Fare ye well in Jesus Christ; being subject to
your Bishop as to the Command of God; and so likewise to the Presbytery. Love
every one his Brother with an unfeigned Heart. My Soul be your Expiation, not
only now, but when I shall have attained unto God: For I am yet under Danger.
But the Father is Faithful in Jesus Christ, to fulfill both mine and your
Petition: In whom may ye be found ublameable.

To the TRALLIANS.

ST. Ignatius, the Author of this Epistle, was a Companion of the Apostles, and
was taught the Faith of Christ from their Mouths: Eusebius. Eccles. Hist. Lib. 3.
Cap. 36.
He wrote this Epistle with many other as He was on his way to Rome, where he
sealed the Truth (of what he had taught and written) with his Blood, being cast
to the Wild Beasts: Thus dying a glorious Martyr of the ever blessed Jesus.

His Martyrdom was but seven Yeas after the Death of St. John, who wrote the
Revelations

FINIS

