THE Freeholder's ADDRESS To the Honorable House of Representatives*
Worthy and much Honored Gentlemen,
THE dark and melancholy (...) this (our once flourishing) Provi^ (...) have
before them, has embold^ (...) address this Honorable House, (...) Umbrage for
my serious Thoughts upon the Di^ of my Country, from you alone. The
Difficultie^ labor under seem to be almost Intolerable, a^ same time as
easily to be redressed as to say the W^ Strange it is how some Men multiply
difficulties and (...) up Lions and Bears in places where they never (...) were
seen; and make every Nightingale that af^ us a chanting Lay under these our
Melancholy ^cumstances, an Owl or a Satyr; terrifying themsel^ and others as
far as possibly they can, and seem with all their Heart to desire the
Destruction of their Country. But sure I am, no true Lover of the Commonweal of
this Province, can forbear complaining of such selfish Monsters, who because
their Coffers are full, and they abound in all manner of worldly Good, care not
what becomes of their poor distressed Neighbors. Many have been the
Projections made* have met with. And (...) they can escape without L^poons and
^atyrs; which ^ poor Encouragement for Me^ of a bright Genius a^ deep Thought,
(...) make any further Attempt t^ way.

Gentlemen,

You are the Fathers of your Country, and Guardans to your several Towns; and
are no doubt, hig^ly sensible of the great Charge laid upon you, and t^ great
Expectations from you. By your Determi^ti^ it is that we stand or fall: You are
the M^ w^e Ears should be always open to the Complai^ o^ (...) People, their
Rights maintain, their Dou^ ^ ^d their Difficulties remove. The Distres^ (...)
under for want of a Sufficient Medium (...) exceeding great; and I need not
tell y^ (...) on the Country is in concerning this M^ (...) ^ange it is, that
in so plain a Case, the (...) many Difficulties raised. The Namel^ (...) ^e
Second Part of the South Sea Stock ^ (...) ^ich will I doubt not be very
plentifu^ (...) ^ur Hands, as was News from Robins^ ^d) is so simple as to
Insinuate, that unl^ (...) against Paper Money be finally shut, we she ^e
Silver come in: And upon the wind i^ (...) ^he whole, if you do not find it as
he sa^ ^ows you to call him a blind Man, a mad Man (...) what you please, which
must needs be of gr^ Service to us, when we are half starved. But so me the
whole Performance, so shallow, so ignorant, (...) wilful, that time would be
ill spent to answer p^ticulars at present; but it may be done when ti^ will
bettter allow; I wont promise to the Auth^ Satisfaction, but to the
Satisfaction of every can^ Reader. But to wave this Matter, my Honor
Countrymen, and of^er things of greater Importa^ to your serious Consideration,
is my present Inten^

And,

First, To say something in the behalf of our poor condemned Bills. And the
first Plea I shall offer is ^his, that they may have a fair and legal Trial,
and not ^e condemned before they have had a hearing. What! to take them like
the greatest of Pirates, and hang them up before the Sun, as the worst of
Malefactors, when all their Days they have been laboring to serve their Makers
and Masters, and brought some of them from nothing, to the Enjoyment of
plentiful Estates! Would not this be sordid Ingratitude?

Secondly. The second thing I would offer in behalf of our Province Bills is
this. They have been under God the Instrument of raising all those noble
Buildings, in the room of which, a few Years ago, were Heaps of Rubbish, like
so many Phenixes out of their own Ashes, which would never have been, had ^t
not been for these Bills. For these Men will work and toil with utmost
Pleasure; for these Men will ^art with the best goods they possess* for these
Men ^re ready (some of them) to run mad: The Possession ^f them is doubtless a
very great pleasure, or else they would never be so hoarded: The want of them
(...) doubtless a very great Affliction, or there would ^ever be such an Hue
and Cry after them.

Thirdly. These, by the Blessing of God, have paid ^ur Expenses through a long
and Bloody War; without which we should never have been able to subsist: ^or
these Men face the fiercest Enemies, defy the roar^g of Cannons and Armies of
Philstians.

Fourthly. These will feed the Poor, and cloth ^e Naked; they will purchase
good Beef in the ^epth of Winter for 4 d. or less per Pound, Butter for ^ d.
and many other things proportionable; and at ^is time they will purchase Rye
for 3 s. 6 d. Wheat ^ s. Corn 3 s. Pork, 4 d. which, had we Silver Mo^y, could
not be purchased for much less. Some cry, ^e more Bills you make, the less will
be ^ir Cre^t, and the dearer Provisions, and other things. But say Nay; for
they have such a Currency, and so good Credit, and are built upon so sure a
Foundation, that this Objection carries no manner of Weight in it. And as to
the second thing, that Provisions will be dearer, is another false Insinuation;
for we plainly and daily see, that when Provisions are scarce, they are also
dear; but when Heaven blesses the Earth, and the Earth yields her increase in a
plentiful manner, Provisions are immediately reduced; and we have from Year to
Year been recovering from our heavy Loss by the late Canada Fleet: So vast a
number of Mouths more than our own to feed, might well raise Provisions, and
did so; and ever since that Fleet have been gone, they have been falling more
or less. And I doubt not, but if the Eastern Settlements be secured and
protected from the Savage Monsters of the Wilderness, with the Industry of our
own Countrymen, Commodities of all Sorts will be as cheap as ever. And I doubt
not, but for Eight Shillings in Bills, you shall by as much Provisions, etc. as
for One Ounce of Silver Money in former times.

But then, some will say, upon what Footing shall we emit more Bills? We are
very ready to do it, if we can find out any way that may not lead us into worse
Difficulties than we now labor under for want of them. For answer, first, I
would propose, that this General Court do emit Fifty Thousand Pound, more or
less, as they think best for a Trial, and let it out at 5 per Cent, as usual,
to such, and such only, as shall give Land Security to double the value
received, and oblige themselves to pay the Interest of the Sum taken up in
Flax, Hemp, Wheat, Rye, Corn, Pork, Beef, Fish, Oil, Camblets, Druggets,
Serges, etc. spun and wove in the Province; and that a Treasurer be appointed
to receive the same as it comes in, and to sell it out as fast as possible for
ready Money; and that the said Treasurer be obliged to lay before this
Honorable House his Accounts yearly, and give his Oath to the same.

At the same time, that an Act pass for allowing a considerable Bounty upon
Flax, and upon every Yard ^ge, Drugget, Camblet, and the like, and so upon
(...) Cloth, spun and wove in this Province. I would propose, that some well
skilled Gentleman be ap^ted, to see that what is brought into the Trea^ be good
and merchantable. And I would further ^ose, that the Money these things fetch
be laid out ^ly in setting up Spinning-Schools for poor Wo^ and Children which
will be as easy and as pleasant an ^loyment as to pick Ocum, and much more
adva^ta^s to the Public. By this means people may be ^plyed with Druggets,
Camblets, and the like, ^h cheaper than from other Parts. And this would ^ently
lessen our Importation: And when once we ^e to that, we may begin to project
how Silver (...) come in: for it never can stay with us till our ^port is more
than our Import.

And besides these Spinning Schools, I would pro^^se, that out of this
Storehouse, all our Garrisons (...) supplied with Provision and Clothes; and
all the ^oney that must otherwise have come out of the ^easury for this Use, be
laid out in Fortifying our ^stern Parts. Nay this Storehouse would soon be ^ed,
and people would flock thither for what ever ^mmodity of those Sorts they shall
have occasion (...), which would be of great service to particular ^sons as
well as to the Public. This would keep (...) Money circulating, and lay the
Borrowers under (...) Impossibilities, for if 50 thousand Pounds be the ^n let
out for ten Years at 5 per Cent, the Interest ^ounts to 25000 l. now how can 50
thousand pay (...) thousand; but paying the Interest in the produce (...) the
Country takes away this Impossibility, and ^ves as much Money out as the
Borrowers are obliged (...) pay in.

Another Use the Interest of the Loan Money may ^ put to is, to bring in Silver
to us again, for sup^e the Public with this Interest should build ^ps and lade
them with Fish, and send them to ^in, Portugal, or other Places where it may
fetch Silver and Gold, and have a Commit to manage tha^ Affair that it may
not cumber them, and as fast as i^ comes in to lodge it in the Treasury, till
they have an equal Quantity to the outstanding Bills; and then by proclamation
to call them all in, and give out Silver for them, making it death for any Man
that shall carry or send above 20 s. at one time out of the Province hereafter.

But some will say, what if the Vessels and Cargo be lost, where are we then? I
answer, just where we are before. The principal is yet good, the Country is no
ways brought into debt by it, for if they make no Money, they can have no
Interest for it, and if they do make it and lose the Interest, partly in
striving so excellently to enrich their Country, in my humble Opinion, it is
the very same thing though they lost it all.

Another vast Advantage might be made by the Interest of this Loan Money, would
be to erect a Paper Mill; some thousands of Pounds is Imported in a Year in
this one Commodity, which would be prevented by the erecting a Mill our Selves,
and the cost would be very small. Considerably less then a thousand Pounds will
set it to work, and by this means thousands of Pounds would be raised out of
the Streets, and out of the Dust: For now the Rag^ which would then be greedily
and Industriously picked up by the poor People, lay and rot.

Another vast advantage the Interest of this Loa^ Money may be laid out to,
would be in building a^ Hospital for poor Boys as in London and other places,
where instead of being brought up in Ignoranc^ as too many are in this Country,
they are well i^structed in reading, writing, and the Mathematick as well as in
the Languages; and by that time the arrive to 14 Years of Age, they are fit for
any sort (...) Business, and many of them arrive to be famous (...) their
Generation. Early Instructions are of gre^ Use to Children, and well instructed
Youths are li^ (...) be blessings to their Parents, blessings to their ^ince,
and blessings to their Country.

Thus having in some Measure laid before you the ^xcellency of our Bills, the
good they have done, ^d the great good they still may do.

I hope this honorable House will thoroughly ^eigh the Matter, surmount all
Difficulties which ^emingly lay in the Way, and grant us a further Sup^ly of
this Miracle working Paper Medium, that we ^s well as others may reap the
Benefit of them, and ^ise to our selves noble Estates as they have done before
us: This will remove our present unhappy ^rospects, and rejoice the hearts of
the People, and ^ause them with cheerful hearts Honorably to sup^ort the
Government, the Ministry, and Schools of ^earning, and add to their now
Wonderful Loyalty (...) King George, and submission to his Government.

I shall wind up all with begging leave to subscribe ^y self as really I am,
Honorable Gentlemen,

Your very Humble and Obedient Servant, P. A.
March 15. 1720.
BOSTON: Printed by J. Franklin, for B. Gray, over against the Brick Church;
where all GENTLEMEN, Tradesmen and others, may be supplied with all the
Pamphlets lately published.


