SEVERAL ARGUMENTS, PROVING, That Inoculating the Small Pox Is not contained in
the Law of Physic, either Natural or Divine, and therefore Unlawful. Together
with A REPLY to two short Pieces, one by the Rev. Dr. Increase Mather, and
another by an Anonymous Author, Entitled, Sentiments on the Small Pox
Inoculated. AND ALSO, A Short Answer to a late Letter in the New England
Courant.

By John Williams.

The SECOND EDITION.

Judge. 5. 15, 16. -- For the Divisions of Reuben there were great Thoughts of
Heart. Why abodest thou among the Sheepfolds, to hear the Bleatings of the
Flocks? For the Divisions of Reuben there were great Searchings of Heart. Luke
19. 40. I tell you, if these should hold their Peace, the Stones would
immediately cry out. Isai. 8. 20. To the Law and to the Testimony; if they
speak not according to this Word, it is because there is no Light in them.
BOSTON: Printed and sold by J. Franklin, at his Printing House in Queen Street,
over against Mr. Sheaf's School. 1721.

TO THE Worthy SELECT MEN Of the Town of Boston, together with my Neighbors
who have so learned and believed, that Inoculating the Small Pox is not lawful.
GENTLEMEN,
DESIRING Health in your Town, I have presumed (and I hope without Offense to
any who have a Desire to see the Case rightly stated and defended by the Rules
of Physic, in Love and Moderation) humbly to crave your joint Acceptance of
this my indigested Paper, as a Sign of my Duty and Love to you; which being
read and tried by the Standard, I trust your Labor will not be lost. Say not
who has written, but consider what is written, and I pray God to give you
Understanding. Say not that he is a Mechanic, and an illiterate Man; for there
is good Metal sometimes under a mean Soil; and if so, I hope for the more
Favor from you in reading this my indigested Paper.

I know the Wall which I attempt to scale is very high; that it is defended by
Men disciplined for War, and of a great Stature, (Goliath- like) and I but a
Stripling, and have not that Armor which is good for Defense: Yet the work is
the Lord's, on whom I depend for Assistance. I hope I may allude unto that
Text, I will set my Face as a Flint, I shall not be confounded, for he is nigh
that helps me.

Your Friend and Servant, John Williams.

SEVERAL ARGUMENTS, etc.
IF Inoculating the Small Pox be not contained in the Laws of Physic, then it
is not lawful. But, Inoculating the Small Pox is not contained in the Laws of
Physic. Therefore, It is unlawful.

I shall in the first Place prove, that it is not contained in Natural Physic.
2 dly, I shall consider it with respect to Divinity.

1. With Respect to Natural Physic.

Arg. 1. If Inoculating the Small Pox be not contained in the Rules of Natural
Physic, then it is not lawful. But, Inoculating the Small Pox is not contained
in the Rules of Natural Physic. Therefore, It is unlawful.

I shall prove it thus: The Rules of Natural Physic are Two, and no more;
which are Sympathy and Antipathy; and whatsoever is not reducible unto one of
these, is not contained in the Rules of Natural Physic.

Now Inoculating the Small Pox is not a Sympathy with, nor Antipathy unto a
Wound or Disease already received, but a making a Wound, in order to
communicate a Disease, which is an Abuse unto that Text, Math. 9. 12. They that
are whole need not a Physician* but they that are sick, and a horrid Violation
of the Intent that our Lord said it for.

2. I shall now proceed to prove the second Part of the Argument, That
Inoculating the Small Pox is not contained in the Law of Physic, as it is
considered with respect to Divinity.

In Deuteronomy. 39. 15. we have these Words, I kill, and I make alive, I wound, and I
heal. And now in what Sense are Actions said to be God's. Actions are either to
be considered good or evil. As they are to be considered good, God does will
them, and by his Power effect them. As they are considered evil, he permits
them to be, as he did Satan to smite Job with Boils.

We shall consider in what Respect Actions are said to be good, as they are our
Actions. They are so when they are God-like, which was the State that God
created Man in, which was in Knowledge, Righteousness, and true Holiness. Our
Actions must be in Knowledge of the Will of God, or they cannot be good
Actions; and Knowledge of his Will is taught by the Will of God: To the Law and
to the Testimony. Joh. 5. 39. They are they that testify of me ( i. e. that
declare my Will.)

Arg. 2 If there is no Rule in the Word of God to found Inoculation upon, then
it is not according to his Will nor can it be according to Knowledge. But,
There is no Rule in the Word of God to found Inoculation upon. Therefore,
Inoculation cannot be according to the Will of God, nor according to Knowledge.

Now we read in Deuteronomy. 27. 19. Cursed is he that perverteth the Judgment (or
Right) of the Stranger, Fatherless and Widow.

Arg. 3 If Inoculation has a natural Tendency to the perverting the Right of
the Stranger, Fatherless and Widow, then it is an unrighteous Action. But,
Inoculation has a natural Tendency to the perverting the Right of the
Fatherless and Widow. Therefore, It is an unrighteous Action.

Arg. 4 If Inoculation be a doing Violence unto the Law of Nature, and the
Pattern that God has set us, then it is unholy. But, Inoculation is a doing
Violence unto the Law of Nature, and the Pattern which God has set us, (which
we are to imitate.) Therefore, Inoculation is unholy. Zeph. 3. 5. The just Lord
is in the midst of thee, be will do no Iniquity.

Now, that Inoculation is unrighteous and unholy* I shall demonstrate thus:
Every Man has a natural Right to some things in common with all Men, as being
of one Blood, made and preseved by one God, coming from one Root, even Adam; a
Right in common to the Benefit of the Sun, Moon and Stars, a serene and clear
Air; yea, to the cloudy Weather and Rain, to the Summer and Winter; and (we
used to say,) to Six Foot of Land, and to his own House; for Man was not made
to be by himself, nor for himself, but to be in a social Relation one to
another, and so serve God in this Relation. It Is a common Saying, A Man may do
with his own as he pleases; but it is as false as it is common; he may not burn
his own House if it hazards the Consuming his Neighbor's; neither by this Rule
may they do what is right in their own Eyes in their own House: Jam. 2. 12, 13.
So speak ye, and so do, as they that shall be judged by the perfect Law of
Liberty; for he shall have Judgment without Mercy, that has showed no Mercy.

Now, to have the Small Pox brought to a Man by a voluntary Act of his
Neighbor, by which he declares, that he does not endeavor to preserve the
health and life of his Neighbor, but eventually to bereave him of both does
Violence unto the Law of Nature, and the Pattern which God has set us, which
we ought to walk by. Be ye holy, for I the Lord your God am holy. Psalm. 89. 74.
Justice and Judgment are the Habitation of thy Throne, Mercy and Truth shall go
before thy Face.

Now we say, by Inoculation, the Small Pox has been carried and spread almost
if not quite over this Town; and our Neighbors have not done as they would
have others do to them. It Is evident they would not have it brought to them, or
else why do they fly unto Inoculation. Now to have it brought to them by a
voluntary Motion of their Neighbor, is more hard to be born by their injured
Neighbor, than if it came to them in or by the common way; (the Providence of
God casting it where and when he will) which has made great Heats, Divisions
and Animosities.

They are guilty of the Breach of the Moral and the Evangelical Law of God; for
they have not done by their Neighbor as they would that their Neighbor should
do to them, and that in a Case of great Moment; not only to the hazard of Life,
but the Loss of many a Life; how many God knows. Math. 7. 12. Therefore all
things whatsoever ye would that Men should do to you, do ye even so to them;
for this is the Law and the Prophets.

If we are commanded to love our Neighbor as our selves, then they that
voluntarily bring in the Small Pox into their Houses, and not only endanger
their Neighbors Health and Life, but eventually take both away, do transgress
the Law and the Prophets, Matt. 22, 35, 36, 27, 38, 39, 40. And, Oh! What a
Fountain of Blood are the Promoters guilty of! God grant them repentance unto
life. May it not be said of you, You lay aside the Commandments* God, and ye
have learned the Traditions of Men. Mark. 7. 9. And he said unto them, Fulwell
ye reject the Commandment of God, that ye may keep your own Tradition.

A Case may be so circumstanced, that may make it immoral. I shall demonstrate
it to you thus: A Man in the Country, living far from Neighbors, may have a
great Stump of a Tree in his Land, which he may desire to have out of the Way,
and he may put Fire unto it, and burn it down, and do no Body any harm; And I
see no reason the Authority has to call him to an Account for it; but should he
for the same Reason do the same thing for kind in Boston, and not only endanger
his Neighbors Houses but eventually consume them, Will not this be looked upon
Immoral, and ought not the Authority to call him to an Account for it? And what
faith the Law of God? Exodus 21. Life for Life, and Eye for Eye, Tooth for
Tooth, and Burning for Burning; Wound for Wound, Stripe for Stripe. And seeing
this way of Inoculation cannot be carried on without hazarding the Life and
Health of People, how does it become our noble Townsmen to take Care in this
Matter, if there was no other reason to be given.

Quest. 1. Whether, the Small Pox be not one of the strange works of God; and
whether Inoculation of it be not a fighting with the most High, and a vying
with the holy One of Israel? He has spoken, and it stands fast, he is of one
mind, and who can turn him? And whether Inoculation has not a similitude unto,
and an Affinity with Phaorah's Magicians who did Wonders with their Rods, even
to hardening of their Hearts, that God might bring greater Judgments upon them
till he had consumed them, and not a mitigating of his stroke.

Quest. 2. Whether the Small Pox be not a Punishment from a righteous God, upon
a People for their Sins? And has it not a crying voice to them, saying, Cease
to do evil, and learn to do good? And whether the laboring to avert the Stroke
in the way of Inoculation, does answer this crying Voice; or whether it be not
to provoke him more and more?

Quest. 3. Whether Inoculation be not an intrenchment upon the Incommunicable
Attributes of God, and also upon his Works, Hosea 6. 1. He has torn, and he
will heal us; he has smitten, and he will bind us up?

Quest. 4. Whether the great mortality that has been among us in these two
last Months, has flowed from this Inoculation? I answer, I do believe it has,
and that for the following Reasons.

Reason 1. Because in the hot Weather, even in the Dog days there was few died,
when Inoculation was little in use; but since Inoculation has been much in use
the Weather has been more temperate, neither hot nor cold, (which I know is
best for that Distemper) yet the mortality has much increased, so that there
has been no comparison.

Reason 2. From the different nature of its working it must needs have a
different malignity: The small Pox when it comes in the good old way, is
ripened by a gradual motion; and so when its nature is spent, dries away
gradually; As it grows gradually, it dies gradually; and if it breaks, it is as
it were but a dead Wound: But the wound or incision is a living wound, and
therefore the matter or putrefaction which comes out of this wound, must be
more quick and penetrating than the other. Now the Reason they render, why
there is less Pustules, and less Sickness, is, because the malignity or venom
which is in the Blood, is discharged by this running Wound. (though they are
not always true Prophets; for I have seen several in their Way, that have had
as many Pustules, and as much Sickness, and as many blisters, and Kidneys to
check the Fever, as in the good old Way; and many in the old way who had as few
Pustules as any of them, even had not their Clothes off one Hour, some at play
and others at work.)

Again, there is living Testimony that do say, the smell of this living Wound
upon some Persons, is worse than ever they smelled it elsewhere, and I cannot
but believe it; for Reason tells me, that it is more raw and contrary unto
Nature, and Penetrating on the Organs of the Body of Man, than the other
matter, which is dead as it were.

Reason 3. Is drawn from the fatal event that Inoculation has had on those
that have took the Small Pox of them: Where are they? how few are there of
those living, that we have reason to think took the Infection of them?

Now to save Life, by giving Death for it, it is but a swapping, and very dear,
though the purchaser may think he has a good bargain.

Reason 4. Why there is such mortality of late, is, as I humbly conceive, from
Inoculation. I have proved that Inoculation is not contained in the law of
Physic, whether we consider it natural or Divine; and to allude unto Jer. 7.
31. Ye have done the thing which I commanded you not, neither did it enter into
my heart.

Reason 5. Because this Inoculation is amongst or by a People that are called
by God's Name; to allude unto Amos 3. 2. You only have I known amongst all the
Families of the Earth, therefore will I punish you for all your Iniquities.

Reason 6. Because God is a Jealous God; Deuteronomy. 32, 22 They have provoked me to
Anger with their Vanities, and I will move them to Jealousy. That is, as we
walk contrary to God, so God walks contrary to us.

In that this People is oppressed and broken in Judgment, and Gods Judgments
are as the light that goes forth; the Small Pox, which flies by night, which
destroys Men not a few, Deuteronomy. 28. The Lord does smite them with a Fever, with
an Inflammation, and with Spots which cannot be healed; and as to very many the
Physicians be of no value. And to allude unto Amos 4. 2.

I shall conclude with Amos 5. 14. 15. Seek good and not evil, that ye may
live; and so the Lord, the God of Hosts, shall be with you as he has spoken.

Hate the evil, and love the good, and establish Judgment in the Gate, it may
be the Lord the God of Hosts will be gracious unto the remnant of Joseph.

ANSWER to a Piece, Entitled, Several Reasons, proving, that Inoculating or
Transplanting the Small Pox, is a lawful Practice, and that it has been
blessed by God for the saving of many a Life. By Increase Mather. D. D.
Honored SIR,
THE Practice of Smyrna and Constantinople, is not a Rule either of Faith or
Manners, and therefore I shall dismiss that Parapraph, and pass on to your next.

II. You say, We bear that several Physicians have recommended Inoculation to
his Majesty, as a Means to save the Lives of his Subjects.

Reply. The Question is not, Whether it may save their Lives or not, but
rather, as you affirm, whether it may be lawful; which you must prove, or you
do not what you have undertaken to do. The matter was not disputed by the
Pharisees, whether their Children did cast out Devils by Beelzebub; the
Reflection that our Lord cast upon them was, that they did it unlawfully. The
King and the Prince have accepted of it as a Means to save the Lives of the
Subject: But yet I remember, they have not proved what you have undertaken to
do, to prove it lawful; neither was the Question proposed to them.

Again, You say, If wise and learned Men from England, declare their
Approbation of this Practice; for us to declare our Disapprobation, will not be
for our Honor.

Reply. All that I shall say at present is, If wise and learned Men from
England should declare their Approbation of worshipping God in the Episcopal
Way, with all the Ceremonies thereof, (which is a matter of Faith as well as
this) for us to declare our Disapprobation will not be for our Honor. I choose
at present to set Honor against Honor, that being viewed a while, and brought
home, they may see each others Similitude.

III. You say, God has graciously owned it, and many Scores have lived and
recovered, and not one died, except Mrs. D -- l* but she had the Small Pox in
the common Way before,

Reply. I believe you cannot know that; for her Husband told me she was
inoculated, and that it came forth at the Time appointed: Now you may take
Notice, that Mr. D -- l and I had some Talk before. Mr. D -- l had said to me,
that he thought it a good Providence, the Discovery of this Inoculation. I
answered him, I believe rather that it is a terrible Delusion. I said, You know
my Mind, and I know yours; now is not a time for us to talk of it: I will see
her and you, as Mrs. D -- l and Mr. D -- l, and not as People that love
Inoculation; and he said, So do. Accordingly I went. At first the Pock looked
likely; but it grew on to be very bad, and she was brought exceeding low, but
afterward there was hope of her recovery, and she was taken out of Bed once or
twice, I cannot tell which. In the mean time two of her Children had it unknown
to her a little before, so lightly visited, that I think one was not abed one
hour; and I heard say in the House, they kept the other abed because he should
not run in to disturb his mother: And the Children being brought in to her, she
received them with surprising Joy, and soon fell into a Fit. We know she was a
thoughtful Woman, and the neighbors said, she could not bear the reflection,
how lightly they had it in the common Way, and how bad she was in the new way.
Had it not been a time of great trouble with Mr. D -- l, I should have had more
discourse with him about it, but had not. I sympathised with him, and do
believe that his loss is her gain. This is a true relation of that matter.

But I pass on to consider some of your other Reasons. You say, That the known
Children of the Wicked one are generally against Inoculation, which is (...)
you a weighty Consideration.

Reply. Wicked men have moral light as well as believers. I have heard you
quote heathens to have Excellent morals. 2. They have the light of the Gospel,
which they may and do understand with respect to the letter of it, and cannot
see grounds for Inoculation, (...). 2. 14. For when the Gentiles which have not
the law, do by nature the things contained in the law; those having not the
Law, are a law unto themselves. v. 15. which show the work of the law written
in their hearts; their Conscience (...) so bearing witness, and their thoughts
the (...) while accusing or excusing one another.

Again, you should be loath to have any hand in opposing Inoculation, because of
the sixth Commandment. For my part I cannot see that there is any grounds for
it in the sixth Commandment.

Again, yet it may be some might (...) minds, if they would but advise with
(...) are (...) them Scripture light.

Reply. Where do these Men dwell? As for all (...) I have heard or seen treat
of Inoculation, they have not (...) Scripture light for themselves, otherwise I
believe we should have heard of it long ago.

And now much honored Sir, with respect to your great Age, especially seeing
you are found in the Way of righteousness, I desire you may have all those
supplies of Grace that your old age needs, till you come to receive the Reward.

Your unworthy Servant JOHN WILLIAMS

I Come now to consider another Author upon the Small Pox. The Title is,
Sentiments on the Small Pox Inoculated. I have just finished an Answer to one
whose Age obliged me to entreat as a Father. Pray take it not amiss, if I
rebuke you when you deserve it; I believe your Age will bear it, Sir.

Your Argument is, A most successful and allowable Method of preventing Death,
and many other grievous Miseries, by the Small Pox, is not only lawful but a
Duty, to be used by those who apprehend their Lives endangered by the terrible
Distemper. But, The managing and governing the Small Pox, in the way of
Inoculation, is a most successful and allowable Method of preventing Death, and
many other grievous Miseries by this dreadful Distemper. Therefore, it is not
only lawful, but also a Duty to make use of it.

Sir, You tell me, None but very foolish and very wicked People will deny the
Proposition. How can you tell that? Are you only capable to tell a Man what he
must not do* and if he does that which you think not good, must you enter into
Judgment, and pronounce him very foolish and very wicked.

Sir, Whatever you think of your Proposition, I think it a poor and a beggarly
thing, to take that for granted which is denied, to put into your Proposition.

I shall first tell you, that the Word Allowable is ambiguous, and shall
distinguish and enquire what you mean by it: If you mean humane Authority, I
shall take no Notice of it. To the* law and to the Testimony, and if they speak
not according unto that, it is because there is no Light in them. But if you
mean an allowable Way by the Law of Physic, then I deny your Proposition. And
now let us see who is the Fool. Your Proposition is, That it is a most
successful and allowable Method of preventing Death. Now we fear there are many
in the Grave the More for it; therefore we cannot believe that it is a
successful Way of preventing Death.

And now I deny the Consequence of your Minor Proposition, and say, that cannot
be accounted a safe way, which has an evil Tendency, and a bad end,
(eventually Death) of more than it has saved alive; not to be allowed, except
God says Amen to it. You go on to say, The Testimonies that our People have
been frighted with, are not worth a Straw; no Man of Sense that confiners them,
can lay weight upon them. Answer: If you are a man of sense, if you consider my
Argumnets, they will bring you upon the Care^n.

Again you bid us ask you not why you say so: But I hope you will not take it
amiss, if I ask you, why you bid us not ask you, and if you will not answer me,
suffer me to draw natural Conclusions; as first, because you could not. 2.
because you affect a Dispotick Power, and would have us pin our Faith upon your
sleeve* But hold, Sir, you are not so high now, but that there is more ways
than one to come at you; and our Faith cannot be swallowed up in your belief,
unless you tell us a reason why you say so. In the next place you say,
Experience will tell us that their was never a more unfailable method amongst
the Children of Men. Hold Sin, suppose I tell you of two as successful, to wit,
to cure Agues. The first is to wear a Spell about the Neck, next to the Skin; I
can tell you too how to make it, and what Words are used in it. 2 dly, The
writing the Persons Name that has the Ague, by the hand of a Seventh Son, and
he slitting the Rine of an Elder-Tree, and opening it, and putting the Piece of
Paper in, will cure the Ague: And they tell you of much Virtue in the Seventh
Son, and also of the Elder Tree; and they, do not say ask them not, but tell us
the Reason why they say so, to wit, because Judas hanged himself on it. I could
tell you of many more such Things, with respect to the Event, which are good to
a Person or People; but that does not prove it to be lawful, which you should
have done, if you understand your Argument.

I will load Success a little further, it may be you may think too far. It was
good that Satan should be dispossessed of his Habitation which he had taken up
in Men in our Lord's Day; but it was not lawful that the Children of the
Pharisees should cast them out by* the help of Beelzebub: We must always have
an Eye to the Matter of what we do as well as to the Result, if we intend to
keep a good Conscience toward God.

From the Means and End of effecting the Action, it is well or ill disposed.
It Is a Duty to go to hear God's Word preached, but it is unlawful to steal a
Horse to ride to hear it. It Is lawful to preserve Life, but it must be in a
lawful way. All Circumstances must concur to make the Action good: The failing
but in one Circumstance does make the Action evil. See Hag. 2. 11, 12, 13, 14.

Arg. That which cannot* be performed with a conformity to that Rule in Phil.
4. 8. Finally my Brethen, whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are
just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever* things are lovely, whatsoever
things are of good Report; etc. is not lawful. But, Inoculation cannot be
performed with any Agreement unto that Rule, as being neither true, nor honest,
nor just, nor pure, nor of good Report. Therefore, it is not lawful.

Now it appears to me to be but a Delusion of Satan, covered over with more
Cloaks than the Doctor's; under which he carries not only the poisonous Venom
of the Small Pox, but also perverse Disputings of Men, every evil Work, as
Strife, Hatred, Backbiting and Lying* which is no Wonder, if we consider who
was the first Inoculator, Tim. 6* 3, 4, 5, and c.

Again, you say, The Objector must say, That it is unlawful for a Man who would
preserve Life and Health to make himself sick in a way that would constantly
tend unto Preservation.

Reply. I distinguish between doing that which may preserve from a Disease, and
doing that which may bring a Disease; and if I may be suffered to speak my mind
of your Thoughts, you inoculate the Small (...) into Men, on a Supposition that
it shall be lighter to you in this Way, than God has designed in his
Providence to send it you. How read you in Isai. 46. 9, 10. I am God, and there
is none else; I am God, and there is none like me, declaring the end from the
beginning, (...) from ancient (...) the things that are not yet done, saying,
my Counsel shall stand, and I will do all my pleasure.

Again, you say, Suppose here was a mortal Sickness in the Town, as the
Bloody Flux, and a Physician is Master of a Purge, which whosoever takes, is in
an ordinary Way* delivered from the Danger of that Distemper. An Artificial
Purge saves him from Death by the Natural Purge which he is exposed unto. Will
any scruple the taking of this Artificial Purge, Surely none but such as want a
Purge of Hellebore!

What aileth thee, O man, that understands not your own Argument. I must tell
you, had you taken a Purge of Hellebore to have cleared your Brain, your
Argument might have been better drawn with respect to the Figure and mode.

Your Argument is drawn from an Artificial Purge to stop a Natural Purge, which
no body denis; but this is foreign to the Case in Hand.

But you should have said, (if you had spoke to the purpose,) suppose the
bloody Flux prevail in the Town where I live, and a Physician goes to one of
their houses, and takes a Bottle of that fluxical bloody Excrement, and put it
into a Man, (by a Clyster Pipe or any way else,) and gives him he Bloody Flux,
which whosoever takes, is delivered in an ordinary Way from the danger of that
Distemper. And now, if you please to take a Pinch of Hellebore, to clear up
your Senses, you may draw this natural Conclusion, which is, Sir, That your
Argument do Stink.

I am not mistaken, as will appear, if you go back to the beginning of the
Paragraph that he is now upon, which runs thus, That this is an allowable
Practice is plain, (faith our Antagonist) because their can be no objections
brought against it but what will lie against all the preventing Physic that is
used in the World. Now it was Inoculating of the small Pox our Author was
talking of, and not the preventing of the Small Pox, which if it had, his
Argument had been more even in ^er Feet, and of a straiter add handsomer Leg.

Again, you say, many good People being sensible how weak their own Judgments
are, will be much advised in a Case of Conscience, by the Judgment of the most
able Divines in the Country.

Reply. Sir, we are deterred from that for several Reasons. 1. We know that the
ablest Ministers in the Country are but men, and are failable as well as
ourselves. 2. They bring not their Arguments from scripture, but from the
History of Places where it was practiced, and plead the lawfulness of it from
the event, which we believe is no safe way for Christians to argue; and if it
should be allowed of, I could give instances enough to fill your ears, Hos. 7.
11. Ephraim is like a silly dove without heart; they call to Egypt, they go to
Assyria (to help them to Arguments.) 3. Because God's Judgments was threatened
against Israel for learning of the manners of the Heathen, Ezekiel. 11. 12. (which
I cast forth before you.) 4. Because the Ministers are very generally revolted
from the good old way, and have set up a way that their Fathers knew not of,
neither entered it into their Hearts; to allude unto Jer. 5. 23. They are
revolted and gone. 5. It Is very natural for men not to be sensible of their own
weakness of judgment; from hence it is (as I suppose) men have so great an
Opinion of their own Works, although there is no Beauty nor comeliness in them:
from hence arises a desire to impose. And others think they know as much about
Inoculation as they desire, and they think the Scripture is silent, in this
matter, the rather, because that is the Key which you must unlock Cases of
Conscience by.

Again, They say you have no Scripture for it, for if you had, you would have
told us so, and directed us where to find it; but you have not done either,
therefore you have none:

Therefore they could expect no advice from you; for you have no Arguments but
such as you fetch out of History, and we desire to learn none of their manners.

They daily see what Work Men make when they intermeddle with any thing they do
not understand, or was not prentice to. Suppose a Tailor should go into a
Cobler's Shop to work; his Tools are not fit, neither has he skill to use the
Cobblers tools, and so he makes but cobling work; and then his ware lies upon
hand, and he derided and scoffed at, and that for his work; when it is possible
the man is proper and comely, and of a good genius, when employed in what he
understands. Hence it was that the Serene States of Holland made a Law to
prevent Ministers meddling with State Affairs, because their Work was not
Temporal but Divine, and the intermixing of them not safe for the common
wealth. The Law was, That if a Minister intermeddled to dictate People about
State affairs, the Government was to provide him a pair of new Shoes and a
Staff, and lead him to the outside of the Town, and let him return to his
pulpit no more. So for Ministers to be able to answer this natural question, we
think is too hard for them; for we think that every thing is beautiful in its
season, or to that which it is adapted to. Now Ministers work is divine, and
for that they are paid for, and for any thing else they are not thanked for,
nor indeed (say some) are not for any thing else thank worthy.

In the next Place, I shall take no notice of your Conclusion which will be
victorious you say, (but I think it is against your self) That when People have
their lives endangered by the Small Pox hovering about them, they may not only
use the method of Inoculation to save their lives, but they even ought to do
it, if they can: they keep not in good Terms with the sixth Commandment if they
do it not.

Reply. It is the first time that I need answer the conclusion of an Argument;
for having answered the major or minor, the Conclusion submits quietly unto the
Fate of the former. But Sir, here seems to want more Grammar Learning, or more
honesty, I cannot divine which. You brought in these words into your Conclusion
which was not in your Major nor Minor, They keep not in good Terms with the
sixth Commandment if they do it not. Sir, I tell you your Argument is lame; its
feet are not equal, and pray take it home again, and inoculate or graft on
three pieces more to your sophistical Argument, or else it will not be able to
stand, and must fall to the Ground unavoidably. Here is such sophistry that
none but my Antagonist is able to answer for. As we would keep in good Terms
with the sixth Commandment: He dare not say we should break the Commandment,
lest then it should be asked for a Reason why he do say (...) Good Terms! Faith
in what is commanded, and a Principle of Obedience thereto is it he means? This
we may do without holding the Doctrine of Inoculation. Or does he mean, that
except we believe the Doctrine or Inoculation to save our Lives, we break the
Sixth Commandment? Surely he means something or other: It may be he would make
it a Bugbear to fright us into it; which seems most likely to me: For if you
look upon his Argument again, from Head to Foot, you will find it is so lame,
it can neither go nor stand, it has two Tails; it is so overcharged, that its
Belly is monstrous big; and his Head is so small, for want of some of that
which is in his two Tails, that it looks no ways handsome; neither has it
Hands strong enough for War.

Sir, You having taken Liberty to put more into the Conclusion than was in the
Premises, (which is very dishonorable if not dishonest) you infer several
Things, which are so mean, that I shall answer but part of them.

Inf. That when some desire to save their Lives by Inoculation, those who have
the Care over them, should not hinder them, lest they should have Cause to
repent of it.

Reply. I do not like this Word Lest. I have seen it somewhere else before now.
I take it to be in Genesis 3. 3. Lest ye die. I suppose our Antagonist learned it
there. I know what Improvement was made of it then, to wit, Ye shall not surely
die. I know the Equivocation of the Word, there was a Willingness to be
deceived; but I fear, the Equivocation of the Word here was a Willingness to
deceive.

Sir, I shall answer you by a Similitude, and yon may judge. I have known
Children that have had the King's Evil, and have desired their Governors to
let them go and be touched by the King, who lays his Hand upon them and says, I
touch, and God heals: Whether or no if Parents or Governors are satisfied that
it is not lawful, or that there is no Physical Means in it, they ought not to
deter them from it, lest the Disease may not go off, and they have sad Cause of
Reflection. The like Cure the Seventh Son performs, which you may consider.

Inf. III. That a People should not be too hasty in Resolves that would forbid
their Neighbors to do what God has made their Duty, for the Preservation of
their Lives in this Method, lest they do in Effect forbid Obedience to the
Sixth Commandment.

Now I hope the Reader may see what our Gentleman aimed at, when he put forth
his Hand, as the Effect of a covetous Mind, and stole these Words into the
Conclusion, which were not in the Major, to wit, they keep not in good Terms
with the Sixth Commandment if they do it not. And now I suppose, from the
Commandment he infers, that God has made Inoculation a Duty. The Syphistry of
this lies here: His Argument should have run thus:

What God has made a Duty, and a most successful and allowable Method of
preventing Miseries by the Small Pox, ought to be practiced. But, God has made
it a Duty. Therefore, it ought to be practiced.

Now, had he put into his Major proposition, What God has made a Duty, we
might have come at his Minor Proposition, which must have run thus, But God
has made it a most successful and allowable way to prevent Death by the Small
Pox. Then his Conclusion might hove run thus, Therefore it ought to be
practiced. And we might have come at his Minor by denying it; and till he had
proved it, his Conclusion would have stood tottering, but if he had proved his
Minor, his Conclusion would stand good: But how he would have proved it, I
cannot tell, except he made a Trip to Smyrna and Constantinople, and to many
wise and learned Men.

Again, you say, To call this a Work of the Devil, etc. is a shocking
Blasphemy. Pray who told you so? They say it is of God or the Devil; but it is
not of God, because it is not contained in the Law of Physic, either Natural
or Divine. What shall we do but draw the natural Conclusion, seeing there is no
Limbus Patrum nor Middle, between the greatest Good, and the greatest Evil one.
Jer. 5. 30, 31. A wonderful and horrible thing is committed in the Land. The
Prophets prophecy falsely, and the Priests bear rule by their means, and my
People love to have it so? And what will ye do in the end thereof?

Sir, Had the Discourse been Verbal, and Moderators chosen, you must not have
dared to intrude upon the Rules of Disputation: If you had dared to have
ventured your Case to the Censure of the People, I should have endeavored to
have made you ashamed; but I suppose you choose rather to stand by your self,
and keep your own Maxim, Ask not why I say so.

I have observed Hints from the Pulpit of new Means discovered, and that we
should be thankful to God for his gracious Providence in discovering it to us.
But I think it is denied to be Means that is lawful, and till it is proved
lawful, it is but begging the Question, to tell me I should be thankful for it:
But I will tell you what came into my Mind, More Grammar, less Sophistry, some
Scripture Proof, less Delusion.

Quest. Whether it is not our Duty to pray, that God would bless the Means of
Inoculation, to those that are under its Operation: Phil. 4. 6. Be careful for
nothing, but in every thing by Prayer and Supplication, let your Requests be
made known unto God.

Reply. This word Every Thing must be restrained unto those Things which God
has made our Duty, and so far as we are found in our Duty. Now for Persons to
undertake any thing without Satisfaction from God's Word, looks like
Jehoshaphats agreeing with Ahab King of Israel, to go up to Ramoth Gilead
before they had enquired of the Lord, May we not think they were left of God to
follow their own Imaginations, 1 King. 22.

Sir, I shall take my leave of you, leaving the following Question for you to
consider of, to wit, Whether in Inoculation, it is barely and simply the Small
Pox that is conveyed in at the incision, or whether the distempers of them from
whom the matter was taken* be not conveyed also, to wit, the Gout, the Stone,
the Gravel, the Rheumatism, yea the great Pox also. I suppose the Drs. Modesty
will not admit him to ask them whether they have either of these aforehand upon
them) and so inoculated Bodies be made a Cage to hold complicated Diseases.

ANSWER TO A Late Letter in the New England Courant.
O Wonderful Champion, what art thou? If I knew who thou art, I would treat
thee according to thy merit. Art thou Dr. B -- n's Champion? or art thou some
Knight of the Post, to swear what is told thee? or art thou some Mountebank's
Boy, to tell more of the Virtues of thy medicines in one hour, than ever was
found true in a thousand Years? Or art thou one that loves to be of that side
of the Hedge the Sun rises? Or art thou one that art a setter forth of strange
things? Art thou a Scholar and wicked, or a poor man and ignorant? Or art thou
for Stoical Destiny, that every thing is moved by its Center that is next to
it, that something begets something? Art thou an old Man and grown Childish? Or
art thou one that had never much Wit (a fool?) Or art thou a young Man, and
boastingly would show that which thou never had, or that which thou always
had.

Sir, you say, Our Age is favored with a wonderful and are discovery, more
worth than a World! What World do you mean Sir* that which is in the Moon? And
was you ever there to know the worth of it?

Again, you say, That none (...) Infatuated People would reject and clamor
against it. Hundreds of Lives are lost, I say Lost, because they would not come
into the Practice of it. Sir, I perceive you have great Confidence, Sir, can
you read, did you ever learn your Catechism? did you ever learn the answer to
that question, What are the Decrees of God? Ans. The Decrees of God are his
Eternal purposes, according to the Counsel of his own will whereby for his own
Glory be has foreordained whatsoever comes to pass. How do we read, Dan. 4.
35. And all the Inhabitants of the Earth are reputed as nothing: and he does
according to his Will in the Army of Heaven, and among the Inhabitants of the
Earth, and none can stay his Hand, or say unto him, what do thou. And is
there not an appointed time for Man upon the Face of the Earth? I am sorry to
see any in New England so ignorant.

Never one died in this way, and it is probable, more than probable, never will.
Sir, is there a degree of difference between more than probable, and certain.
You say, never one died in this way; Dr. M -- r indeed did within this three
Weeks say, that there was no question to be made of a man's Life when
inoculated, which is short of this: But be it so, if they will have it so* I
know their way well enough, if any of theirs are bad, yea very bad, to be sure,
say they, they had it in the Common way before, and so to clear themselves lay
the blame at God's Door; but I read, Let God be true and Men liars. Prove. 26.
5. Answer a Fool according to his Folly, lest he be wise in his own Conceit.
See Mat. 5. 19.

FINIS.

