THE Whole Concern of Man

What he ought to Know (...), in order to Eternal (...) Laid down in a Plain
and Familiar Way for the Use of All, but especially the Meanest Reader. Divided
into XVII. Chapters.

Necessary for all Families.

WITH DEVOTION^ (...) several OCCASIONS, Ordinary and Extraordinary.

By JOHN EDWARDS, (...)

The (...) ^^ition, with (...)

Reprinted at BOSTON in N. E. by S. Kneeland, for J. Edwards, at his Shop on
the North-side of the Town House. 1725.

TO THE READER.
THIS Treatise distributes the Whole Concern or Duty of a Christian into the
things which he ought to Know, and those which he ought to Do. For the former
are our Concern as well as the latter, because our Christianity consists in
Principles as well as Practice: And therefore if we would approve our selves to
be complete Christians, we must take care of both these. In the Doctrinal part
of this Book I have presented the Reader with all the necessary Truths of
Christianity, and in the Practical part I have set down the peculiar and proper
Offices of All Persons of what rank or quality soever, even of Rulers and
Magistrates. Nor have I omitted the Duty of Spiritual Governors, that is,
Pastors and Teachers; for the Reader might justly think we are very Partial,
when we pretend to assign the Whole Concern of Man, and yet omit our Own Duty.

I have much Enlarged (beyond the proportion and length which I have observed
in other Heads) on that of Parents and Children, Masters and Mistresses of
Families and their Charge, but let it not be accounted as a fault, for I
intended this Book chiefly for Householders and their Families, and therefore it
was proper to Insist on those Duties which more particularly concern these.

So as to the Reasons and Motives which I have used to excite to the practice
of the Duties Discoursed of, I have more than ordinarily brought them forth
when I had occasion to make my Application to Parents and Heads of Families,
not only because these generally need them most, but because here they will
have the greatest Influence, and the largest Effect, if they prove successful.

I have added a particular Discourse concerning the nature of that Preparation
which every Christian ought to make for Death: which is a very useful and
necessary Subject, and therefore could not be omitted.

As to the wording and phrasing of the whole, though I did not intend it should
be so Plain as that there should be nothing to entertain the Learned, yet I
have calculated it chiefly for those that are of ordinary understanding and low
capacity, and accordingly I have used a free and facile way of Expression, as
most suitable to that rank of Persons.

As to the Devotional Part, I have composed it not only of Prayers to be used
in the Closet, but by the Family together, not being willing to be guilty of
that Defect which is observable in the Book Entitled, The Whole Duty of Man,
where there is not one Family Prayer for Mornings or Evenings. To render this
part of the Book as unexceptionable as I could, I have consulted and made some
use of several Forms of Devotion published by some of our most Eminent Divines
for the needs of pious and well-disposed Christians, that the Reader might have
Choice of Words to express his devout thoughts when he addresses himself to the
Almighty.

May the Divine Blessing vouchsafe to make the Whole serviceable to the Great
Ends it was designed for, the Glory of the Eternal Being, and the Welfare of
Men's Souls.

The Method of using the following BOOK.
CALL your Family together every Lord's Day in the Morning, and then use that
particular Prayer which is appointed there for that time. In the Afternoon or
Evening call your Family again together, and read one of the Chapters of this
Book, in order as they lie: and so by reading a Chapter every Lord's Day, the
whole Book will be read out thrice in a Year. And thereby your Family will be
fully instructed not only in the Practical part of Christianity, but in all the
necessary Doctrines and Principles of it, which of late are much neglected.
When the Chapter is read over, Pray one of the Prayers which is appointed for
the Lord's Day in the Evening, together with any other Prayer that you think
sin.

On other days of the Week use the rest of the Prayers continually, namely the
Prayers for Morning and Evening. And besides these, when there is ^ solemn
Occasion of humbling your selves, make use of the Confession of Sins. And when
you are to celebrate the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, make use of the
particular Prayer for that purpose: and after receiving the Sacrament, there is
an other proper Prayer.

When there is occasion, use the Prayer for a Sick Person, and for one Troubled
in Mind.

In times of Public Danger and Calamity, as Raging Sickness, War, Unseasonable
Weather, and the like, have recourse to the Prayers proper for these Purposes.

When you are delivered from any of these, use the Thanksgiving.

The Whole CONCERN OF MAN.
CHAP. I.
A Preface to the ensuing Treatise, showing the Necessity of caring for the
Soul.

. 1. BEFORE I proceed to discourse of the several Particulars of the Whole
Concern of Man, it will be requisite in the first place to prepare the Reader
by convincing him of the Necessity of the Care which be ought to have of his
Soul. For unless he be thoroughly persuaded of this, he will never think himself
concerned in the Directions that I shall lay down. We see daily that the
greatest Care of the generality of Men, is to ward off dangers from their
Bodies and Estates, to guard and secure these by all means possible from those
Evils which they are most incident to; they very industriously take care to
prevent Sickness and Poverty, and to live in Health and Ease, and to grow Rich
in the World: but in the mean time they neglect a far greater and weightier
Concern, and wilfully pull down all manner of Evil and Mischief upon their Best
and most Considerable Part, their Souls. But certainly they must be reckoned as
very Unwise Persons who act after this rate, and indamage these latter to
secure and save the former, namely, their Outward and Bodily Concerns. And on
the contrary, this is the truest Wisdom, and the most rational Love of our
selves, to prefer our Immortal Souls before all worldly interests and
advantages whatsoever. For a Man's Soul is his richest and most precious
Treasure: and the whole World is too mean a Price for it. This is the sense of
our Infallible Master in those Words of his, Matthew. 16.26. What is a Man
profiled if he shall gain the whole World, and lose his own Soul? or what shall
a Man give in exchange for his Soul?

. 2. In which Admirable Passage there is observable, First a double
Supposition, and Secondly a double Position or Conclusion grounded on those
Suppositions. The things supposed are, 1. That a Man may lose his Soul. 2. That
with the loss of his Soul he may gain the whole World. For it is said, If he
shall gain the whole World and lose his own Soul. The Things that are
positively asserted and inferred from this twofold Supposal are, 1. That the
Man who gains the World and loses his Soul, receives no advantage or profit by
such Gain. 2. That this wretched Man, having lost his Soul, cannot possibly
redeem and regain it, or give or take any thing in Exchange for it.

So then, these four following Propositions comprehend the full meaning of our
Savior's words. The First is this, that there are some Men, and those too many
in the World, who not only hazard but lose their Souls. The Second is, that it
often happens that their gaining of the World is attended with this loss of
their Souls. The Third is, that though Men gain the World, and yet lose their
Immortal Souls, they are unspeakable losers by such a Bargain. The Fourth and
last is, that there can be no Satisfaction or Recompense made for the loss of a
Man's Soul.

3. I begin with the First of these, namely, that there are some Men, and those
too many, who not only hazard but lose their Souls. Though this be a kind of
Supposition in the forementioned words of our Savior, yet it is a most
Positive Truth in it self. This is too sadly Experienced, that the Sinner
destroys his own Soul. Prove. 6.32. Not that the Soul of Man shall cease to be,
Man's Soul may be lost.
nor that it shall perish, and vanish into nothing: for it is an Immortal
being, and is not capable of being destroyed, without the Almighty Power of God
who created it. But he has plainly declared that it is his Will and Pleasure
that Souls shall always exist, and remain either in Eernal Bliss or Misery. By
the loss of the Soul then we are not grossly to imagine any such thing as its
being reduced to nothing: we cannot so lose our Souls as that they shall not
continue to have a being. What is the meaning then of losing the Soul?

I Answer, this may be learnt from the Origiginal Word, that is, the Word which
the Evangelist here uses; this signifies not only detriment or damage, but it
denotes likewise privation or loss: and so it may convey to us this double
notion of the Souls being lost, As given up to Sin in this Life, and Misery in
the next.
namely First, in this Life, by the Damage it receives by Sin; Secondly, in the
other Life, by the Deprivation of Glory, and exclusion from Eternal Happiness.
There is a Temporary, and there is a Final Loss of the Soul: and it is only Sin
or departing from God which procures this Perdition. He that Converteth a
Sinner saves a Soul, says St. James, chapter 5. ver. 20. Whence I gather, that if
the Conversion of Sinners be the Saving of Souls; then by the Rule of
Contraries, the Losing of them is when they are Perverted and drawn away,
Corrupted and Debauched by Lust and Vice, when they contract habits of Sin, and
persist in them, and Revolt from their Maker and Redeemer, and are shut out
from Communion with God, and incur his wrath and displeasure. Then they are
properly said to be lost.

. 4. So they are said to be more signally when this displeasure follows them
into the other World, and places them in the forlorn Condition of the Damned
Spirits of Darkness. Then they are irrecoverably lost in Hell, and Mercy it
self cannot retrieve them, for they are absolutely deprived of God's Favor,
debarred of his presence, shut out from it as Reprobates and Castaways, and
irreversibly destined to endless Torments. Hence our English Translators have
thus rendered that parallel Place in St. Luke, in Chapter 9. ver. 25. What is a
Man advantaged if he shall gain the whole World, and lose himself, or be cast
away? Whereby they would let us understand, that then a Man may properly be
said to lose himself or his Soul, when he is cast away; that is, cast out of
God's favor, which alone can create Ease and happiness; when he is Finally
rejected by the Almighty, and utterly denied all tenders of Grace and Mercy.
Whereupon must necessarily follow a most dreadful Horror and distraction of
Mind, and the most exquisite Pain and Torture: such as no thoughts can
sufficiently conceive, no Tongue is able to express; for in this the Torments
of Hell, and the Joys of Heaven resemble one another, that they are both
Unutterable. It is impossible to tell you fully what the Damned lose, and what
they suffer; what they are deprived of, and what they feel.

. 5. Let us, before we pass to the next Particular, stand a while and seriously
lament and bewail the forlorn state of lost Souls. I have given you a brief
representation of it; and now let us ask our selves what can we imagine more
sad and dreadful? It would be well for the Sinner, if he could lose his Soul in
the Sense which I first of all mentioned, that is, if he could slide into
nothing, and for ever cease to be. But the will not be granted him: for he must
remained Lasting Monument of the divine displeasure. This is the height of his
Misery, that he shall have a Never-failing Existence, and his portion shall be
in that Lake which Perpetually burns with Fire and Brimstone, where the Worm
dies not, and the Fire is not quenched. This the Holy and Infallible Book of
God acquaints us with: and yet how Great are the Numbers of Men in the World,
who throw themselves into these Flames, and wilfully plunge themselves into
that horrible Lake, who not only Hazard but Lose their Souls? Broad is the gate
that leads to Destruction, and Many there are that go in thereat, and so are
Everlastingly excluded from all hopes of Life and Salvation. These Miserable
and besotted Wretches, though perhaps they sufficiently understood their Duty,
yet wilfully neglected the practice of it. They rushed into danger, and seemed
to court Death and Destruction, neither minding the dreadful Judgments of God,
nor being affected with the Kindness and Obligations they daily received from
him. They cared not how they were to fare hereafter, so they might be Permitted
to Gratify and Indulge their desires here. They were no ways sollicitous for
the Future, but it was their Present Advantage only that they busied themselves
about. And in this oftentimes they are thriving and successful enough, but yet
so as that they but the World with the Price of their Souls.

. 6. Which brings me to the Second Proposition, which is this, that too often
it happen^ that Men's gaining the World is accompanied wi^ the loss of their
Souls. Whilst they purchase Earth, they lose Heaven: they grasp at things
Temporal, and let go those that are Eternal. Or, to gain the whole World, in
the fullest meaning of our Savior's Words is this, To climb as high in the
World as a Man's Avarice or Ambition can carry him, to immerse himself as deep
as he can in the delights of Sense, to attain to as ample a fruition of Earthly
Possessions as is possible, to live in splendour and gallantry, to be Great and
Powerful, to be Rich and Wealthy, to enjoy the affluence of all sensual
pleasures, and to have what heart can wish. And now I believe you perceive
already, that we are in a fair way to prove the Proposition: for whilst the
unbridled appetites of Men are let loose to the enjoyment of all they desire
and covet after, it is no wonder that their Immortal Souls are hazarded. The
Connection of the Parts in this clause of our Saviors Words, is no uncommon
thing in the observation of all Intelligent Persons. The Gain of the World is
joined with the loss of the Soul. The frequent Examples of Mankind do too
evidently evince, that Wealth and Worldly possessions are held without Virtue
and real Goodness; nay, that these are too often made instrumental to the
greatest Vices: they usually promote in Men's minds Lust and Pride,
forgetfulness of God, and a hatred of Goodness, a Profane and Atheistical
Spirit, and an utter disregard of another Life.

. 7. Would you know (or rather be reminded of) the Reason of this? It is no
other then this, that it is hard to gain the World, and not let our Hearts upon
it: and hence it is, that our never-dying Souls. The immoderate gain of the
World endangers the loss of the Soul.
are endangered by the acquisition of these Temporal and Transitory Goods. You
read of the Deceitfulness of Riches, (...). 13.22. This Cheat, this Delusion is
too apparent in the World, and the sad effects of it redo and to the depraving
and corrupting our Better Part. What do not the Immoderate care and Solicitude
about this World betray men to? What do not this Inordinate Love and Delight
invite Men to, and even thrust them upon? so true is that of the Wise Man, [ He
that makes hasts to be Rich, shall not be Innocent.] Prove. 28.20. Which Words
plainly import more than they express; for the person he speaks of, is so far
from being Innocent that he unavoidably involves himself in the greatest Guilt,
and runs into the worst of disorders and misdemeanors. Thus the Traitor Judas
was betrayed (if I may so say) into that Execrable Villainy of Selling his
Master by his Coveting the 30 Pieces of Silver. The true cause of Demas's
forsaking St. Paul, and Apostatizing from his Christian course, was his loving
of this present World. 2 Timothy 4.10. This deceitfulness of Mammon might be
Demonstrated in Innumerable other Instances, which I now forbear.

. 8. I could Evidence to you likewise, that it not only Cheats Men of their
Faith and Religion, but of Heaven and Eternal Happiness, which indeed
necessarily follows on the other. There are Two Notable Parables left us by our
Savior, to put us in Mind of this. The First is of the Rich Man, Luke. 12.16.
Who Built larger Barns and Granaries to Lodge his Stores and Provisions in, and
then Sung this Requiem to his Soul, [ Thou have much Goods laid up for many
Years, Eat, Drink, and be merry.] But mark what was said unto him by God, [
Thou Fool, this Night thy Soul shall be required of thee.] The Loss of his
Soul, yea and the Eternal Perdition of it, was the Lamentable close of all his
Gains. The Reading or Hearing of this, should startle the Wealthiest Possessors
of this Worlds Goods, and remind them to secure their Interest Above, that when
their Earthly Mammon fails, they may be received into Everlasting Habitations.
They have need of Repeating Our Church's Litany, In all time of our Wealth,
Good Lord deliver us. They have Reason to Pray, and that most heartily, that
they may not be so busy in Gaining the Riches of this World, as thereby to
hazard their welfare in another.

The Other Parable is of the Wealthy Glutton, who Fared Deliciously every Day,
Luke. 16.19. But in the 23. ver. You find him in Hell, lifting up his Eyes,
being in Torments, beholding that Happiness which he could not come at, and
Begging for that Refreshment which he was never like to obtain. And what was
the Reason? Namely, because he had wilfully Excluded himself by his Voluptuous
and Luxurious Living, by Immoderately Glutting himself with the Delights of
this Life, and never thinking of another. These are very Lively Representations
and Convictions of the Truth of what we have been treating of. Therefore let us
make this Excellant Use of it, to be exceeding Careful and Watchful through our
whole Lives, that we be not Deceived and Ensnared by the Things of this World,
that we suffer not our Minds to be Debauched by the enjoyment of them, that (as
the Apostle advises) we use this World as not abusing it, lest we be of the
number of those whom our Savior speaks of, who Gain the World, but Lose their
Souls into the Bargain.

. 9. But these, you will say, are no Great Gamers: Which leads me to the Third
Proposition, viz. That though Men Gain the World, and yet Lose their Immortal
Souls, they are unspeakable Losers notwithstanding such Gain. [ What is a man
Profited? That Question is a downright Denying of the Thing, and the plain
meaning is, The Balance of the Account in the Loss of the Soul, and Gain of
the World.
that a Man is not in the least Profited; If he casts up his Accounts, he will
find that he is so far from having Enriched himself, that he is a mere Bankrupt.

. 10. But some may say to me, How can these things be? Surely the Whole World
is able to outweigh that which you call the Soul of Man. If we can purchase
the fruition of this Worlds Goods, we cannot see how it is possible we should be
Losers. This World certainly is no Contemptible Bargain; we taste the
Sweetness, we behold the Beauty, we feel the Goodness of it. We have Listened,
and our Ears have heard, and have been ravished with its Charms: we have
experienced its Delights, and we cannot be deceived: and therefore we conclude,
that this World has more worth in it then you imagine: and you vainly
endeavor to beat down the Price of it. And then as for the Soul, we cannot say
such great things of that. Yea, many dispute and wrangle about it is Nature and
Properties, and certain it is, that no Nan ever saw it. But let it be what you
imagine it to be, yet it cannot stand in Competition with the whole World:
surely therefore you overvalue it, and set too high an Estimate upon it.

. 11. To take off these Objections and Scruples, we may consider the Soul and
the World apart. The Souls excellent worth argued from its Nature.
Let us lay these in the Scales one against another, and without doubt we shall
find the former of these Two, to be most weighty and considerable. The great
Worth and Value of Souls might be Evidenced from the Consideration of the
Excellent Nature and Frame of them, for they partake not of Dull and Senseless
Matter, but are Spiritual, Refined and Exalted Beings. Being Immaterial, they
are Immortal and neverdying Spirits. Being Free and Rational, Faculties.
they are able to Reflect on themselves, to Understand their own Essence and
Nature, and that of all other beings; especially they are capable of Knowing,
Loving, and Serving of God, in the Knowledge, Love and Service of whom the
happiness of Mankind consists. And in a Word, the Souls of Men were made
after the Image of God, Image of God
they are Copies of that Excellent and Divine Original. Thus humane Souls in
their own Nature are of great Worth and Excellency. Price of your Redemption.
Again, we cannot but be convinced, that they are so from the Consideration of
the Great Price which was Paid for them. God thought Men's Souls worth the
expense of the Blood of his only Begotten Son. This shows how highly they were
valued by God the Father, and Christ Jesus the Merciful Redeemer of them. This
shows that they are in themselves Precious, and that they are in the Sight of
God of great Price. Attempts of the Enemy.
Likewise, from the eager and busy endeavors of the Evil Spirit, to prevert
and seduce them, we may Infer the great and inestimable worth of them. He is
restless in his Attempts to make a Prey of us, because we carry within us so
Great and Rich a Treasure: this makes it worth his pains and utmost care, to
Spoil and Rob us. So that the Indefatigable Assaults of this our Malicious and
Cunning Adversary, are an Argument of the Extraordinary Worth and Excellency of
our Souls.

But then for the World, weigh it in the balance, and it will be found Light
and Worthless. The Sum Total of it is thus computed by the Apostle St. John, 1
Epist. 2 chap. 16. ver. The lust of the Flesh, the lust of the Eyes, and the
Pride of Life: that is, in other terms, Pleasures, The emptiness of the World
Riches and Honors. This is all that is in this World; in these are couched,
whatever the Voluptuous, the Covetous, or the Ambitious can be Masters of. Now,
we have it upon infallible Record, that the Wisest and most Experienced Man
upon Earth, disparaged all these with the Inscription of Vanity and Vexation of
Spirit. They entertain us with mere Shows and Appearances, and are not able to
stint and satisfy the Capacious Mind of Man: yea, they are Entertainments that
are no ways suitable to the Soul: but thus far only they have relation to it,
that they are wont to Deprave and Debauch it.

. 12. But the most palpable disparagement and blemish, of all the things that
this World affords, may be comprehended in these Two Things, First, They cannot
allay or mitigate the Stings of a wounded Conscience: they cannot avail us when
God withdraws the light of his Countenance, when he writes bitter things
against us, and discovers his wrath and displeasure for our Sins. Then the
World will not yield us any solace and contentment. It yields no Comfort, when
we most need it.
Miserable Comforters are all the Pleasures, and Profits, and Honors of the
World at such a time. They are Physicians of no value, because they cannot Cure
and Heal our Inward distempers: but they rather serve to Increase them. And
Secondly, more particularly, the World cannot speak Peace to a Man when he is
to leave it, and to go out of it, and consequently, it cannot be of any great
value and worth, for all its worth extends no further then this Life, which is
short and soon ended. But there is another Life after this, even an Endless
duration, and then this World will do us no service at all. Whence we may
rationally conclude, that it is a very Mean and Sorry thing; and hence also it
follows, that a Man is not in the least Profited, if he shall Gain the World
by the Loss of his Soul.

. 13. I might further prove this Proposition by the next, as thus; That the man
who loses his Soul, though with the Accession of Worldly Gain, is an
unspeakable Loser, may be made good by the Fourth and Last Proposition, which
is yet behind, which you may remember was to this effect, That there can be no
Satisfaction or Recompense given for the loss of a Man's Soul: or, as it is here
expressed, there is no Exchange. The Greek Word has reference to Contracts and
Bargains about Buying and Selling, which of Old were made not by Paying or
Receiving of Money, but by Bartering or Exchanging. Whence the word is here
made use of by our Savior, to let us know, that there is no Traficking for
Lost and Damned Souls, there is no Buying of them again, when they are finally
Sold and Lost. And more particularly, the word is used in Good Authors to
signify the Price of Redemption, and so it may very fitly be applied here: and
then this important Truth is conveyed to us, that after this Life there is an
utter Impossibility of Redeeming a lost Soul. If the Sinner be once taken
Captive by Satan, and bound in the Chains of Darkness, there is no hope of
Redemption, there is no Counter-Price to be laid down and paid, to buy him back
again. What shall a Man give in Exchange for his Soul?

14. The Soul lost in Eternal Misery, can never be Redeemed.
This being delivered by way of Question, seems to imply this, that a Man would
be willing to give something, yea anything for the Recovery of his Lost Soul.
What is there that he would not part with? What can be too dear to make this
purchase? Alas! the blinded Sinner goes on Now without control; he only
attends to the present pleasure of satisfying his Lusts and Exorbitant desires.
He thinks not of the Sting which must close all, he considers not of the future
checks of Conscience, and that it will be bitterness in the Latter end. Now he
undervalues his Soul, and reckons the loss of it as a thing inconsiderable: but
when he shall descend into the Regions of the Damned, then (but too late) he
will wish he had Lost all, so he had secured the Main Property. Then he will
breathe out such Relenting Language as this, O foolish and sottish wretch that
I was no neglect the Only Concern I had, to purchase Eternal Torments for the
Pleasures of Sin for a Season! O how shall I now bear the restless groanings of
a Despairing Mind! how shall I suffer the gnawing of this Worm that never
dies! What? must there be No Period put to these Infernal Flames? Cannot our
Floods of incessant Tears Extinguish these Burnings? Is there no Interceding
with the Judge? May not a Man be upon his Probation once again? May I not be
permitted to live over my Years once more? What is there no Release from these
chains of darkness? Is there no Exchange for Souls? No; there is a flat and
peremptory Denial couched in this Question, What shall a Man give in Exchange
for his Soul? That is, he can tender nothing which may be in the least
Available for the Retrieving of his Soul. Though he Would, he Cannot. This is a
Loss which is not to be repaired. There is no Price or Ransom that can fetch
back the poor Captived Sinner. All the World cannot Redeem one lost Soul.

15. And this will appear to be a Proposition too sadly true if we consider
this one thing, that there is no Proportion at all, between the thing lost and
that which is offered in Exchange or Compensation. The whole World affords
nothing that can Answer the Loss of a Soul; for (as I have briefly demonstrated
to you) all the World in respect of the Immortal Spirit of Man is Mean and
Inconsiderable. There is no Comparison at all between these Two: therefore the
Gain of the whole World will not countervail the loss of one Soul. And this
also is to be considered, that there is an Irreversible Sentence past upon the
Wicked as soon as they leave this World, and therefore there can be no
Satisfaction or Exchange made for them. When once the Fatal Doom is pronounced
by the Judge, there is no possibility of Evading it.

Reckon then upon it as an Infallible Truth, that the Soul which Wilfully and
Obstinately miscarries in this Life, shall not meet with any Relief in the
Other. There is no Redemption after Death, maugre the fond opinion of the
Church of Rome, which establishes the contrary by maintaining the Fire of
Purgatory. But be not deceived by such Vain Delusion; for the Enriching of
their Priests is the only fuel which maintains that Fire. A constant Revenue
comes into them from the Dirges and Masses for the dead, in hope of a Release
out of those Flames. Thus this, and many other Popish doctrines are founded on
their Secular Profit. They make their Gain their Godliness. To Gain the World
they pretend to rescue Souls out of the Infernal Prison; whilst in the mean
time by their falsehoods and delusions they palbably endanger the Salvation of
men, and put them into the direct way of Losing their Souls. But what can be
more Plain and Peremptory than that of the Royal Preacher, in Eccl. 9.10. [
Whatsoever thy hand finds to do, do it with thy might, for there is no work,
nor device, nor knowledge in the grave whither thou go?] As much as to say,
the working out of our Salvation, is the proper and only employment of this
Life, and after it there is no Redress. Whence it follows that the Loss of
Souls is not to be Reversed in another World, and consequently that it is such
a Loss as is Inestimable and Irrecoverable. [ For what is a man profited if he
shall gain the whole world, and lose his own Soul? or what shall a man give in
Exchange for his Soul.

. 16. Thus I have distinctly considered the several branches of our Saviors
words, with the Propositions that they afford. And I have done it with this
design, that we might thence be convinced of the Grand thing I propounded,
namely, the Necessity of taking care for our Souls, and that above and before
all other things whatsoever. This is the proper Inference from every one of
those Particulars that I have insisted upon: which I will thus briefly make
good. First, If the Loss of the Soul be no unusual thing, then it highly
concerns us to take Care, that we be not of the number of those unhappy persons
who lose their Souls. Secondly, If the Gain of the World contributes to this
Loss, then we are obliged to be very cautious and circumspect, in the use of
the enjoyments of this World: which we cannot be, unless we have a great Care
of our Souls, unless we watch over them with much diligence, and take some
pains about the regulating and well ordering of them. Especially, if we
consider, Thirdly, that all the Worldly Gain and Advantage we can expect to be
possessors of by our sinful and vicious behavior, will be of no real Profit to
us, this will further engage us to mind the welfare of our Souls, and to secure
that, whatever else we fail in. And then lastly, if we consider that the Loss
of our Souls is of that nature that no Exchange or Recompense can be made for
it, we are yet more strongly obliged to the duty I have so often mentioned. If
we lose our Souls, it is impossible to recover them: If by our wilful neglect
we forfeit our Salvation, there is no way left to regain it.

17. Wherefore let us be exhorted to value our Immortal Souls above all things
else, and to think nothing too difficult to do, or too dear to part with for
the ensuring and saving of these. As for our Bodies, the worth of them is, that
they are the receptacles of our Souls. These are the Jewels, the others are but
the Casket. And as for the World, and all things in it, they are not only vain
and empty, and unable to satisfy the rational mind of man, but they are wont to
mold and disturb it, and to divert it from attending to the serious concerns of
another World. Therefore that we may in good earnest mind the Interest of our
Souls, we must be careful not to busy our selves too much with worldly affairs,
we must not set our hearts on Earthly profits and pleasures. My meaning is not
that we should slight and disregard our Bodies and our temporal concerns. We
may lawfully look after these, we have free leave to mind our secular business
in a moderate and due manner, and so far as Christian Discretion requires of
us. But that which I urge is this, that we should not so attend on our Earthly
employments as to forget Heaven, that we should not be so sollicitous about our
bodily affairs, as to neglect the things which are Spiritual, according to the
Apostle's complaint, that all seek their own, not the things which are Jesus
Christ's, Phil. 2.21.

But we ought to listen to our Blessed Master's Advice, Mat. 6.33. Seek ye
first the Kingdom of God, and his righteousness; that is, mind Religion and
your Souls in the First place, and then be not neglectful of your temporal
Interest, and the things which conduce to the advantage of your bodies and
outward man. Know this, that your Eternal Salvation is the main thing you are
to mind: you are to prefer your Spiritual advantage before all worldly and
temporal considerations. For your Souls are more considerable than the whole
World, and therefore the securing of them is a matter of the greatest moment,
and of the highest concern. For these are Your selves, and your most Near and
Intimate Possession. Therefore remember what is dictated to us in the Sacred
Oracles, If thou be wise, thou shall be wise for thy self, Prove. 9 12. No man
can give a greater testimony and proof of his Wisdom than his looking to
Himself, that is his own Soul in the First place. The reason is evident,
because he cannot so much as pretend to common discretion who cannot afford to
regard his own proper Concernment. Now, it is certain that the Salvation of our
Souls is such; the making sure of their Happiness is our own Peculiar Interest;
and here we are concerned, or no where. Strive then to save your Souls, and
account all Attempts mean in respect of this. Let it appear that you chiefly
mind your future Welfare, by your early and constant prosecution of it, by your
longing and breathing after it, and by your love and affection to those who
tender the Salvation of your Souls.

What Our Savior told the busy Martha, is worthy of our daily thoughts,
One-thing, says he, is needful, (absolutely necessary and indispensible) and
Mary has chosen that Good Part which shall not be taken away from her, Luke
10.42. There lay the Excellency and Prudence of her Choice, that she pitched
upon that for her Portion which none could deprive her of, which none could
take out of her possession. And herein it is that we ought to give a Testimony
of our true Christian Wisdom, namely that we make choice of that for our Chief
Good and Treasure which is Lasting and Durable, and which no Enemy or Cross
Accident can spoil us of. That is, we must prefer the Favor and Love of God
before all things, and no Temptation whatsoever must bribe us to the neglecting
of what he requires of us. Our constant study and endeavor, must be to
understand our Duty in the full extent of it, and when we know it, to pursue it
with all Diligence, and to do those things which are pleasing to the most High,
and agreeable to the dictates of our Consciences as they are enlightened and
directed by the Holy Scriptures. And these are the things which I shall in the
next place distinctly and fully treat of.

CHAP. II.
Of the sum of Religion. That it consists in Knowledge and Practice. The
absolute necessity of Christian knowledge demonstrated in five grand
Considerations. This Doctrine improved against the ignorance of the Romish
Devotion. The Pursuit of Knowledge recommended as a Duty and Advantage to our
selves and others.

. 1. THere are but these two things belonging to Religion, namely, the
Knowledge and the Practice of it, and both are equally necessary, because one
is as much our Duty as the other. Then we are truly Religious when we
understand aright the things that are requisite to be believed in order to our
salvation, and when we act according to that Understanding and Knowledge: and
it is impossible to conceive aright of Religion, if either of these be laid
aside. I begin with the former of these: and first, I will endeavor to show
the absolute Necessity of this Divine Knowledge, from such Considerations as
these; 1. Knowledge is the foundation of Religion. 2. The want of it is the
root of Errors and Heresies, and all pernicious Doctrines. 3. This hinders us
from valuing and esteeming the things of God. 4. This is the source of all
Practical Evil. 5. This is destructive both to Body and Soul.

. 2. 1. Knowledge is the very foundation of Religion, and there can be no
Religion without it. I speak of True and Real Religion, for what is false and
counterfeit deserves not the name of Religion, but is abusively called so. It
is granted indeed that Superstition, which is but an Aping of Religion, is
founded in and proceeds from Error and Ignorance. There is a Zeal of God, which
yet is not according to Knowledge, as the Apostle acquaints us, Romans 10.2. And
we find that the most Ignorant and Blinded wretches are the most Superstitious
Bigots. But if we speak of True Religion, it is certain that that cannot be
separated from a due Knowledge. My Son, give me thy heart, is a just and
befitting Command of the God whom we Worship and Serve, Knowledge the
foundation of Religion.
Prove. 23.26. The Heart denotes the Understanding as well as the Will and
Affections, and God will be served with that no less than with these. Our
Religion is styled by the Apostle, our Reasonable Service, Romans 12.1. But how
can it deserve that denomination if it be not accompanied with the
Understanding and with Knowledge, which are the groundwork of Reason? If you
Consider things aright you will grant that no Action in Religion can be sounded
in Ignorance, and where there is not the Knowledge of God there cannot be the
True Service of him. For our Ignorance of God and the things belonging to Him
spoils all our Duties, taints all our Performances, corrupts all our Religious
Exercises, and makes us incapable of offering up an acceptable Sacrifice to the
Almighty. Nay, that Action which is done without Knowledge is so far from being
acceptable to God, that it is not so much as a Moral act, because it proceeds
not from a rational and free Principle, and then certainly it cannot possibly be
an act of Religion. This may convince us of the Necessity of Divine Knowledge
in general, and more particularly of the knowledge of the Principles of
Christianity. It is absolutely requisite that our Judgments be found in matters
of Faith, or else our Actions, though they seem never so good and pious, never
so charitable or just, are of no value and worth, because they proceed from no
True Principle and Bottom. What a Foundation is to a Building, that True
Knowledge is to Christianity; it is that which sustains it, and bears it up.
And accordingly this is the style of the holy Apostle, be calls these Grand
Principles of Truth the foundation, 1 Cor. 3.10, 11. Ephesians. 2.20 Heb 6.1. and
that very justly, because they are the Stay and Support of our Holy Religion,
they are the Basis and groundwork of the Christian Structure.

. 3. 2. It is to be considered that the Ignorance of God and of the things
revealed in Holy Writ, Ignorance the Root of all Error.
is the root of all Heretical and Damnable Doctrines. Truth is but o^e, but
Error is various, and marches in several Divisions. He that leaves the path of
Truth is soon betrayed into a multitude of mistakes. He is inclined to sever
himself more and more from the Center, and to fly off into Irregular motions,
and to entertain all sorts of Errors and Follies. Thence was there such a Swarm
of Monstrous Opinions among the Heathens, of which some of their Philosophers
complain. Thence also among Christians has the Catalogue of Heretics and
False Teachers swelled. And believe it, This is no Inconsiderable thing: for
Heretics pervert the Essentials, corrupt the Vitals, and undermine the
Foundations of Religion. Heretical Seducements are like Poisoning the Wells and
Fountains, which is the most Pernicious thing imaginable. The streams of Divine
Truth are thereby corrupted, and nothing is derived to us but what is deadly
and fatal. This is Satan's employment, Mat. 13.39. The Enemy that sowed the
Tares is the Devil. Accordingly Heresies and False Doctrines are called by St.
Paul, doctrines of devils. 1. Tim. 4.1. It is the most Hellish design that can
be to instill false Principles under the notion of true and sound doctrine: for
you cannot give Poison to any man so easily and so effectually as to him, who
in taking it thinks he takes wholesome Food or Physic: Evil Doctrines are then
most Hurtful when they are embraced without any Distrust. Those are the Worst
Evils whereof we have no Knowledge or Apprehension. From whence you learn the
Deplorable state of those who are led into Error by being kept in Darkness and
Ignorance. Plutarch reports how the Simple Satyr, when he first of all saw
Fire, would needs kiss and embrace it, looking upon it as some very Harmless,
nay Lovely thing. He did not know it would Burn, and that Betrayed him to that
fond Rashness. Ignorance betrays men daily to the Like unadvised attempts, and
causes them to hug and embrace those Errors and Evil Doctrines which will prove
Destructive to them, and end in Hellfire, as you shall hear afterward. He
that is Truth itself acquaints us with the Dangerous effects of Ignorance and
Error, John 12.35. He that walks in darkness, knows not whither he goes;
and consequently he must needs stray into every by-path, and wander into any
wild opinion that depraves Religion, and begets Atheism or Superstition.

. 4. 3. Consider it is another Argument to persuade you of the Necessity of
Divine Knowledge, that the want of it hinders men from Valuing and esteeming
the things of God, the Excellency of Grace, and the Beauty of Religion and
Holiness. It is an old and true Maxim, that what is not known cannot be desired
and loved, and therefore it is necessary in order to the desiring or loving of
any thing, that there be a Knowledge of it first. Did men know what real worth
there is in Virtue, and how base and vile every Sin is, they would prize the
former, and abhor the latter. The reason why Men seek not after Divine and
Heavenly things, is, because they are not Acquainted with them. This is
signified by these words of our Savior, in John 4 10. If thou knew the Gift
of God, and who it is that says unto thee, Give me to drink, thou would
have asked of him, and he would have given thee living water. Christ himself
was the Gift of God, as he tells us in John 3.16. The Great obstacle which
hindered the Samaritan Woman from Asking this Gift was, that she was Ignorant of
the power and virtue of it; she knew not that He who spoke to her had the
Bestowing of it. The same may be said concerning all the Gifts and Graces which
the Gospel tenders to men: they are Undervalued and Slighted, because the Worth
of them is not known. Wherefore there is a necessity of being instructed in the
Doctrine of Christ, whereby we may gain the knowledge of these things. We must
labor to understand our Religion, and have an insight into the nature of
Christianity, and all the parts of it. For this is most certain, that none ever
yet condemned it that thoroughly understood it: but on the contrary, all that
have attained to a right understanding of it, are admirers and lovers of it.

. 5 4 It is to be remembered that the want of Divine Knowledge is the root of
all Practical Abominations. If you think fit to Observe the Connection of the 4
first verses of the 14th Psalm, you will see this Confirmed. If the Fool, i. e.
the Atheist (and Atheism is one of the Highest Instances of Ignorance and
Folly) says in his heart there is no God, he will necessarily be guilty of
visible and open Crimes in his Life: Ignorance the Root of sinful Practice.
for the wilful Ignorance of a Deity must produce very Strange and Prodigious
effects in his Manners. Accordingly you read in the same place, that such
persons are Corrupt, they have done Abominable works, there is none of them
that does Good. They are all gone aside, they are all together become Filthy.
And it might well be added in the next verse, Have all the workers of iniquity
no Knowledge? It is the want of this that makes them so Loose and Licencious,
that renders them Disordered and Exorbitant in their Lives. This may justly be
assigned as the Great Cause of that Irreligion and Profaneness which are to be
seen in the World. The true Knowledge of God is lost among men: Many brag of
their Parts and Acquirements, and yet are destitute of a Sound Understanding.
Many men venture to Dispute and manage Controversies, and are able to Wrangle
and Quarrel, and yet they fall short of the attainment of those Truths which
are the Vitals and Essentials of Religion, whence their miscarriages arise; for
an Evil Life is frequently grounded on the ignorance of those Truths. Which was
long ago observed by that Pious Father of the African Church, St. Augustine, in
his Book of the City of God, and accordingly he has left us there this
remarkable Saying, Men must needs live ill, if their belief concerning God be
not aright. Their Morals cannot but be corrupted, when their Principls are
unsound. And on the other side, a Religious and holy Conversation is the
genuine result and product of right Apprehensions of God, and of the Christian
Institution which we profess.

Let me Observe to you the Dependence of those words in the first and second
verses of the 4th Chapter of Hosea. The Complaint at that time was, that there
was no Knowledge of God in the Land: Whereupon it immediately follows that by
Swearing, and Lying, and Killing, and Stealing, and committing Adultery, they
brake out, and blood touched blood. Ignorance of God has these woeful
Consequences, these dismal effects. He that knows not God, and is not
instructed in his duty, will be tempted to commit all manner of wickedness and
impiety. If we look into the Body of Man, we shall find that there is a near
conjunction between the Head and all the Members that are designed for action
and motion: the Brain, the Seat of Understanding, constantly sends forth
Spirits through all the Nerves into the whole fabric of the body, in order to
sense and action. This may represent or shadow out to us an higher Notion,
namely, the near Tie and Union, the constant commerce and correspondence
between Knowledge and Practice, between the Understanding and the Conversation.
The Head being duly informed, affects the Heart and Life: and on the contrary,
gross Ignorance and false Apprehensions defile the Manners, and pollute the
whole Man. When vile Sinners arrive to that pitch, to say unto God, Depart from
us, we may then gather, that they desire not the knowledge of his ways, as it
follows in Job 21.14. And we may rationally gather, that this latter was the
cause of the former, i. e. that the want of a due and well grounded Knowledge
is the root of Apostasy, or departing from God, and revolting from Religion,
because none are substantially good, and persevere in Virtue, but those that
are Knowing.

. 6. Fifthly, and lastly, to sum up all in short, our ignorance of God
(notwithstanding some are pleased to excuse and extenuate the guilt of it) is
really dangerous and destructive both to our Bodies and Souls, it ruins us
both here and hereafter. Ignorance destructive to Body and Soul.
As to the former, it is represented as an experimented Case by the Prophet
Isaiah, (Chap. 5. v. 13.) Therefore my People are gone into Captivity because
they have no Knowledge. And the same is signified to us by the Prophet Hosea,
Chap. 4. v. 1.) The Lord has a controversy with the Inhabitants of the Land,
because there is no Knowledge of God (as well as no Truth, nor Mercy) in the
Land. This Controversy held as long as the Captivity; and afterward it began
again, and ended at length in the final destruction of that Nation; of which it
is probable Hosea prophetically speaks in the sixth Verse of this Chapter, My
People are destroyed for lack of Knowledge. Thus Ignorance (no less than
positive acts of Sin and vicious Enormities) provokes God to send his severest
Judgments on the Bodies of Men.

And that their other and better part is endangered is yet more evident, for
that the Soul be without Knowledge it is not good, says the Wise Man, Prove.
19.2. which is that usual way of speaking wherein more is intended and meant
than is expressed: Wherefore the sense of those words is this, that it is a
very evil and destructive thing to the Soul to be without Knowledge. For this
depraves the Soul, and is the cause of many sins; and if it be obstinate, is
the greatest Sin it self. This is well expressed by the Apostle in Ephesians. 4.18,
19. where he tells us, that the Gentiles walked in the vanity of their minds,
having their understanding darkened being alienated from the life of God by the
ignorance that is in them, because of the blindness of their hearts. Observe
it, darkness, ignorance, blindness, are attended with, and are the causes of
vanity of mind, and an alienation from the life of God. And if you peruse the
next words, you will take notice of other dismal Consequences, viz. Being past
feeling, and giving themselves over to lasciviousness, and working all
uncleanness with grediness, which manifestly proves this Particular which I am
now upon, namely, that Ignorance is destructive to the Soul, and also is a
Proof of what I said before, that Ignorance is the Root of all practical
Abomination.

. 7. We are ascertained that this is life eternal to know the only true God and
Jesus Christ, John 17.13. Where though the whole Christian Religion may be
included in the word knowing, yet seeing it is expressed to us by this term, it
is plainly intimated, that it cannot be without knowledge; nay, that it must
necessarily be attended with it, and that Life and Happiness depend upon it.
Which is manifest from this, that Knowledge qualifies us for the Vision of God,
and renders us like him, and fits us for the eternal enjoyment of him. Now, if
this Knowledge of God the Father and of his Son Christ Jesus be life, it
follows, that the wilful ignorance of them is death, that is, will end in the
destruction of the Soul. Which is implied in those words of the Apostle, 1 Timothy
2.4. God will have all men to be saved, and to come unto the knowledge of the
truth: Where we see both these are in Conjunction, Salvation and Knowledge: and
then by the plain Rule of Contraries it follows, that Damnation and Ignorance
are linked together. But behold this Doctrine asserted by St. Paul in more
direct and downright terms in 2 Thessalonians. 1.7, 8. where he positively affirms,
that the Lord Jesus shall be revealed from Heaven with his mighty Angels, in
flaming fire, taking Vengeance on them that know not God, and that obey not the
Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ; who shall be punished with everlasting
destruction from the presence of the Lord, and from the glory of his power.
Knowing not God, as well as not Obeying him, deserves (you see) eternal
Damnation, and shall be punished therewith. A most horrid and affrighting
Thunderclap into those who willingly persist in their Ignorance! This is a
fault that merits everlasting Burnings; and if you continue in it, it will most
certainly procure them. If you have not the knowledge of God now, you may
expect to hear those words from him hereafter, Depart from me, I know you not.
Persuade your selves of it as an undeniable Truth, that gross and wilful
Ignorance is a damning Sin.

. 8. I grant you may be ignorant of some things which have reference to
Religion without danger: Though you have no insight into several points of
Speculation and Controversy, yet you do not thereby hazard your Salvation. But
if you be destitute of the knowledgs of the great and necessary Articles of
Christian Faith, and if your Ignorance be voluntary, and you refuse to be
informed and instructed, then I may truly pronounce, that your case is
exceeding dangerous, Your Ignorance being of this quality, is inexcusable, and
in plain terms damnable. If the Apostle blames those who are always learning,
and yet never come to the knowledge of the truth; then surely those who refuse
to learn, and affect Ignorance, are much more to be blamed, and even condemned.
And thus I have presented you with several important Particulars, which give
you an account of the Evil and Mischief, of the hazard and peril of being
Ignorant of God and the things of Religion.

. 9. I hope what I have here delivered will make such an effectual impression
upon the Minds of those that read it, that they will for the future entertain a
very mean opinion of those who maintain it as an undeniable Proposition, that
Ignorance is a good Ingredient in Religion, and that the knowledge of the
Scriptures, and Divine Truths, is a perilous thing among the People. He that
would admit himself into their Society, and become their Proselite, must do it
upon the same condition that the Ammonites would have made a Covenant with the
Israelites, namely, that every Man should have his Right Eye thrust out, 1 Samuel
11.2. Nay, you must be content to lose both your Eyes, and to sit down in utter
Blindness and Ignorance if you imi^race the Roman Church for your Mother, for
of her I now speak: She will be sure to pursue her old Maxim, that Ignorance is
the Mother of Devotion. But, alas! what a Daughter must that be which has so
scandalous a Mother? One would think that such an Offspring should be of
little credit in any Church; but such is the dotage of this sort of people,
that they hug and caress this Brat, and would have others to do so too for the
sake of its blind Parent. Notwithstanding the Apostle directly forbids the use
of an unknown Tongue in the Congregation except it be interpreted, and shows,
that it is against the Laws of Edifying in the Church that any such thing
should be tolerated; nay, he intimates, that it is a wild and frenti^k
Devotion ( Will they not say you are mad? 1 Cor. 14 23.) yet these Men assert,
that it is not necessary the People should understand what they say when they
Pray: It is not required in the Roman Devotion, that they should know what they
supplicate God for; nor is it requisite to their Religion that they should read
the Bible. But you have not so learned Christ and Religion: You are convinced,
I question not, that your Understandings are to be interested and employed in
all the acts of Religion, in all the exercises of Piety and Devotion.

. 10. And being convinced of this, I beseech you strive to attain to that
Knowledge which I have been commending to you. You may observe, that the
purchase of Knowledge under what denomination soever, is a thing which is much
prized in the World, and it busies the minds of Men exceedingly. Arts and
Sciences are greedily sucked in by inquisite Minds, and thence every Age brings
new and fresh Discoveries. My Request to you at present is, that the Divine and
Spiritual Knowledge may be your Care also; nay, that it may be your chief Care
and Business. And indeed if you duly consider how this Knowledge surpasses all
that which is Secular and Humane, Excelling worth of Divine Knowledge.
you will think it an Employment worthy of you. This is called by St. Paul,
Spiriritual Understanding, (1 Col. 9.) to distinguish it from that other kind
of Knowledge and Science, and to acquaint you that it is from the Holy Spirit,
and that it is conversant about Spiritual and Divine things. This I conceive,
is the reason of that Epithet. Now it is an undoubted Truth, that the more
excellent the Object is, the more excellent is our Knowledge of it: On which
ground it will necessarily follow, that the knowledge of Spiritual and Divine
matters, such as belong to our eternal Salvation, far exceeds the most refined
Notions concerning other things. Thus you are invited and encouraged to enquire
into the great and necessary Points of your Religion, from the consideration of
the worth and excellency of them.

Besides, you may remember it is St Peter's Advice, or rather his Command, that
we be ready always to give an answer to every one that asks us a Reason of
the hope that is in us, 1 Pet. 3.15. That is, we are obliged to give an Account
of our Faith and Religion: And if this be our Duty, then Ignorance cannot be
excuseable; but we must enquire into the Principles and Foundations of our
Religion, and gain a sufficient Understanding of them. And assuredly, in these
times of Error and Delusion this becomes our Duty more especially: We must
endeavor to have right Notions of those great things, and the rather, because
mistakes and misapprehensions about them are too common in this Age. Yea, we
must endeavor to advance the Knowledge of God not only in ourselves, but in
others; for though we live in a Nation prosessing Christianity, yet I may
tender it to you as a great, but deplorable truth, that many thousands of Souls
in this Land have no more Knowledge of God than mere Heathens have; that is,
they have only a general Notion of a Deity, and of some kind of Religion, but
they are not able to give any particular account of either, and more especially
they are very ignorant of the main Principles of Christianity. Therefore we
must think it our concern to furnish ourselves and them with the necessary
Doctrines of our Religion, with a right knowledge of God, and his Son Jesus
Christ our Lord, and all the other Principles of true and saving Knowledge.

Having premised these things, I come now to what I chiefly designed as the
First Part of my General Task, viz. To show you particularly and distinctly
what that Knowledge of God is which is required of every Christian. I must let
you see what are the main Principles of Divine and Saving Knowledge, what are
those fundimental Doctrines which you must by no means be ignorant of, what are
the necessary Truths which you ought to know and believe in order to your
eternal Happiness. This I comprise ^n these Nine Particulars, 1. You must know,
and be fully persuaded, that there is a God. 2. That this God is but One and
hat there is no other God but him. 3. That as he is One in Essence, so he is
Three in Persons 4 You must know the several Attributes of God. 5 You are to
know that God created Man in a state of Innocence and Uprightness. 6. That Man
continued not in this first happy state, but fell from it by wilful
disobedience, and thereby made himself miserable. 7. You are to be fully
informed concerning the undertakings of the Son of God, in order to the
delivering of Man out of this miserable condition. 8. You must be acquainted
with the way of the Recovery of lost Man as it relates to what he is to do on
his part. 9. and lastly, You are to know what is the Will of God concerning the
Privileges or Punishments you may expect both here and hereafter. These are
the several Particulars which I will briefly explain, and thereby present you
with the sum and substance of all that a Christian is bound to know in order to
his Salvation.

CHAP. III.
The knowledge of God's Existence. From natural Impression, by Consciousness
and Reflection. From the visible Fabric of the World, which is proved to be
the result of Design and Intention. From the eminent acts of remarkable
Providence which are mentioned. Of the Unity of God, Proved from Natural
Reason. The vanity of Polytheism and Idolatry. Of the Blessed Trinity. The
Trinity proved from Scripture. The essential Properties, Names and Works of
Divinity attributed to the Three Persons. Of the Mystery of the Generation of
the Son, and Procession of the Holy Ghost. Of the Attributes of God. Of his
Wisdom. Of his Power. Of his Mercy, etc.

. 1. THE first Fundamental and necessary Principle of Knowledge is, that there
is a God. This is the foundation and groundwork of all: And the several ensuing
Particulars must be built on this bottom. The Author to the Hebrews makes this
the first and lowest step of our Knowledge and Belief, Heb. 11.6. He that
comes unto God (that is, in any way of Religious Worship) must believe that he
is. It is requisite that he lay his foundation in the Knowledge and Belief of a
God. And here indeed Natural, as well as Revealed Religion, directs us; for the
Pagan World arrived thus far, namely, to acknowledge a Supreme Being, who was
before all things, and is exalted above all, and is the Governor and Disposer
of all. They had some notice of a Being that was the Author of all other Beings
and is Infinite and Eternal, and void of all Imperfections whatsoever. This is
God, and the truth and reality of such a Being are proved from that general
Impress and universal Stamp of a Deity which are on Men's Minds. The Being of
God a Dictate of Nature.
All of us, as we we are Men and Rational Creatures, have this Notion naturally
implanted in our Understandings, that there is a Sovereign Being that made us,
and upholds us, and is continually showing kindness to us, and is in himself
infinitely good and perfect. We bring this Sentiment into the World with us,
and it is so fast riveted into our Minds, that we cannot shake it off and be
rid of it, though we would. Now, this being a persuasion fixed in all Mankind,
it follows, that it is a very Reasonable Dictate: And the voice of Nature here
is to be interpreted as the Voice of God. All agree unanimously in this
Acknowledgment, and there are no Dissenters in this Point, unless they be those
whose Brains are disturbed and shattered, or those who being addicted to their
Lusts and Vices, discourse against a Deity, because they would not have one to
punish them for their misdemeanors. Excepting these Men, the universal
suffrage of Mankind is, that there is a God.

. 2. Again the Knowledge of a God, that is, of his real Existence is proved not
only from the natural Instinct of every Man's Mind, but also from those
occasional Reflections which Men are wont to make upon themselves and their
Actions. How frequently do their Consciences tell them that they have done
amiss? And they pronounce themselves guilty, and fear and dread possess their
Minds. Now I pray tell me whence does this proceed? Why are they afraid, and
find a disorder in themselves? Is it not because they have offended some Being
or Person who knows what they have done, and who will call them to an
Account, and will punish them for their miscarriages? Proved from conscience of
guilt.
Who is this but God? It is their consciousness of his taking notice of their
faults that discomposeth them: And we read that the greatest Tyrants and most
domineering Persecutors, who have defied and out-braved all Mankind, yet were
not able to stifle their Fears which they had in their Breasts of a God. The
apprehension of this has made them quake and tremble, and amidst all their
Pleasures and Luxuries, they could by no means divert the torments of their own
Consciences. These cried aloud to them that there was a God, a God who would
severely animadvert upon their wicked Actions. Thus there are inward Evidences
from Men's Souls and Consciences, which are undeniable proofs of a Godhead.

. 3. But besides these inward proofs, there are these likewise which are
outward and visible. Open your Eyes, look abroad, and you cannot but behold a
God in the Frame and Fabric of the World, From the visible Frame of things.
in the upper and lower Rooms of this great House, and in all the Guests and
Inhabitants of it. View and consider these distinctly, and you will confess
them to be no less than a demonstration of a Deity. The existence of a Creator
appears unto us by his Creatures. We may know the great Artificer of the World
by the Works of his Hands, and that as certainly as we can gather from the
sight of a complete and exact Watch, that the Spring and the Wheels, and all
the other parts of it, and the whole orderly motion of it, are not by chance,
but are the product of some skilful Workman and Artist: Nay, we may gather this
more certainly; for if such a piece of Workmanship as a Watch, which must be
wound up at a certain time, or else its Motion will fail, and the fineness and
exactness of all its parts will signify nothing, (I say) this Workmanship be
not thought by any sober Man to be casual, or to be from its self, then much
less can we imagine the Fabric of the World to be of that nature, when we see
that after some thousands of years it needs no winding up, no renewing,
repairing, or recruiting, but continues entire and perfect, as at first, and is
moved and acted in the same way, course and method that it ever was. This shows
its Almighty Author, and All wise Maker, so that we have reason to establish
our selves in the belief of a God from the consideration of the Maker of the
World, and all things in it. His eternal Power and Godhead are clearly seen and
understood by the things that are made, Romans 1. 20. And more particularly and
signally the Heavens declare the glory of God, and the Firmament shows his
handy work, Psalm. 19.1. And his glorious Power, Majesty, Wisdom and Goodness,
are beheld every where in the Works which we see in the World. Wheresoever you
look, he is before your Eyes, he may be taken notice of in every Creature.
Therefore we may, if we please, be so favorable in our Censures as to imagine,
that that excellent Natural Philosopher, who in the beginning of his Natural
History asserts the World to be God, meant no more than this, that God is to be
discovered in all the parts of this wonderful composure of the World, and
particularly in the Frame of our Bodies. Thus God is not far from every one of
us, and in him (...) live, and move, and have our being. The Works of the
Creation alone are an undeniable proof of a Deity. You must needs acknowledge a
God when you take a survey of the Heavens and of the Earth, and of the
excellent Furniture belonging to them, especially if you survey your selves,
and consider the make both of your Souls and Bodies, the excellent Workmanship
whereof is a pregnant confutation of Atheism. It is utterly impossible that
these things should make themselves, and that they should subsist in that
wonderful manner in which they appear, without a Divine Contriver and Author.

4. And here, to render this Argument yet stronger and more forcible, we are to
observe and remember, that all the Works we contemplate in the World show
Design and Intention in the making of them, and therefore are not the Works of
Chance, but the result of an infinite Wisdom. Behold the greater World, the
whole Structure of the Heavenly and Earthly Bodies; and look into the lesser
World, your selves, and you will find, that there is an excellent Harmony and
Connection of all things, you will perceive that one thing was made and fitted
for another, and that there are certain Ends and Purposes to which they tend,
and for which they were contrived. So that from the contemplation of the Works
that are before us, we cannot but infer an All-wise Architect and Disposer.

. 5. There are several other Arguments to prove the Divinity, as the many
Revelations God has made of himself to the Patriarchs and holy Men in the Old
Testament, and to the Apostles and others in the New: the foretelling of future
Events many hundreds of Years before they came to pass: The strange and
wonderful Preservation of the Church in all Ages: The remarkable Punishing of
notorious Offenders, so that the Lord is known by the Judgments which he
executes, Psalm. 9.16. And lastly, the singular Rewarding and Blessing of some
religious and pious Men; which are so evident and convincing, that a Man shall
say, Verily, there, is a reward for the righteous: Verily, there is a God that
judges in the Earth, Psalm. 58.11.

Wherefore let us firmly embrace this leading Principle, which is the Source
and Root of all the rest, and the very prop and support of Religion; for he
that acknowledges not that there is a God, cannot worship or obey him. Let us
be well grounded in this first and fundamental Point concerning the Being of
God: Let us have a solid and rightly settled persuasion of it, founded on those
clear and convictive Arguments before alleged.

. 6. II. As we are to know there is a God, so we must know that he is but One,
and that there is no other God but He. This Principle must be settled in us in
contradistinction to the plurality of Gods which the Pagans vainly imagined. We
must acquaint our selves, that it is a very gross and absurd thing to conceive,
The Unity of God.
that there are more Gods than One. This delusion is frequently struck at in
the Sacred Law given by Moses, and the opposite Truth is there very often
inculcated. This is the First thing which is presented to us in that Body of
Precepts, which we call the Ten Commandments, Thou shall have no other God but
me. This is urged as a necessary Principle of Knowledge, Deuteronomy. 4.35. That thou
might know that the Lord he is God, and there is none else besides him.
Again, in the 39th Verse of the the same Chapter, this is commended as a
Principle which ought to be known and considered. Know therefore this day, and
consider it in thy heart, that the Lord he is God in Heaven above, and in the
Earth beneath, there is none else. So likewise in Deuteronomy. 6.4. Hear, O Israel;
the Lord our God is one Lord. The same is pressed by the Apostle in 1 Cor. 8.4,
5, 6. And you may observe, that it is mentioned in that place also as a
Principle of Knowledge: We know that an Idol is nothing in the World, (that is,
though it be counted something, nay a very Deity, by the ignorant and
idolatrous Gentiles, yet it is no such thing really): We know this, says the
Apostle, and we know that there is no other God but one: For though there be
that are called Gods (as there be Gods many and Lords many) yet to us there is
but one God. Answerable to which is that which the same Apostle says in Ephesians.
4.5. There is one Lord: And Verse the 6th, There is one God and Father of all,
who is above all, and through all, and in you all; which is an excellent
description and portraiture of that One True God.

. 7. The Philosophers and sober Men among the Gentiles, when they had a mind to
speak seriously, and to be understood so, asserted that there was but One God:
And truly they might arrive to this by the very light of Nature; for the very
Notion of a God, that is, of an infinitely and transcendently Good, Wise, and
powerful Being, includes this in it, that there cannot be more Gods than one.
For what is Infinitely Perfect can be but One, because that which is most
perfect exceeds and surpasses all others, and consequently there cannot be any
other of that transcendent Nature: It is impossible there should be any more
than One of that Rank. Besides, the Divine Power and Majesty being Supreme,
cannot, on that very account, be divided. It might be proved also, and that
undeniably, that the First Cause, and such is God, can be but One. The natural
reasoning of Men will conduct them to the belief of this Proposition, that
there can be but One First, without any laborious proving of it.

. 8. I might add here also, that the knowledge of this Principle is necessary
in order to the fixing and rectifying of our Devotion. For the knowledge of one
God is the foundation of all our Addresses to him, it is the true Basis of our
Service and Worship: For these Exercises of Religion arise from the excellency
and transcendency of that One Being above all others. Hence we appropriate
Divine Adoration to Him, because He, being of Infinite Perfection, and being
but One, commands our entire Worship, and none else can.

. 9. And I might observe, that this One or Only God is called the True God,
John 17.3. The true God.
where it is required that we know him under that Notion, that we acknowledge
him to be the True God as he is distinguished from the False and Feigned Gods
of the Heathens A God has been always confessed in the World, but, alas! there
has been a huge mistake and error about it: For those Nations who owned a God
in general had not the happiness to own the True God, but being strangely
deluded and perverted, they set up Gods of their own making. What they fancied
to be a God, was presently reputed and taken to be such. The vilest and meanest
Creatures, the worst of Beings have been made Gods by the Pagan Devotion and
Superstition. We are told that the Egyptians Deified Dogs and Cats, and they
could stoop to Worship Leeks and Onions. Their very Gardens furnished them with
Deities. Other Nations worshipped things which had not so much as a vegetative
Life, Stocks and Stones were made up into Gods by those vain and blind Bigots.
The Gentile Devotionists would by all means have a God, let him be what he
would. They cared not what a kind of Deity they embraced, so they had one. But
it is not enough to acknowledge a God, that is, something that is taken for a
God; but you must assert and believe the Only True God, that Infinite Being who
gave existence to all things, that Eternal Spirit who made the World out of
nothing, that Divine Substance which is of Infinite Perfection, which is the
chiefest Good, and in the enjoyment of which our Happiness consists. This is
the Only True God: And you see how requisite this Principle of Knowledge is. I
pass to the next, which is this.

. 10. III. It is not sufficient to have a general Notion of a Deity, but it is
necessary that our Knowledge of God be more particular and distinct, and that
we believe and acknowledge this Truth, that though there be but one God, yet
there are Three Persons in the Godhead, Of the Trinity
and that though these three Persons are really distinguished from one another,
yet they are equal in Substance Glory and Power, and in all Divine Perfections
and Excellencies. The Holy Scriptures of the Old and New Testament assure us of
this; but more especially this is the discovery of the New Testament. Here we
are taught, that in the Divine Nature or Essence there are Three Persons
subsisting, the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, and that every one of
these is God, and yet they are but one God. Thus we read the Sacrament of
Baptism is commanded to be celebrated in the name of the Father, and of the
Son, and of the Holy Ghost, Mat. 28.19. which joining of the Three Persons
together in that solemn act of Divine Worship shows that these three are the
same God: for no Man of sober thoughts can think that Baptism, being a sacred
Ordinance, should be administered in any Name but that of God. And seeing the
Father is acknowledged to be God, we cannot but own the Son and Holy Ghost to
be so too, because they are joined with the Father in this holy Institution and
Worship. Another clear and ^ull Text is that of St. John in his 1st Epistle,
5th Chapter, and 7th Verse, There are three that bear record in Heaven, the
Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost, and these three are one. That is, one in
Nature and Essence. This is an impregnable Text, and was particularly mentioned
and referred to by some of the ancientest Writers of the Christian Church, for
the proof of the Holy Trinity.

. 11. And moreover, the Scripture not only makes mention of Three to whom the
Godhead distinctly belongs, but it gives the Name of God, and attributes the
Properties of the Deity to Christ and to the Holy Spirit, as well as to the
Father. Thus Christ is expressly called God, 1 John 1. Rom 9.5. Phil. 2.6. 1 Timothy 3 16. 1 John 5. 20. and in other places. And the Holy Ghost is called God.
Acts ^.3, 4. And those three incommunicable Attributes of God, viz. his
Omnipotence, his Omniscience, and his Eternity are ascribed to these two Divine
Persons. Thus concerning Christ, it is said that he is the Almighty, Rev. 1.8.
He knows all things, John 21.17. He was before the World was, John 17.5.
Which is an Expression in Scripture to set forth Eternity. The same essential
Attributes of the Deity are ascribed to the Holy Ghost in Scripture: He is
called the Eternal Spirit, Heb. 9.4 He searches and knows all things, 1 Cor.
2.10.11. And his Infinite Power is manifest from the Miracles which we read of
in the Gospel, which were actions that far surpassed all natural strength, and
were the immediate effects of the Holy Spirit: Which is the reason why the
denying of these miraculous Acts to be done by the extraordinary power of this
Divine Person, is called the the Blasphemy against the Holy Ghost, Mat. 12.31.
The sum then is this, that we find in the New Testament that there are Three
who are spoken of as God, and to whom the Name and the Divine Nature, and the
essential Properties of God are attributed, and t^ence we certainly infer that
every one of these three is God. And more particularly as to Christ and the
Holy Ghost, we have as much reason and evidence to believe that they are God,
as we have to believe that the Father is God. And because the same infallible
Scripture assures us that there is but one God; we gather this likewise that
these Three are One; and we not only gather it, but it is expressed in plain
terms. And if they are One, they are all equally God, and he that separates the
Son and the Holy Ghost from the Godhead, does in a manner also abolish the
Divinity of God the Father, as St. John bears witness in his 1 Epistle, Chap.
2. ver. 3. Whosoever, says he, denies the Son (and with him the Holy Ghost)
has not the Father; that is, he denies him to be God.

. 12. As for the particular and exact knowledge of the Generation of the Son,
The Generation of the Son and procession of the Holy Ghost remain Mysteries.
and of the Holy Ghost's Proceeding from the Father and Him, we are not to
trouble our Heads about them. The manner how God's infinite and glorious
Essence is communicated to the other Persons in the Trinity, is wholly above
our apprehensions, and is to be admired and adored by us rather than searched
into and comprehended; for this is a Mystery, and therefore we must not
immodestly pry into it. And what I say concerning the Trinity, is to be
applied to all the great and profound Mysteries of the Christian Religion, as
our Saviors Incarnation, the Resurrection of our Bodies, and some other
Doctrines which are of so abstruse a nature, and accompanied with such
Difficulties, that we cannot expect to have a complete understanding of them.
You must not dive into these Secrets, which were designed to be covered and
kept close. You ought to believe these Mysteries because they are revealed to
you from Heaven, but you must never think to apprehend the manner of them. It
is not requisite that you should answer all the subtle Questions that may be
started about those Doctrines. If you once give way to nice Queries, they will
multiply without end, and you must act the part of wrangling Sophisters rather
than sober and humble Christians. Let me desire you then to forbear Disputes
and strife of words, to leave Speculation and Controversy to the Schools.
Believe the Truth, although you cannot answer all vain Cavils that are made
against it. Assert, maintain and defend the Principles of Christianity, though
you be not arrived, to a complete and adequate knowledge of them. There are
some heights in Divinity which the most exalted Heads can never reach. Nay,
there are some things hid and darkened on purpose that you may not search into
them. I beseech you forbear curious Enquiries here, amuse not your selves with
the contemplation of those things which surpass the model of your
Understandings: be not wiser than God would have you to be.

And as to the Trinity, which is the Subject I am now insisting upon, this only
is required of us to be known and heartily believed, that the transcendent and
Infinite Nature of God contains in it three distinct Persons or Subsistencies,
viz. the Father, Son and Holy Ghost. This is the third Principle of your
Knowledge concerning God: and it is proper and peculiar to Christianity, for
neither Jews, nor Turks, nor Gentiles, nor any other profession of Men
whatsoever besides the Christians acknowledge this Doctrine. You are obliged
therefore more especially to own this as an undoubted Truth, and such as is
confirmed and established by the word of God. You are concerned to defend this
Article, because the main points of the New Testament, and of our Christianity
depend upon it. For our Redemption, and the whole work of our Recovery are
founded on the undertaking of the Three Persons in the glorious Trinity: The
several parts of our Salvation are accomplished by the peculiar concurrence and
different operations of these distinct Persons, as is evident from the New
Testament. Therefore unless we know that God is one in Essence, and three in
Persons, we cannot have a true and right apprehension concerning our Redemption
and Salvation.

. 13. IV. The Attributes of God cannot be divided and separated from the Divine
Essence, The Attributes of God.
and therefore in the next place the knowledge of them is necessary. The first
essential Attribute of God is his Wisdom, whereby he contrives all things for
the best ends and Purposes, Wisdom.
which is grounded on his foreseeing all the events and successes of things.
All things are naked and open to his eyes, Heb. 4.3. The weak and shallow
understandings of Men will not permit them to pierce very far into Objects, and
therefore it is no wonder to see them puzzled and non-plus'd: But he who
created all things, and gave them their Beings and Natures, cannot but have a
full and perfect insight into them, and be intimately acquainted with all their
Effects and Productions. He knows all things past, present, and to come, all
things whether secret or open, all the thoughts and intentions as well as
actions of every Creature. His eyes are in every place, beholding the evil and
the good, Prove. 15 3. And this All-wise God governs the World in a most exact
and accurate manner; there is no error or staw in his Administration, every
thing is managed and conducted with the greatest prudence, although our dark
and distracted Minds do not always perceive it. By this unerring Wisdom he so
orders and disposes all things, that he makes every thing beautiful in its
time, Eccl. 3.11. and directs them to such Ends as are most conducible to his
Glory: And therefore he is justly styled the only wise God, Rom, 16.27.

. 14, Secondly, the infinite Power of God, which is another of his transcendent
Attributes, The Power of God.
is to be known by all that profess Christianity. By this it is that he does
whatsoever he pleases both in Heaven and Earth, Psalm. 135.6. and actually
accomplishes whatsoever he has in his Wisdom determined to be. By this he
brings to pass those strange and wonderful things which we see in the World and
which exceed the utmost Power of Angels and Men: And by this he defeats and
confounds the Enemies of his Church when they are most proud and insolent. By
this Attribute we are encouraged to call upon God in the day of trouble and
distress, and to expect help and deliverance, because he being of Infinite
Power is able to relieve us in our greatest Streights, and to rescue us in our
greatest Dangers. This Attribute administers comfort to us in all our
Temptations, for we are assured that Satan and all the Infernal Powers are at
the beck and command of this Sovereign Lord of Heaven and Earth. He can
overruled and control them when he pleases, he can effectually tread Satan
under our Feet, and he will do it if we trust in him, and discharge our Duty
faithfully. The mighty God is our support in all our Difficulties: His Power
being unlimited (as most certainly it is because it is Infinite) we need not
fear what Men and Devils can do unto us. By his Almighty Arm he first created
the World out of nothing, and ever since has continued it in its Being,
upholding all things by the word of his power, Heb. 1.3. And by the same power
he can, if he thinks good, reduce all things into their first nothing. In
short, there is not any thing whatsoever can prove difficult or impossible to
an Omnipotent Being, and such is the God whom we serve.

. 15. Thirdly, we are to have right apprehensions of the Justice of God: Of
Justice.
Which is that Attribute whereby he shows himself Righteous in all his ways,
Psalm. 145.17 and whereby in a more special manner he severely and impartially
animadverts on wilful and obstinate Sinners, and suffers not vice and
wickedness to go unpunished. For although he is pleased to let some great
Offenders persist in their gross Impieties, and not cut them off in the Career
of their Sins, yet this is no argument of Impunity: For who knows what Lashes
and Torments they feel in their Breasts? Who can tell the exquisite pains and
anguishes which are in the Consciences of these Men? But suppose they
experience no inward regrets and remorse, no black and dismal reflections in
their Minds, yet if we will have so much patience as to stay till the last Act
of the Divine Tragedy wherein these persons are concerned, we shall find no
cause to impeach God of Injustice: For as the end of the righteous man is
peace, so the close of wicked men does oftentimes prove troublesome,
distressed, and calamitous, though they had some Comic mixtures at their first
entering on the Stage, and acting some time upon it. But say that the Wicked go
off with applause, and nothiag direful and fatal befalls them, yet shall we
question and doubt of God's Justice, because we behold things to be after this
manner? There is no reason we should do so, if we consider that there is
another World after this, there is a future state of Being, and in that these
sinful Wretches shall certainly receive the recompense of their repeated
exorbitancies and impieties, of their wilful obstinacy and impenitency. Is not
God Just because he does not remarkably punish all sins in this life? Yea,
rather say that he will be very severe, because he delays their punishment, and
will certainly double it at last.

. 16. The fourth Attribute of God is his Mercy: For as he is just in punishing
Offenders in due time, Of Mercy.
so he shows himself merciful in p^ssing by offenses, and not taking advantage
against the Guilty. This was the illustrious Name and Title which he was
pleased to be proclaimed and known by, The Lord God merciful and gracious, long
suffering and abundant in goodness, keeping mercy for thousands, for giving
iniquity, transgressions and sins, Exodus 34.6, 7. And every Moment of our lives
attests the realty of this Divine Goodness and Benignity. O how frequent are
the Instances of Gods compassion and clemency of his favor and indulgence! He
who might deservedly pour down the Vials of his Wrath upon our Heads, he who
might utterly destroy us as soon as we offend, yet is pleased to let us
experience his patience and long-suffering, and vouchsafes to bear with our
Follies, and by his forbearance designs to win us to repentance and amendment
of life. O how often does the great lover of Mankind extend kindness to poor
Creatures, when they have nothing but their Misery to commend them to him! The
Lord is good to all, says the Psalmist, Psalm. 145 9. There is an universal
Compassion in him, whereby he showers down Favors and Blessings on the whole
World: There are signal Examples of the Divine Goodness every where. But
especially his mercy is great toward them that fear him, as the same holy Man
has observed, Psalm. 103.11. There is a favor showed to them which is not
common and ordinary, a love which is singular and peculiar. This is that which
distinguishes them here from the rest of the World, and Heaven hereafter will
make a greater distinction.

. 17. Besides these Attributes of God already named, viz, His Wisdom, Power,
Justice, and Mercy, there are others which we are to have a knowledge of, as
his Immensity, or Omnipresence, Of the other Attributes of God.
whereby he is every where, and fills Heaven and Earth, Jer. 23.24. His
Eternity, whereby he existeth without beginning or end, from everlasting to
everlasting he is God, Psalm. 90.2. His Veracity and Faithfulness, whereby we
are assured, that whatever he has said and revealed in his Word is certainly
and infallibly True, so that we may rest our Souls on those sacred Truths. And
as for his Promises, we are certain of the performance of them, for he is (as
he is called) the Faithful God, Deuteronomy. 7.9. and will keep his Word inviolably.
Gods Holiness is a large and extensive Attribute, and takes in some of those
Divine Excellencies already named, and comprehends all that unspotted Purity
and Rectitude of the Divine Will which is inseparable from his Nature, and
whence he is called the Holy One, Isa. 5.16.

. 18. Likewise, unto God's Attributes may be referred his Providence, Providence.
which extends it self to all Conditions and 'States of Men, to all Kingdoms,
Nations, Churches, Persons, Societies, Actions, Events, Times and Seasons: Yea,
it reaches even to the most despicable Creatures, to the meanest Beings; for a
Sparrow falls not to the Ground without it, and the Hairs of our Heads are
numbered by it, Matthew. 10.29, 30. Wherefore it is necessary that we have a
knowledge of this universal Divine Influence.

Lastly, We must not be Strangers to God's Unchangableness, whereby he
continues always the same, Immutability.
and is subject to no Alteration. With him is no variableness, neither shadow
of change, Jam. 1.17. These are the several Attributes of the Supreme Being,
and we cannot without great Damage to our Souls be ignorant of them, because
our worshipping and serving of God aright depend upon the knowledge of them.

CHAP. IV.
Of Creation, Of the first Covenant; the Breach of it, and thereby Man's Fall.
The manner of Adam's Fall. Its miserable and sinful Effects. Of Original Sin.
Its derivation to Posterity Of the Second Covenant, or our Recovery by Christ
the Seed of the Woman. Of his Incarnation. The method of Salvation by Christ as
our Surety. He must be God and Man. Accomplishing the Work of Redemption a
proof of his Divinity. Salvation of pure Grace. Of the absolute necessity of
the Knowledge of Christ as Mediator. This offered to the serious Consideration
of Socinians and Arians. A review of the Threefold State of Man.

sect;. 1. V. ANother Principle of Divine Knowledge is this, That God created
this World and all Things in it in an excellent manner, Of Creation.
and that particularly he made Man in a State of Innocence and Righteousness,
capable to serve him both with the Faculties of his Mind, and the Members and
Organs of his Body. This first State of Man is thus briefly but fully
represented in Genesis 1.27. God created Man in his own Image; that is, as the
wise Man expound it (in Eccl. 7.29) God made Man upright: Or, as St. Paul
explains it, (in Ephesians. 4.24.) After God (or according to the Likeness of God) in
Righteousness and true Holiness. He was not only created without Spot and Sin,
but was likewise endued with an inward and real Purity, a natural and primitive
Goodness: And he had a power given him of standing and continuing in this State
of Uprightness. And he being at that time free from Sin, was free also from all
Misery, from all outward Evils and Calamities, and from all Distempers of Body
and Soul. He lived a most happy Life in the Enjoyment of God and of his
Creatures. And all the future Rice of Adam are reputed to have been in this
original State of Innocence and Purity, because they were all in the Loins of
Adam, who was their Head and Representative. And besides, there was a Covenant
between God and Man in the State of Innocence, The first Covenant.
which reached to the whole Race and Posterity of Adam, which appears from that
Transaction which we read of in the beginning of Genesis between God and Man,
and from that positive Law which God gave to our first Parents, namely, Not to
eat of the Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil; and from the penalty which is
annexed to the breach of that Law, In the Day that thou eatest thereof, thou
shall surely die, Genesis 2.17. which shows that their Posterity was included in
the Covenant or Engagement, for else they would not have incurred the
Punishment, that is, they would not have been liable to Death. This mutual
Covenant or Agreement between God and Man is referred to in Hos. 6.7. and if
our first Parents had kept their part of it, they had been happy, and so their
Posterity have been; for they were reputed to be included in them, and to have
enjoyed what they enjoyed. Which is plain from what the Apostle says, Romans 5
9. (and which I shall have occasion to qu^^e under the next Head) By one Man
sin entered into the World, and death by sin: For if by Adam's wilful
Transgression his Posterity became sinful and miserable, then in him they were
at first Righteous and Happy. Thus it is necessary, in order to the right
apprehending what is the present State and Condition of Mankind, to know that
they were all once in a good and happy Plight.

. 2. VI. The next thing you are to acquaint your selves with is, That man
continued not in his primitive Condition of Happiness, The Fall of Man.
but soon fell from God, and became miserable. This is represented to us in
that passage of the Royal Psalmist, Psalm 49.12, and last Verse; Adam (for that
is the word in the Original, the proper Name of the first Man, and so this
place refers more peculiarly to our first Parent) this Adam (as well as his
Posterity) being in honor abides not, understands not, but is like the
Beasts that perish. His innocent and Happy State is comprehended in those
words, being in honor; and his guilty miserable Condition is doubly expressed,
first, by mentioning his Sin and Apostasy, he understood not, he abode not;
secondly, his Punishment, or the due Effect of his Fall, he became like the
Beasts that perish. Now this Misery befell Man in Paradise, by his listening to
the Temptations of Satan, and by yielding to his Suggestions: For you must be
reminded of this, that God had created Angels as well as Man; very great
numbers of those glorious Spirits were placed in Heaven by the Bounty of God;
The manner of it.
but even there they Revolted and Rebelled against their Maker; and thereupon
they were thrown down from those lofty Regions into this World below, as you
read in the 6th Verse of St. Jude; The Angels kept not their first Estate, but
left their own Habitation. These Angels being thrust down from Heaven, turned
Devils, and being inspired with Envy, Hatred and Malice, designed to do all the
Mischief they could upon Earth. God having created Man here a Blessed
Inhabitant in Paradise, they forthwith contrived his Ruin and Destruction. The
Chief and Head of them (as we may reasonably suppose) undertook this cursed
Task, and disguising himself in the Shape and Form of a Serpent, set upon our
Grandmother Eve first, as being thought more flexible and weak, and readier to
comply with his Suggestions: He prevailed with her to eat of the forbidden
Fruit, and she soon after acted the Serpents part, and tempted her Husband to
do the same, and so they both transgressed the Divine Commandment, and fell
from their original Righteousness and Purity by their wilful Disobedience, and
became guilty Persons.

. 3 Our first Parents thus falling, drew all Mankind with them into the same
Sin and Guilt, and made them subject to the like Calamities that they had
involved themselves in. Ever since that fatal Fall the whole Race of Adam has
been miserable. Their understandings are darkened and obscured, their Wills are
perverted and distorted, their Affections are misled and seduced, and all the
Faculties of their Souls, and Members of their Bodies are become Instruments of
Unrighteousness. They take delight in Sin and Wickedness; they are easily
infected with the Pollutions of the World; they are soon misguided by the Evil
Spirit, the first Author of our Misery: They are weak and infirm, apt to attend
to evil Counsel, inclinable to all Evil, and averse to all Good: They
unworthily prefer their Bodies before their Souls; they prize Time above
Eternity, and value Earth above Heaven: They have an higher esteem for
momentary and trifling Pleasures, than the endless Joys and Satisfactions of
Glory at God's right Hand. Thus they are wretched and miserable; The miserable
Effects of the Fall.
and the more so, because they wilfully shut their Eyes, and blind their
Understandings, and are perverse and obstinate. They sit on the very brink of
the bottomless Pit, and yet they Sing, and think themselves as secure as if
they were at the farthest distance from it. They Glory in their Shame, and
whilst they are posting to eternal Torments, they presume on the Mercy of
Heaven. Thus this excellent Creature, who was made after the Image of God, and
was a lively Transcript of his Maker, is now basely degenerated, and sunk below
his Species, and (as the Psalmist says) become like the Beasts that perish.
This is the forlorn Condition, this is the original Depravity and Misery of
Mankind by Nature.

. 4. Of the Truth and Certainty of which you may assure your selves from the
infallible Testimony of God's Word. By one Man (says the Apostle) sin entered
into the World, and death by sin: and so death passed upon all Men, for that
all have sinned, Romans 5.12. And if at your leisure you peruse the following
Verses, you will find that there is scarcely one of them (and there are about
eight in all) to the end of the Chapter, wherein the sense of this 12th Verse
is not again expressed. It seems it is so great and important a Truth, that the
Apostle thought fit to repeat and inculcate it in almost half a score Verses
together. Therefore this must be a main Principle of our Religion, and such as
we ought to know in order to our Salvation. From the whole Series of the
Apostle's words in that place, it is clear, that we are all Criminals even by
Birth, we inherit Death and Sin from the first Man. His Corruption becomes
ours, not only by imitation and example (as some would persuade us) but by
Propagation. Which is yet further asserted and confirmed by the same inspired
Apostle, when he says, We all were by Nature the Children of Wrath, as well as
others, Ephesians. 2.3. We all, that is, Jews (for the Apostle speaks of himself and
his Countrymen) as well as others, namely Gentiles, and particularly the
Ephesians to whom he writes, we all, Jews and Gentiles (which comprehends the
whole Race of Mankind) are by Nature, that is, by our Birth and descent
Children of Wrath, liable to God's Wrath and Displeasure, obnoxious to
Punishment both here and hereafter. For Adam fell, and we in him, Of Original
Sin.
and his Sin is become ours. He represented all Mankind, so that what he did,
he did it not only for himself, but in our stead. He was our Head and our
Surety; he acted in our place, and on our behalf, and thence it is that his
F^ult is entailed upon us.

Besides, there was (as I said before) a Covenant made with Adam, not only for
himself, but all his Posterity; wherefore on that account Adam falling, all Men
fell with him; as on the other hand, if he had remained in his primitive
Integrity, we all had shared with him in the Blessings that accrued by it. If
then this latter part of the Covenant made with Man was just and equal (as we
acknowledge it to be) we have reason also to assert that the former was so too.
Wherefore you must remember to urge upon your Minds, as a necessary Principle
of Knowledge, that upon Adam and Eve's Apostasy from God and their Duty, we who
are there Offspring are become Guilty. There is a Pollution derived from them
with our Nature, and together with that a liableness to the everlasting Wrath
of God, as the punishment thereof. You see this is plainly and expressly
delivered in the Scripture of Truth; and therefore attend not to the Cavils of
perverse Men, who study to annul this Fundamental Point of our Faith.

. 5. VII. Being convinced that Man's Nature is infected and poisoned, let us
think our selves concerned to know what is the Antidote, what is the Remedy of
this Malady and Disease, what is the Method of our Recovery. And here we are to
take notice, that as God in infinite Wisdom chose a way to save Man when he was
lost, so he was pleased to discover this way to Adam immediately after his
Fall, in those first Gospel-tidings, Genesis 3.15. The Seed of the Woman shall
break the Serpent's head. In which words is contained the Second or New
Covenant, which is so called in contradistinction to the First, or Old
Covenant, commonly styled the Covenant of Works, made with man in the state of
Innocence, but this New Covenant was made in the Lapsed state of Man, and is
justly called the Covenant of Grace, because the tenor of it was that Men
should be recovered, and restored to the Favor and Grace of God, not by virtue
of any works of their own, but by the Meritorious Undertakings of Christ,
whereby He was to make Satisfaction to God for their breach of the Divine Law,
and to rescue them from Hell and Eternal Damnation, and to purchase Salvation
and Everlasting Happiness for them. And their Duty is contained in this
Covenant (it being the nature of a Covenant to include in it the Terms relating
to both Parties) namely, that they believe in this Gracious savior and
Redeemer, and obey his Laws: which they are not able to do of themselves, and
therefore it is part of this New Covenant that they shall have strength given
them by the Holy Spirit to believe and obey. This is a brief account of the
Second Covenant made by God with the Elect through the Messiah, who is called
the Seed of the Woman in the forecited Text. The Work of Redemption.
The Reason is because he was born of a Woman in a signal and unusual manner,
as being not the Offspring of Man, as all others are. And after this there were
several Types, Prophesies and Promises concerning this Blessed Seed; and at
length God the Father in the fullness of Time sent his only Begotten Son, the
eternal Word; and this Word was made Flesh, took our Nature on him, and was
born of a Virgin. Great is this Mystery of Godliness, Incarnation of Christ.
God manifested in the Flesh, Divinity assuming Humane Nature, the second
Person in the Glorious Trinity made Man. He was the happy Author of our
Deliverance and Recovery. Be very desirous then (as it is your Interest) to be
acquainted with this way of Man's being delivered from his miserable Condition.
St. Paul briefly comprizes it is those few words, in Romans 5.15. If through the
Offense of one many be dead, much more the Grace of God, and the gift by Grace,
which is by one Man, Jesus Christ, has abounded unto many. And if you read
what follows, you will find that this Happy State or Condition of Man, no less
than the Miserable one before treated of, is repeated and explained to the very
end of the Chapter. The Judgment was by one to Condemnation, but the Free Gift
is of many Offenses unto Justification. If by one Man's Offense Death reigned
by one, much more they which receive abundance of Grace shall reign in Life by
one, Jesus Christ. As by the offense of one Judgment came upon all to
Condemnation, even so by the Righteousness of one, the Free Gift came upon all
Men unto Justification of Life. And the final Close is, As sin has reigned
unto death, even so Grace reigns through Righteousness unto eternal Life, by
Jesus Christ our Lord.

I rehearse this to you, to convince you of the Necessity of this Principle of
Knowledge. If it were not a matter of vast Importance, and such as you must by
no means be ignorant of, you cannot imagine the Apostle would urge and repeat
it so often. I have not met with any Particular in the whole Bible that is
mentioned over and over again in so many Verses together. Now, it is certain
that the Apostle is not here guilty of vain and useless Repetitions, but it is
the Excellency and Necessity of the Matter which caused him to inculcate it in
so many words of the same Sense and Import. Wherefore you cannot sufficiently
weigh and ruminate upon so worthy a Doctrine, you can never deservedly prize so
precious a Truth, namely, that as by the first Adam Sin and Death entered into
the World, so by Christ Jesus, the second Adam, Life and Happiness are procured
for us, and conveyed to us. When our first Parents, and we in them, had
deserved everlasting Misery, and utter rejection from God's Favor and good
Will, he then vouchsafed to think thoughts of Mercy toward us, and laid help
upon one that is mighty to save us, and that to the uttermost. He opened a
Fountain of Life through the Blood of his only begotten Son, and prevented our
eternal Death and Damnation: which is thus expressed by our Blessed Savior,
God so loved the World, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever
believes in him should not perish, but have everlasting Life, John 3.16.

Here it is to be observed that three Great Dignities or Offices are conferred
upon Christ for the saving of his People. He is a Priest, to interc^de for
them, and to Expiate for their Sins, and to that end to offer up himself a
Sacrifice* He is a Prophet, to teach and instruct them in the ways of
righteousness: which Moses foretold many ages before, A Prophet shall the Lord
your God raise up unto your brethren, like unto me: him shall ye hear in all
things. He is a King, to rule and protect his Subjects: which also was foretold
by the Prophet Jeremiah, 23. Chap 5, 6. v. Behold the days come, says the
Lord, that I will raise unto David a righteous branch, and a King shall reign
and prosper. In his days shall Judah be saved: his name is the Lord our
Righteousness. There the Angel assured the Blessed Virgin, Luke 1.32, 33. The
Lord God shall give unto him the throne of his father David, and he shall reign
over the house of Jacob forever, and of his Kingdom there shall be no end: he
shall always execute his Regal Office for the good and welfare of his Church,
his Elect and Peculiar people, whom he came to recover and redeem.

. 6. But more particularly you are to acquaint your selves with the singular
Method of this Recovery. To explain which to you, you must know that Man having
sinned, God's Mercy inclined him to pardon him, and to receive him into Favor;
but God's Justice required that Sin should not go unpunished, but that the
Majesty and Force of the Laws should be kept up. But how was it possible that
Man should be pardoned, and yet at the same time Sin be sufficiently
animadverted upon? To accomplish this, God appointed a Surety who should suffer
in Man's stead; Christ our Surety.
and this Surety, this Sponsor was to be a Man, that he might suffer, and that
Sin might be punished in the same nature in which it was committed. But then he
was not to be a sinful Man, that is, one involved in the same Guilt with
others: for he that is himself Guilty cannot satisfy for others: And thence we
read that the Surety whom we are speaking of was conceived by the Holy Ghost,
Mat. 1.20. that he might be pure and sinless as to his Humane Nature. But
suppose him void of Sin and Guilt, yet if he were a mere Man, he could not be
able to save us, for it is above the strength of a Creature to redeem lost
Sinners; wherefore it was requisite that this Surety should be God as well as
Man: And accordingly it was ordained and appointed by the Sacred Trinity that
one of that number, viz. the Second Person, The Surety must be God and Man.
should undertake and accomplish the Recovery and Restoration of lost Mankind,
and that in order to that he should take upon him our Humane Nature.

. 7. This is that which was foretold by the Evangelical Prophet, Isa. 7.14.
Behold, a Virgin shall conceive, and bear a Son, and shall call his name
Emanuel. The Virgin's conceiving and bearing him speak his Humanity; and his
name Emanuel, God with us plainly tells his Divinity. And St. John expresses it
thus, The Word was made Flesh, John 1.14. that is, the eternal Son of God, the
Second Person in the Trinity, assumed our Nature, and united it to the Divine,
and so was both God and Man, and therefore fit to be a Mediator between God and
Man, and to reconcile both. This is the great and amazing Mystery of the
Gospel, the Union of the Godhead and Manhood, in order to the Redemption of
lost Man; for Christ, as he was Man, suffered for us; as he was God, satisfied;
as he was both God and Man, accomplished our Redemption. And after this
gracious Redeemer had actually become a Sacrifice for us, and made himself an
offering for sin by his meritorious Death, he declared himself to be the Son of
God with power, by his Resurrection from the Dead, Romans 1.4. He thereby gave
undeniable proof of his Divinity, and made it evident to the World that he had
accomplished the Work of our Salvation, and was accepted of God the Father. Of
which we have a farther assurance, by his visible, and glorious Ascending into
Heaven, and there sitting at the Right Hand of the Father, Christ's Exaliation.
to make Intercession for us, presenting himself and his Sufferings before his
Father, and offering our Prayers and Supplications to him, and applying the
Benefits of his Passion. Thus is the work of our happy Recovery wrought by the
undertaking so Christ Jesus, the eternal Son of God.

. 8. And we are to know further, that this Redemption, and the whole
Transaction of it, are from the free Bounty and Mercy of God: For he was not
obliged to restore us to our primitive State of Happiness after we had fallen
from it; he was not bound to enter into a new Covenant with us, after we had
broken the first by harkning to the Suggestions of the evil Spirit, and had
thereby lost our Innocence, and were become Enemies and Rebels against God. We
could not have accused him of Injustice, if he had left us miserable for ever.
Whence it follows, that we must ascribe our Recovery to the Divine Compassion
and Goodness only. To us a Son is given; that is the Style of the Prophet;
Salvation of pure Grace.
and accordingly our Savior calls himself the Gift of God, John 4 10. It is
the free and undeserved Donation of Heaven to Mankind, that this Jesus, this
Redeemer was sent into the World. This is said to be according to the good
pleasure of his Will, to the praise of the Glory of his Grace, his free Grace
and Mercy, Ephesians. 1.5. And what can be plainer than the same Apostle's words
Chap. 2d, Verse 8th? By Grace ye are saved, and that not of your selves: This
(as well as Faith which he here mentions) is the Gift of God. It was from the
Divine Bounty alone that a Savior appeared; and all the happy Effects and
Consequences of it are from his good Will and Favor. We must needs pronounce
this Redemption to be free, because we had to hand in it, we were utterly
incapable of doing any thing toward our Relief. It was without the least
consideration of any thing in us that favor was showed to us, because after
our Fall nothing remained in us that was lovely and desirable, nothing
Praiseworthy and Excellent. Then it was that our merciful and gracious Creator
was pleased to pity our forlorn State, and freely to send his Son to accomplish
his designs of Love to us. Here is the only Foundation of all our Happiness,
this is the source of all our Comfort; and therefore let us thankfully admire
and adore this free and gratuitous Dispensation of the Almighty. Let us
attribute it wholly to the Favor and Indulgence of God, that we are in a
capacity of being saved: Let it be ascribed to the pure good Will and Pity of
Heaven, that any of the lapsest Race of Adam, even as many as are given unto
Christ by his Father, are restored to their lost Happiness. The Angels fell,
but irrecoverably: there was no Salvation for those Apostate Spirits: but God
has not dealt so with Man, he has not left him under an impossibility of
Recovery. Here the Riches of Grace, and the unmeasurable Depths of Mercy are
discovered. O happy Souls, that lose themselves in the Contemplation of this
Unspeakable Goodness, of this infinite Bounty!

. 9. Moreover, you are to know, that there is no other way of Salvation than
this, which is offered to us by Christ Jesus in the Gospel. He is the only
Savior. Jews, Mahometans and Pagans are all out of the way, and whilst they
continue such by their wilful opposing or neglecting of Christianity, are
incapable of the Mercy offered in the Gospel for St. Peter assures us, that
there is no Salvation in any other but Christ, and that there is no other name
under Heaven given among Men whereby we must be saved, Acts 4.12. And we are
told by another Apostle, that God is in Christ (and him alone) reconciling the
World unto himself, 2 Cor. 5.19. This Blessed Atonement and Reconciliation are
wrought by Him alone: He it is that Skreens us from the Divine Wrath, having
made Satisfaction to the Justice of Heaven: By him we are restored to the
Favor of God, as the Apostle instructs us, Ephesians. 1.6 We are accepted in the
Beloved. This is a grand fundamental Point of Knowledge, and unless we be
acquainted with this, we know nothing of our Religion, we are utter Strangers
to Christianity: And therefore I have insisted the longer upon this main
Principle. Nor have I yet finished it, because I would endeavor yet further to
convince you of the absolute Necessity of the Knowledge of Jesus Christ, as he
is a distinct Person from the Father, and as he undertook to be the Redeemer
and Savior of lost Men. To this end let me commend that remarkable Text to
your perusal in Ephesians. 2.12, The Knowledge of Christ as Mediator the only saving
Knowledge.
13. Remember (says he) that at that time (that is, when they were Ignorant
Gentiles, and had no Knowledge of Christ Jesus) ye were without Christ being
Aliens from the Commonwealth of Israel, and Strangers to the Covenants of
Promise, having no hope, and without God in the World: But now in Christ Jesus
ye who sometimes were far off* are made nigh by the blood of Christ, for he is
our Peace etc. I pray observe it, that the Apostle lets the Ephesians know that
as long as they were without Christ, they were without God in the World. Those
that have the Knowledge of a God, a Supreme and Infinite Being (and the most
improved Heathens know as much) and yet are destitute of the Knowledge of
Christ the Son of God, the only Mediator and Redeemer, they are reputed to be
without God very Atheists, and void of Religion. God without Christ is no God
to them. The Knowledge of God the Father without the Knowledge of Jesus is
rec^o^'d as Atheism. He that is ignorant of Christ, is as if he knew not a
Deity. So lamentable and deplorable is the Condition of obstinate Jews, wilful
and h^dne^ Turks, of blind and pervers^ Pagans, ve^v^n of some who go under the
name of Christians I mean pro^ Arians and Socinians, w^ thou (...) they
acknowledge a Christ, v^ deny his Divinity, and consequently his Sati^faction
for us. And the whole Work of the Redemption which was wrought by him. I wish
they would consider that peremptory decision of St. John, 1 Epist. chapter 2. ver.
23 which I had occasion to mention before, He that denies the Son, has not
the Father: Whilst they deny Christ's Divinity, they do in vain assert a Deity.
You see then how greatly you are concerned to know and own this fundamental
Point of the Christian Religion: All your Knowledge of God the Father devoid of
the Knowledge of Christ is of no value.

Nay, let me tell you, you cannot attain to a right Knowledge of the former,
but through the latter. To this purpose I offer those words of the Blessed St.
Paul to your Meditations, 2 Cor. 4.6. God who commanded the light to shine out
of darkness, has shined in our Hearts, to give the light of the Knowledge of
the Glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ: As if the Apostle had said, God
is a bright and glorious Sun, whom we cannot look upon directly, the Rays and
Beams of his Majesty being so transcendently Illustrious. That we may therefore
behold this Divine Glory, and not be struck blind with it, whilst we are gazing
on it, it is necessary that we take a view of it, not as it is in it self
abstractly, but as it represents it self to us in the Face of Jesus Christ.
There we may behold God in the best and safest manner. That we may know him
aright, we must look on Christ who is the express Image of his Person, and in
whom he is well pleased. You have it from our Savior's own blessed Mouth, John
14.6, 7. No Man comes to the Father but by me. If ye had known me, ye should
have known my Father also. Be sollicitous then above all things to know God the
Father in and through Jesus Christ his Son; for by him we have the knowledge of
the way of our Recovery out of our sinful and miserable Condition, because it
is for his sake alone that God vouchsafes to show mercy unto Mankind, who had
once been happy, but fell from that State.

10. And thus I have acquainted you with the Threefold State of Man. He was
spotless and innocent by his Creation: He was corrupted by Satan's Temptations,
and so apostatized: But he is restored and renewed by the wonderful Grace and
Mercy of God in Christ Jesus. Or thus, Man was created at first according to
God's Image, in Righteousness and Holiness, and consequently was in a state of
Happiness; but he wilfully transgressed God's Command, and thereby lost his
first Purity and Innocence: Thence came Sin into the World, and Death by Sin.
But notwithstanding this, God at first promised, and afterward actually sent
his Son to deliver Man out of this miserable Condition, and to Redeem him from
Death and the Curse, and to confer upon him eternal Life and Happiness. And
accordingly the Son of God, taking upon him humane Nature, recovered him from
the state of Guilt and Misery, and restored him to Life and Blessedness. It is
of absolute necessity, that you inform your selves very distinctly concerning
these three States, for otherwise you remain ignorant of the grand matters
which are requisite to be known in order to your eternal Salvation. Therefore I
dwelt the longer upon this, that you might have a thorough apprehension of this
so necessary a Principle of Religion, which every Christian Man ought to
furnish himself with.

CHAP. V.
The necessity of a Change in us in order to Salvation. Of Regeneration, Faith
and Repentance, with all the other Graces of God's Spirit. What are the ways
ordained wherein alone we can reach eternal Life. Considering them as
Conditions, or Qualifications, or Helps, or Instruments, or grateful Returns
for the Gift of eternal Life. Religious Exercises and Duty have the necessity
of a Precept. It Is therefore dangerous Presumption to neglect'em, under
pretense of extraordinary Communications. Our Graces and Duty, though so
necessary, are not to be mistaken for our Justifying Righteousness. Nor to be
supposed the result of our own Power and Ability.

. 1. VIII. YOU must have yet a more particular knowledge of the way of Recovery
of lost Man, as it relates to the Alteration which is to be made in us, and as
it has respect to those things which we are to do. You must know this, that in
order to Salvation and Happiness it is necessary you be changed in your Minds
and in your whole Man: For (as you have been taught already) you were all born
in a state of Nature, that is, you were corrupted and depraved both in your
Souls and Bodies. Now, you cannot pass from this State unto that of Grace but
by Regeneration. You must be born again: Of Regeneration.
A new Nature must be planted in you. Are they not the plain and express words
of Christ, who best knew the Terms of Salvation? Except a Man be born Again, he
cannot see the Kingdom of God, Joh. 3.3. He can neither arrive to the Kingdom
of Grace here, nor of Glory hereafter. This Regeneration or new Birth is then
wrought in us, when the Graces of the Holy Spirit are inwardly planted and
rooted in our Hearts, and when they bring forth Fruit in our outward
Conversations. For this is certain, that the internal habit of Grace and
Holiness will show it self in good Works, in all visible and apparent acts of
Sobriety, Righteousness and Godliness. We must persuade our selves then of the
indispensable necessity of having our Minds and Consciences, our Hearts and
Lives adorned with all spiritual Endowments, for otherwise we have no marks and
signs of our being born again, and we have no hopes of seeing the Kingdom of
God.

. 2. And this must needs be so, because these Graces and Virtues are express
Conditions, on our part, (as has been said before) of the new Covenant. And by
Conditions I mean no more than this, The necessity of such a Change, in order
to the benefits of the new Covenant.
that they are such necessary Requisites that without them none shall be
partakers of the benefits and privileges of the Covenant. Thus Believing is
made a condition of being saved, Mark 16.16. and (which is the same) it is a
condition or not perishing, but having everlasting life, John 3.16, 36.
Confessing with the mouth the Lord Jesus, and believing in the heart that God
raised him from the dead, is a condition of being saved, Romans 10.9. Confession
of sin (that is such as is accompanied with true Repentance) is a condition of
forgiveness of sins, and being cleansed from all unrighteousness, 1 John 1.9.
Holiness is a conditional forerunner of seeing the Lord Heb. 12.14 Such a
Righteousness as exceeds the Righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees is
propounded as a condition of entering into the Kingdom of Heaven Mat. 5.20. And
in the beginning of the same Chapter, poverty of Spirit, purity of heart,
meekness, mercifulness, are made conditions of Blessedness. And Repentance is
exhorted unto as a conditional assurance of our sins being blotted out; that
is, forgiven, Acts 3.19. And in sundry other places Pardon is offered, and
Heaven is proposed on the terms or doing what is commanded us. For though
Christ's Righteousness be the only meritorious Cause of our Pardon, and of our
Salvation and Happiness, yet our Faith and Repentance, and other Graces, are
the previous conditions of them on our part. And we are not to wonder at this,
because it is a Divine Appointment and Constitution; for it appears from the
Holy Writ, that it was agreed from all Eternity between the Father and the Son,
that Man should not be saved but in a way of Duty, and that in order to this
his Sins should not be remitted but on condition of Repentance; and
consequently, though the Gospel be a dispensation of Grace, yet it promises
Pardon to none that persist in their Rebellion. And this is the tenor of the
new Covenant which is made with Man, namely, that he shall perform the
Conditions which are required on his part; and therefore if he neglects this,
he cannot expect to have the benefit of the Covenant.

Or if you dislike the word Conditions, call those Graces and Duties
Qualifications, because in their own nature they fir us for Heaven and
Happiness, and the fruition of God. He that is the Author of all Grace does
hereby make us meet to be partakers of the Inheritance of the Saints in light,
Col. 1.12. for these spiritual Endowments are the new Man, and the new Creature
which the Apostle speaks of; and they are the divine Life in Man, and therefore
are necessarily required to prepare and qualify him for communion with God,
and enjoyment of him.

. 3. These Graces have likewise the nature of Means, The Graces of the Spirit,
in order to eternal Life, have the same necessity as of Means to the End.
and on that account are of absolute necessity, for the Means are in order to
an End, and the end cannot be obtained without them. So we find in Scripture
that there is a necessity of being Born again, of being religious and holy, and
of obeying God's commands in order to the obtaining of eternal Happiness, which
is the End we aim at. Or, these divine Endowments may be called Instruments and
Helps of our Salvation, because they further and advance it in that way which
is peculiar to them, and which is of God's own appointment: and particularly
some of them may be said to be Instruments of applying to us the Salvation
wrought by Christ. Or lastly, these Acts of Holiness and Obedience in the Lives
of the Faithful may be called Thankful Acknowledgments of God's Mercy to them
in Christ Jesus, they are ingenuous Retributions for the matchless kindness
showed to them in their Redemption. And certainly it is most highly reasonable
that such grateful Returns should be made by those that participate of the Life
of God, and feel that new Principle in their hearts which is a powerful Spring
of all that is good and holy.

. 4. Thus under what consideration soever you look upon the Graces of the
Gospel, it appears that we lie under a necessary obligation of adorning our
Lives with them. We must be daily examining the Truth and Sincerity of them,
and we must strive to increase and improve them. According to St. Peter's
advice (2 Epist. chap. 1. ver. 5.) we are to add unto our faith virtue, and to
virtue knowledge (that is, experience of the ways of goodness and piety) and to
knowledge temperance, and to temperance patience, and to patience godliness,
and to godliness brotherly kindness, and to brotherly kindness charity, and the
whole retinue of Divine Graces, which I shall particularly describe to you
afterward, when I come to the second general part of my Discourse. We must
shun all the Occasions of Sin, and embrace all the Opportunities of doing good,
and abound in all Virtues, and grow in every Grace, and persevere in all
Holiness and Godliness to the end of our Lives. This we must do, or else we can
never have the Benefit of Christ's Redemption; all his Undertakings will avail
nothing without this. For as it was Gods's Will and Appointment that Christ
should suffer and make atonement for Sin so this is the will of God, even our
sanctification, 1 Thessalonians. 4.3. And we are sure that the great end and design of
Christ's coming was to restore us to our primitive Holiness and Purity, and to
renew the spiritual Life in us. Therefore let us not be ignorant of this great
Truth, but act according to it, and commend Religion to the World by an
exemplary Conversation, that others seeing our good works, may glorify our
Father which is in Heaven.

. 5. And besides these Graces and Virtues which are to shine in our Lives,
there are certain Duties and Exercises of Religion that are required of us. For
though all Graces are our Duty, yet all the Duties and Performances in
Christianity are not to be termed Graces or Virtues, but they are rather to be
called Means of Grace and Helps to Salvation. The Duties of Religion made
necessary by Command.
Such are holy Meditation, devout and ardent Prayer, a diligent reading the
Scriptures, attending on the Word preached, a pious celebrating of both the
Sacraments, and the like Religious Exercises which are enjoined us by our
Savior and his Apostles, of which I shall distinctly discourse when I come to
the Practical Part of this Treatise, for that is the proper place for them to
be insisted upon: but now I only offer those things to you as matter of your
Knowledge. You are by no means to be strangers to this great Truth, that the
Word and Sacraments, and the lest of the Institutions and Ordinances of divine
Appointment are to be made use of by us as means and helps in order to Grace
and Holiness. We are to know, that as we cannot arrive at Happiness, unless we
be furnished with inward Graces, so neither can we attain that end, unless we
conscientiously perform those outward Exercises of Religion which the Gospel
requires of us. The want of this Knowledge has caused great Mistakes, and
gross Disorders among those that have made the greatest Pretenses to Religion.
There are a sort of Men who think to go to Heaven a new way; they are above
Ordinances, as they are pleased to boast; they despise the outward Service and
Worship of God as a mean thing; every day is a Sabbath with them, and every
Meal is a Sacrament; and the teaching of the Spirit excludes all Preaching and
Hearing. They talk of exalting Christ, whilst they are throwing down all
Christian Duties; they are for setting up Christ by pulling down his
Ordinances, by disparaging of those Means which were of his own ordaining.

But we are to know that God is a God of order, 1 Cor. 14.33.40. and what he
thinks best for us, is really so; therefore we are not to prescribe Laws to
him, but to rest in what he has determined. Whosoever are saved, are saved in
God's way and method, and consequently we are obliged to make use of all the
means which he has appointed for the enlightening and converting of Sinners,
and for establishing them in Religion. The Divine Right of a standing Ministry.
There is a standing perpetual Ministry in the Church of Christ; for, as he
gave at first Apostles, and Prophets, and Evangelists, who were extraordinary
Ministers, so likewise he has gi- Pastors and Teachers, for the orninary and
constant Work of the Ministry, and for the edifying of the Body of Christ, Ephesians.
4.11, 12. There is a particular and distinct Order of Men, set apart to take
care of Men's Soul's, there are peculiar Persons ordained to the Public Offices
of Praying, of Teaching, of Administering the Sacraments, of exercising
Discipline and there are Rules and Injunctions given for the right
Administration of these. Wherefore to vilify these, is to vilify the Holy
Scriptures, yea, to despise God himself, because it is a despising of that
which the wise God has ordered and approved of. He promises no where to make
void the Ministry of the Church, and to teach us from Heaven immediately without
the use of this, for this would be destroying what he had set up himself; for
we read that our blessed Savior gave Commission to his Disciples to Teach and
Baptize, (which includes all the other Ordinances of Christ) and promised to be
with them always unto the end of the World, Matthew. 28.20. which shows that this
Promise is made also to their Successors in the Ministry; for the Apostles
themselves were not to be always, or unto the end of the World: Therefore this
must be meant of all the Faithful Ministers of Christ, in all the successive
Ages of the World. He will be with them, to direct, assist and encourage them
in their Office, and will bless their Endeavors. And if God will be with them,
certainly Men ought not to be against them, It cannot be allowable in any Man to
despise and neglect their Ministry.

(...) Further, we are assured that Grace, and Strength, and Comfort are
derived to us by hearing of God's Word, by Reading, by Praying, by holy
Conference and Communion, and by the rest of the Exercises and Duties which God
has commanded. They are Channels in which those good things are conveyed to
us, they are Means and Methods which the Divine Wisdom has instituted for the
transmitting of those Spiritual Benefits to us; and they are in themselves and
in their own nature serviceable to the great end of Salvation. Therefore in the
conscientious use of them we may expect that God will bestow Grace upon us; and
that when we are employed about them according to his Will, we shall never fail
of a Blessing; of which the whole Volume of God's Word is one continued Proof
and Assurance. If we then tender the Salvation of our Souls, we must make it
appear in pursuing the Means prescribed in order to it: If we sincerely desire
that Happiness which Christ has purchased, we must be sure to take the Way
that leads to it.

. 7. And I will add, that these things before mentioned are more than Means,
for they are actual Exertments of Virtue, and are real Exercises of Religion,
and Parts of Holiness. External Duties are to flow from Grace within us, and
are to be Signs and Evidences of it to our selves and others. Prayer, and
celebrating the Sacraments, and hearing the Word, and the like performances are
not only Instruments of Religion, but Branches of it: They not only dispose the
Soul to Holiness, but are a portion of it. We must look upon them under this
notion, if we will understand the nature of them aright: And this will be a
powerful ^^^itation and encouragement to the undertaking and performing of
those Evangelical Duties, and being very frequent and fervent in them.

. 8. But now concerning these Graces and these Religious Exercises which I have
been speaking of, we must entertain these two Principles of Knowledge, First,
Our Graces and Duties are not our Justifying Righteousness.
That though we are to be careful to act our Graces and to discharge our
Duties, yet this must not be so understood, as if we were to be saved for
either, as if we merited God's Favor by our Virtues or good Works. For though
it is true, that by the tenor of the First Covenant, viz. the Covenant of
Works, Man was to enter into Heaven by the merit of his Obedience, yet now
since that Covenant is broken, and thereupon laid aside, there is no entering
that way. Our own Works are not able to entitle us to Life and Happiness; it is
by another's Righteousness and Merits that we must obtain the Favor of God,
namely, by the meritorious Undertakings of Christ Jesus our Mediator. According
to the terms of the Covenant of Grace, our own Righteousness will not avail us,
as to the purchasing a Right to eternal Salvation. This is done only by our
Lord's Undertakings for us: These are the only Source and Fountain of the Mercy
we partake of, both here and hereafter. It is not for the sake of our Doings,
nor on the account of our Graces, that God is reconciled to us, but for the
sake of his only begotten Son, in whom he is well pleased. We are saved, not
because we are good and holy, but because Christ has effectually died for us,
and because God for his sake accepts of us. Therefore when we have done our
utmost, we must own our selves to be unprofitable Servants, (as we are taught
to speaki^ Luk 17.10.) we must acknowledge the weakness and sinfulness which
accompany our best Actions, and we must wholly rely on the Mercy of God, and
the Righteousness of the Blessed Jesus. Though we are to be endued with an
inherent and personal Righteousness, because that renders us new Creatures; yet
the Righteousness for the sake of which we are pardoned, and justified, and
entitled to Happiness, is the Righteousness of Christ imputed to us.

. 9. The other Principle of Knowledge belonging to this General Head which I am
now upon, is this, that though the Graces and Duties I have been speaking of
are ours, because they are exerted by us, yet none of them are the product of
our own power and strength. For we can do nothing acceptably in Religion
without divine Assistance, we can do no spiritual good without the Grace of
God. We are not sufficient of our selves (says the Apostle) to think any thing
as of our selves, but our sufficiency is of God, 2. Cor. 3.5. And if we are not
sufficient of our selves to think any good thing, surely it must be granted
that we are not sufficient to will any thing that is good. Whilst a Man is
Unregenerate and in a state of Nature, He has a Free Will only to Sin, but
has no Will toward that which is Holy and Divine, but on the contrary is
Averse to it: which proceeds from that Inability which he contracted by Adam's
fall. But the Apostle tells us who is the Author both of our Willing and Doing
any spiritual Good. It is God, says he, that works in us to will and to do
of his good pleasure, Phil. 2.13 As there must be a Divine Illumination to
instruct us in the Truths of the Gospel, Nor the product of our own Power.
so there must be a supernatural Power to enable us to perform the Evangelical
Duties. Faith and Repentance, and all other Graces are the gift of God, and the
vouchsafement of the Holy Spirit, and not the result of our own ability and
strength. We understand but little, and are very short sighted in Religion, if
we be not convinced of this. And we are to know this further, that our Graces,
our Duties and all our Religious Performances are Acceptable unto God on this
very account which I have now mentioned, namely because they are the Fruits of
the Holy Spirit, the Blessed Sanctifier. They are not only accepted for the
sake of the unspotted Righteousness of Jesus (as was said before) but because
they proceed from the Holy Ghost, the Author of all spiritual Life and
Goodness. He gives worth and value to the Actions and Duties of Believers; so
that as they come from him, they are valuable and precious in the sight of God
the Father, because he delights in whatever flows from that Sacred Fountain.

. 10. And if he thus accepts of our Services, let us be encouraged to perform
them; let us carefully do what is prescribed us; let us be obedient to the
Dictates of the Holy Spirit in all things. The great God and lover of Souls
will not fail to do his part; let it be our care to discharge ours with
diligence and faithfulness: Let us not wilfully harden our hearts, and resist
the offers of Grace, and neglect the means of Salvation, and undervalue the
Blood of Jesus. Let us not stand out against the invitations of our merciful
Redeemer, against the promises of eternal Life, and against the Love and
Compassion of a crucified Savior: In a word, let us not by our own fault shut
our selves out from Happiness, and voluntarily Damn our selves. Thus I have let
you know what is required on our part, in order to obtaining the Fruits of
Christ's Undertaking, and of arriving to endless Bliss.

CHAP. VI.
The Privileges of true Christians, beginning in Election to Grace and Glory;
are continued in many temporal Blessings of this Life, but more especially in
spiritual and heavenly Things, Sanctification, Adoption, Pardon of Sin,
Justification, Peace of Conscience. The Spirits witness. Assurance of Hope and
Faith. Perseverance. The Blessings of the Christian in the World to come. Of
the Resurrection. The Misery of unbelieving Sinners in this Life, and that
which is to come. Of Hells Punishment. Of the Compass of saving Knowledge.

. 1. IX THE last Principle of Knowledge is this, to know what are the vast
Privileges, Blessings and Rewards which belong to those that are true
Christians, and what are the Miseries, Curses, and Punishments that attend the
Wicked. The former Rank of Persons were from Eternity peculiarly favored above
all others, for their names were written in the Book of Life, from the
foundation of the World, Rev. 17.8. or before the foundation of the World, as
it is expressed in other places, John 17.24. Ephesians. 1.4. 1 Pet. 1.20. We read
that they were predestined unto the adoption of children by Jesus Christ,
according to the good pleasure of his will (his Eternal Will and Decree) 1 Ephesians.
5. and according to his good pleasure which he purposed in himself, v. 9. and
again v. 11. according to the purpose of him who works all things after the
counsel of his own will. We read that they were ordained to eternal Life, Of
Election.
Acts 13.48. and chosen to Salvation, 2 Thessalonians. 2.13. And this Election had
respect to the Means, as well as to the End, that is, they were predestined
to Grace as well as to Glory, to Holiness as well as to Happiness; for their
Calling or Conversion is said to be according to God's purpose, Romans 8.28. and
he has chosen them that they should be holy and without blame, Ephesians. 1.4. Thus
they were in a peculiar manner dignified from Eternity.

. 2. But I shall confine my self to the Consideration of the Blessings and
Privileges which Believers and holy Men partake of in this present Life, and in
that which is to come. First, in this present State their Advantages are very
great, and these are of a double nature; some of them have respect to their
outward Condition, and the things of this World; others have regard to their
inward Man, and the things that are spiritual and Divine. As to the former, our
Savior has assured us, that those who seek first the Kingdom of God and his
Righteousness, shall have all these things added to them, Mat. 6.33. If above
and before all other things we look after those that are spiritual and
heavenly, we shall not be denied the temporal and earthly Blessings which our
gracious Father sees necessary or convenient for us. If we carefully follow his
Dirctions, The Privileges of a Christian in this Life.
and obey his Will, and strive to please him in all things, he will certainly
take care of us and our Concerns, and he will not suffer either Men or Devils
to harm us. He will cover us with his feathers, and under his wings shall we
trust: We shall not be afraid for the terror by night, nor for the arrow that
flies by day, nor for the pestilence that walks in darkness, nor for the
destruction that wastes at noon day. There shall no evil befall us, neither
shall any plague come nigh our dwelling: For he shall give his Angels charge
over us, to keep us in all our ways. They shall bear us up in their hands, lest
we dash our Feet against a stone, Psalm. 91. 4, 5, etc. And not only the
Psalmist but the Apostle lets us know that the Angels are spiritual Ministers
to assist and defend us, and to do us good Offices; They are ministering Spirits
sent forth to minister for them who shall be Heirs of Salvation, Heb. 1.14.
Nay, if we fear and love God and conscientiously mind our Duty, an Universal
Blessing shall attend us, for whatsoever we do shall prosper, Psalm. 1.3. All
Events and Occurrences, yea even the most afflicting ones shall tend to our
real advantage and benefit, according to that of St. Paul, We know that all
things work together for good to them that love God, to them who are the called
according to his purpose, Romans 8.28. It is observable that he propounds it as a
point of Christian Knowledge, We know, says he, that it is thus, and all that
profess Christianity should take up this as a certain Principle.

. 3. The Spiritual Blessings of a Christian in this Life
Then as to the other sort of things, viz. those that are spiritual and divine,
the Advantages and Blessings of the Servants and Friends of God are yet much
higher; witness their Regeneration or Conversion, or effectual Calling, for
these are but terms for the same thing, Sanctification.
only with some different respect We must know then that Sanctification is not
only a Duty (as I considered it before) but our Privilege and Honor: As
Holiness is exerted by us, it is the former; but as it is wrought in us by God,
it is the latter; it is a mighty Blessing and Favor, and conferred only on a
few. Adoption.
Adoption is another inestimable Privilege, for it is the admitting us into
God's Family, and making us his Children. To this purpose God sent his Son,
viz. that we might receive the Adoption of Sons, Gal. 4.4. And accordingly he
has bestowed it upon all those that receive him, and believe in him, John
1.12. To them he gave power (that is, Right and Privilege) to become the Sons
of God, not only to be adopted into his Household, but to be taken into the
number of his Children, to be entirely loved, maintained and provided for, and
to have a Title to the Inheritance. And this is accompanied with another
Privilege; for the Apostle tells us, that by virtue of receiving the Spirit of
Adoption, they are enabled to cry Abba, Father, Romans 8.15. that is, they are
encouraged to make their Addresses unto God, as to a reconciled and loving
Father. They have by Jesus Christ an access unto the Father, Ephesians. 2.18. yea,
in him they have boldness and access with Confidence, Ephesians. 3.12. And then it
is no wonder that all their Prayers are heard and graciously answered. This
Honor have all his Saints.

. 4. Forgiveness of Sins is the next thing I shall mention, Forgiveness of Sin.
and it is the absolving us from the guilt of Sin, and remitting the Punishment
due to it. Through Christ alone we share in this matchless Benefit, In him we
have the forgiveness of our Sins, according to the Riches of his Grace, Ephesians.
1.7. To this end the Father exalted him, viz. to give forgiveness of Sins,
Justification.
Acts 5.31. To which is to be adjoined Justification, as an higher degree of
it, for hereby we have not only our Sins pardoned, but our Persons accounted
Righteous, namely, for the sake of Christ's Righteousness reckoned as ours. We
are justified freely by God's Grace through the Redemption that is in Jesus
Christ, Romans 3 24 Hereupon follow Peace and Reconciliation with the offended
Majesty of Heaven: Peace with God, and Peace of Conscience.
Being justified by Faith, we have Peace with God through our Lord Jesus
Christ, Romans 5.1. The Curse of the Law, the Misgivings of our Consciences, and
the Accusations of Satan, are silenced and removed by the Merits and
Satisfaction of Jesus our Redeemer, for by him all that believe are justified
from all things, from which they could not be justified by Law, or by any other
means, Acts 13.39. And here may be reckoned the Witnessing and Sealing of the
Spirit, Romans 8 16 Ephesians. 1.13. which are followed with Confidence toward God, 1
John 3 21. full assurance of Hope, Heb. 6.11. and full assurance of Faith, Heb.
10 22. All these are the Privileges and Dignities of the Gospel which every
holy Man has the experience of in this Life.

. 5. In the next place are to be considered the Blessings and Recompenses which
all holy M^n shall partake of in the other Life. The Blessings of the other
Life.
For that there are Benefits and Rewards belonging to that future State, as
well as to this present one, is clear from the express words of that Infallible
Author who has told us, that Godliness has the promise of the Life that now
is, and of that which is to come, 1 Timothy 4 8. I have already proved the former,
now it remains that I make good the latter, that is, that I show what Promises,
and consequently what Advantages and Blessing are entailed up on the next Life.
First, in order to the future Rewards of all Pious Souls there shall be a
Resurrection of their Bodies, Resurrection to Life.
which is largely and ^ully proved by the Apostle in the 15th Chapter of the
1st Epistle to the Corinthians. After this Resurrection shall immediately
follow the Last Judgment, which is designed chiefly for the clearing and
justifying of the Righteous; and therefore it is compared to a Shepherds
dividing his Sheep from the Goats, and setting the one on his right hand, and
the other on his left, Matthew. 25.33. to let us know that there shall be an
apparent distinction at that day between the good and the bad, and that the
former shall in a special and signal manner be owned by God; for then their
Names, their Credit, their Profession, their Cause, and their particular
Innocence shall be vindicated and asserted in the face of the whole World, and
after an impartial Trial they shall be fully quitted, discharged, and absolved,
and thereupon recompensed for whatever they have done or suffered in the
discharge of their Duty, and of a good Conscience. For as soon as the Judgment
is past, the Servants of the most High shall be taken up into the Mansions of
Glory, and there shall for ever be with the Lord, in whose presence is fullness
of Joy, and at whose right hand are Pleasures for evermore.

. 6. This place and this state of eternal Happiness are known and called by the
Name of Heaven, Matthew. 6.20. Col. 1.5. Heb. 10.34. Heaven.
because this Earth and lower World are not the Seat of Happiness, but those
Regions above are designed and prepared for that purpose. Accordingly our
Savior comforts his disciples by telling them that great is their reward in
heaven, Mat. 5.12: and the Apostle assures all the Godly that they have a house
Eternal in the heavens, 2 Cor 5.1. This is called Paradise, Luke 23.43, and the
third heaven, 2 Cor. 12.2. and the New Jerusalem, 21 Rev. 2. There is endless
rest and peace, satisfaction and pleasure, and freedom from all sorrows and
pain; and there is the perpetual enjoyment of all that is good, excellent and
desirable. There is that far more exceeding and eternal weight of Glory, which
will counterpoise all the heaviest pressures of this Life. But the Glories of
that place are rather to be admired by us, than thought to be comprehended. If
I could tell you how great they are, they would not be the Joys of Heaven, that
is, immense and infinite. But we are sure that there are such Mansions of
never-fading Glory and Happiness in those Heavenly Regions, because the holy
Scriptures, which were endited by the Spirit, expressly assert it, and because
our Blessed Savior, who was our Head and Representative, is ascended thither.
Let us then be fully persuaded of this Truth, that all faithful Souls, after
they have left this World, shall inherit eternal Life and Happiness in another,
and receive the glorious Recompenses of their Faith and Obedience. This is
worthy to be believed, and we cannot indeed but firmly assent to it, when we
call to mind what the Apostle says, That God is a Rewarder of all them that
diligently seek him, Heb. ^1.6. The former Clause of which Verse was the First
Principle of Knowledge I propounded, and now the latter is part of the Last
Principle I am offering to you: For you may remember that under the foregoing
Head I told you what you are to do; and therefore now under this I have let you
see what God will do for you. If you be steadfast, unmovable, and always
abounding in the work of the Lord, your labor shall not be in vain in the
Lord, 1 Cor. 15. last Verse; and you may observe that the Apostle tells the
Corinthians there, that they know, or should at least know this, intimating
thereby that is is a necessary Point of Christianity, and one of the main
Principles of it that is to be known by us.

. 7. And you are to know in the last place, that as there is a Reward for the
Righteous both in this and another World, so there are Judgments and
Punishments designed for, and executed upon the Unrighteous both here and
hereafter. In this Life they are under a perpetual Malediction, because they
always continue what they were at first, Children of Wrath: They remain in
their corrupted and defiled State, The Misery of Unbelievers in this Life.
and their Sins are unpardoned; they are hated of God, and they have no peace
in their own Breasts; they are delivered to Satan, and given up to evil and
malicious Spirits, who rule in them. All things that happen to them, and every
condition and state of Life are for their ^urt. Nothing that they possess is
their own, they are Robbers and Usurpers; their Riches, and Pleasures, and all
earthly E^joyments are a Curse to them. But all this is but a forerunner of
greater and more horrid Evils (...) they (as well as Devils) are reserved to
the Judgment of the great Day. In order to which they shall be rouzed out of
their Graves by the last Trumpet; for we are ascertained by our Blessed Lord
himself, that as they that have done good shall come forth unto the
Resurrection of Life, At Judgment.
so they that have done evil, unto the Resurrection of Damnation, John 5.28,
29. Their rising again does but make way for the final Sentence and
irreversible Doom that shall pass upon them, after an impartial Examination and
Trial. And though at that great Tribunal, Sinners will be apt to contrive
Excuses to palliate their Misdemeanors, yet these graceless Criminals shall be
convicted and confounded by the Testimony of their own Consciences, by the
glorious Angels and Ministers of Heaven, by the Devils and forlorn Spirits of
darkness, by their Neighbors and Companions who joined with them in their
Sins, by those righteous Souls who endeavored to reclaim and reform them, by
the solemn and amazing Convention of that High Court, and by their own
Confessions and Acknowledgments.

. 8. It is true, this Doctrine has been derided by Atheists; and we are not to
wonder at it; or those that throw off the Notion of a God, will soon scoff at a
Judgment to come. It has been rejected also by some high-flown Enthusiasts,
because these Men make it their business to Allego^ze the Scripture, and to
pervert the plain and literal Sense of it, and consequently they fancy the day
of Jud^ment to be a mere Mystery. But chiefly this Doctrine is despised by
profane and debauched Live^s, whose I^terest it is to disbelieve a future
Account, and by some formal and careless Professors of Religion, who, like
Lot's Sons, laugh at the Destruction which is foretold. But notwithstanding
this, Certainty of a future Judgment.
it is an undoubted and infallible Truth, that God will one day call all Men to
an Account, and that particularly he will judge the Wicked. This was the sober
Sentiment of the Patriarchs before the Flood, as that Prophesy of Enoch
testifies, Behold, the Lord comes with ten thousands of his Saints, to execute
Judgment upon all, and to convince all that are ungodly among them, of all
their ungodly Deeds which they have ungodlily committed; and of all their hard
speeches which ungodly Sinners have spoken against him, Jude 14, 15. verses.
This was the established Notion and Belief of the Jewish Church, as appears
from Solomon's words, Know that for all these things God will bring thee to
Judgment, Eccl. 11.9. And this is a Principle of the Christian Faith, as is
evident from Acts 17.31. He has appointed a Day in which he will judge the
World in Righteousness. We must all appear before the Judgment seat of Christ,
2 Cor. 5.10.

And this Judgment makes way for a final Execution; for after the Sentence is
pronounced against the Wicked by the righteous Judge, Of Hell.
they shall go away into everlasting Punishment, as he himself has told us.
Matthew. 25.46. They shall be cast into everlasting fire, as he expresses it in
another place, Matthew. 18.8. They shall forthwith be consigned to eternal
Torment and Misery in the infernal Dungeons of the Damned, which are known and
called by the Name of Hell and Hell Fire, Matthew. 5.22, 29, 30.10.28.18.9. Mark
9 47. Luke 12.5. 1 Pet. 2.4. And this is the greatest aggravation of those
Torments, that they shall never have an end. This is the severe and dreadful
Punishment of all those who live and die in their Sins; this is the horrid
result and issue of wilful Impenitency; and no Tongue is able to express the
dismal Effects of it, no not the Tongue of the Damned themselves, who endure
these endless Pains, and lie for ever and ever under the Wrath of God.

. 9. And thus I have given you a plain and brief Account of those Fundamental
Principles of Knowledge which you are indispensably obliged to be acquainted
with. You see what are the essential Truths of our Religion, and such as are
absolutely necessary to Salvation; for I have not offered any doubtful and
controversia^ Points to you: The main doctrinal Principles of Christianity,
which are plain and intelligible, have been set before you. And from the whole
Catalogue of Particulars which I have presented to you, let me observe this,
that the whole Extent of a Christian Man's Knowledge lies within such a
compass, that he may with ease attain to it. All that you are to know in order
to your Salvation is couched within a little room. You cannot then pretend that
you have not leisure to study the Principles of Christianity. A little time
will make you Masters of them. There is no great trouble and pains required to
learn the Chief Heads of Divinity. You are not to turn over a great many
Volumes, and with great Labor and Fatigue to search into Variety of Authors.
No; the most substantial Doctrines of Christianity are contained within a very
narrow compass, and therefore it is no hard task to gain a competent Knowledge
of them; though, it is true, much more time is required to consider of them
duly, to understand them fully, to digest them well, to fix them on your
Memories, and to make them serviceable to your Practice. Saving Knowledge not
difficult to be attained.
Let this then excite you to set about the study of your Religion, and to spend
some serious Hours in the Contemplation of its excellent Principles, and to
endeavor to attain to such a measure of Knowledge in them as you are capable
of according to your Abilities. Consider, I beseech you, what I have offered to
you, and employ some considerable portions of your Time in this great and
weighty Affair. Take up Resolutions to meditate frequently on the several
particulars which I have mentioned, and have given you a summary Explication
of. I pray God enrich you with the Treasure of Divine Knowledge, and bless you
in the laying of it out, that is, in the communicating of it to others, and in
making it useful and serviceable to your selves, in order to the Practice of
Christianity: Which is the next thing I am to treat of.

CHAP VII.
Of Christian Duty; First, to our selves, of Sobriety. Of Humility. Of
Consideration. Of Christian Relolution. Of Sobriety with respect to the World.
Its Cr^sses and Benefits. Its Conveniences, their emptiness and danger. Of
Sobriety with respect to our Passions and Affections. Of Fear, Anger, Antidotes
against immoderate Anger, Grief, Joy, Love, Hatred, Desires, Wishes as to
Wealth, Honor, Pleasure. Of Sobriety as to our outward Behavior. Of
Temperance. Four Rules to preserve and Try our Temperance. Of Chastity.

. 1. HAving given you a full enumeration of the Principles of Christianity,
which are required to be known by every Christian, I am now to offer to you a
plain Account of all that we are bound to Practice, in order to our Salvation
and Happiness. And by Practice I mean not only all outward Actions of Religion,
The Practice of Religion.
but those likewise that are inward, viz. the Thoughts and Desires, the Will
and Affections, the good and holy Inclinations of the Mind; and, in a word, all
but Knowledge of which I have distinctly spoken before. It is necessary that I
awe you a complete Scheme or Platform of this Practical part of Christianity,
that you may have it always before your Eyes, and be constantly examining your
Lives by it, and urging upon your selves your exact conformity to it. And
because the Apostle has reduced all practical Christianity to Three Heads,
viz. living Soberly, Righteously, and Godlily, Tit. 2.12. which comprehensive
Terms express, first, that part of our Duty which relates more especially to
our Selves, next that portion of it which has an immediate respect to our
Neighbors, and lastly that Branch of our holy Religion which immediately
refers to God, I will therefore follow this plain Method which the Apostle has
prescribed, and go through these Three Parts of Religion, or Practical
Christianity.

. 2. The first is that which has relation to our Selves, and is called by the
Apostle living Soberly. The main Offices and Branches of which part of Religion
are such as these, First, To rectify and moderate our Thoughts or Opinions:
Secondly, our Affections: And, Thirdly, Our Actions and Behavior.

. 3. It is the great work of Christian Sobriety to regulate and moderate our
Thoughts, Judgments and Opinions. We are not to think as we please, for it is
evident from Sacred Writ that Religion provides for the government and
management of the Thoughts, and does not leave them, at liberty, that is, to
sally forth and fix themselves on any object without distinction. Concerning
the Persons of the Old Degenerate World it is complained that every imagination
of the thoughts of their hearts was only Evil, and that continually, Genesis 6.5.
And of a Wicked man in general it is said that God is not in all his thoughts,
Psalm 104. And therefore it is no wonder that Solomon pronounces the thoughts of
the wicked to be an abomination to the Lord, Prove. 15.26. because they are
Atheistical and Profane. But on the contrary, he tells us that the thoughts of
the righteous are right, Prove. 12.5. And Reason as well as Scripture d^cta^es
this, because such as a man is, such are his Thoughts Which makes it necessary
for us to take Special care of them. And this is part of the Sobriety I am
speaking of, which consists in keeping our Thoughts just and regular, in having
right and due Apprehensions of Things, of these Two especially, our Selves and
the World. The foremost and leading act of Sobriety is to frame due Thoughts
and Conceptions concerning our Selves, Sobriety of Thoughts.
especially our Souls, which are our better and choiser part. We are to think
aright concerning the Nature of them, we are to be sensible that they are
really ^^sti^ct from our Bodies, and that they are spiritual, immaterial and
immortal Be^^^es; that they are made for great and ^oble Things, that they are
capable of Truth and Religion, of Grace and Goodness, and are fit to co^v^rse
with God* and to enjoy him forever. Therefor we ought not to stoop to ^as^ and
mean Things, but to act worthy of our Nature and Make, and to employ our
excellent Faculties and Powers in the Service of our Creator.

. 4 Another sober Thought, and which must continually be upon our Minds, is,
That we are in this Life in a state of Trial, we are here upon our good
Behavior; and as we deme^n our selves now, so we shall fare hereafter. Let u^
always bear it in our Thoughts, that we are Probationers for another World,
that hereby we may be reminded of accounting it our great and Principal Work to
please our great Master, who has placed us in this World. We are to consider
that we are here in a state of Pilgrimage, we are traveling to the new
Jerusalem, the City that has Foundations, whose builder and maker is God; and
therefore above all things we are concerned to behave our selves as Strangers
and Pilgrims, that is, as the Apostle explains it, to abstain from fleshly
Lusts which war against the Soul, and to have our Conversation honest, 1 Pet.
2.11. and in our whole Behavior in the World to live as those that are passing
to another.

. 5. To think meanly and humbly of our selves, and what we do, is another
essential part of Sobriety. Humility.
For this teaches us to be sensible of our manifold Infirmities and
Deficiencies, our great Unworthiness and Vileness, and thence to think of our
selves as becomes such weak and vile Creatures. Wherefore it is Christianity
alone that lays the Foundation of the deepest Humility, by acquainting us with
our fallen State,, and the true nature of our present Condition; which the
wisest of the Heathens were ignorant of, and consequently knew not what true
Humility was. This is taught us by the Gospel only, which gives us a sight of
our selves, of the Corruption of our Nature, and of the vileness of Sin, and
thereby lays us low, and causes us to abase and humble our selves. We should
always govern our selves by that Apostolical Advice, Romans 12.3. Not to think of
our selves more highly than we ought to think, but to think soberly; that is,
to judge of our selves after an humble and modest manner, and not to pretend to
more than we have, or to be better than we are; yea, not to boast of any of the
Seize we really are Masters of, though they be never so goodly and
excellent, for they are but Gifts, they are what we have received, and why then
should we glory as if we had not received them? 1 Cor. 4 7. Though we be never
so well furnished with spiritual Endowments and Graces, we must not be proud of
them: But the greater our other Gifts and Graces are, the greater should be our
Humility. We must always have lowly Thoughts of our selves, by reason of our
Failings and Offenses both past and present. Our own Sins should be thought to
be the greatest, as St. Paul was the chiefest of Sinners in his own account. So
as to Opinion and Judgment, a sober Christian follows that Counsel of the holy
Writer, Be not wise in your own Conceits, Romans 12.16. Do not arrogate to your
selves, and fondly, prefer your own Judgment before that of others; think this,
that others may understand things as well, if not better, than your selves.
Banish all Pride and Self-conceit, and be content that even others should think
meanly and lowly of you. This is true Humility, and consequently Sobriety, for
the humble Minded Christian is the Sober Man.

. 6. Consideration is another part of Sobriety; Of Consideration.
for this bids us look into our selves, and converse with our own Souls, and
reflect on our past Actions, and think on our Ways (as the Psalmist expresses
it, Psalm. 119.59.) and freely and impartially examine our State and Condition.
This is absolutely necessary, because we are so apt to deceive our selves, and
to impose upon our own Minds and Conscience. From that fond opinion which we
generally have of our selves, we are wont to entertain false Persuasions
concerning our Lives and Actions: We usually take some fair appearances, some
goodly show and semblance of Virtue for real Sanctity, and so we delude our
selves, and make a constant practice of it: And the worst is, we think to
deceive God as well as our selves. Now then, we are concerned to take such a
course as may prevent or cure this destructive Folly: And what more effectual
way can we apply our selves to than this, viz. to deal impartially with our
selves, and to discover our Selfdelusions, by searching narrowly into our
Souls, and Ransacking our Hearts and Manners? Let us then take some
opportunities of retiring from Business and Pleasure, that we may keep Company
with our selves: Let us accustom our selves to retreat from the World, to be
alone, and to enjoy a free and undisturbed Solitude, wherein we may mind the
state of our Souls, and effectually pursue this work of Self Examination, which
is a necessary Ingredient of Christian Sobriety. For it is the property of this
Virtue to rectify our Judgments concerning our selves by daily conversing with
our own Hearts, and examining our Consciences, and r^fling our Lives and
Actions. This is most seasonably performed in the close of every day, before we
betake our selves to our Repose: Then let us seriously call the Actions of the
past day to remembrance, let us make up our Accounts, and with grief and
remorse beg pardon for our Follies, and sleep not in any sin unrepented of.

. 7. Consideration makes way for Resolution: Of Resolution.
And this is another Duty owing to our selves. After you have considered,
resolve with your selves to be Religious and Holy. Thus we find Joshua
resolving both for himself and his Family, As for me and my House, we will
serve the Lord, Josh. 24.15. And holy David utters this resolute Language,
Psalm. 17.3. I am purposed that my Mouth shall not transgress: And again, I
said, that is (as that word denotes in some places of Scripture) I purposed, I
resolved after this manner, namely, I will take heed to my ways, Psalm. 39 1.
The Prodigal Son resolved to return home, and to be a new Man; I will arise,
and go to my Father, says he, Luke 15.18. So should we fix and determine our
selves by holy and religious Purposes, and not always pass our days in an
unfixed posture, and so hover in uncertainty. We should be steady, and come to
some resolves, and notwithstanding all Impediments and Hindrances in our way,
make our passage through them, and cleave to the Lord with full purpose of Heart.
Thus you see how those that are truly Sober manage their Thoughts with respect
to Themselves.

8. Secondly, The Grace of Sobriety furnishes us with right Thoughts concerning
the World, and all Things in it. These may be reduced to Two Heads, the Crosses
and the Conveniences of this World. As to the former, Sobriety with respect to
the World.
the Crosses and Afflictions of this Life, we ought to have this right and
sober Apprehension concerning them, that they may be made very useful and
beneficial to us, if they be rightly improved. Then they lead us to a sight and
sense of our past Miscarriages and Failings, they wean us from the
over-luscious Sweets of this World, and give us a relish of another, and a
better State. They are Antidotes against most Vices, Of Afflictions and their
Benefits.
they are those Grains of bitter Aloes which our wise Physician makes use of to
purge away our Sins. They are serviceable, by the Divine Blessing, to quicken
our Prayers, to hasten our Repentance, and to promote all our Graces and
Duties. Which was long since experienced by that holy Man who professed, It was
good for him that he had been afflicted, that he might learn God's Statutes,
Psalm. 119.71. Another of later Experience declared, That his Tribulations were
more necessary for him than his Meal and Drink. So said the pious Martin
Luther. If we have respect likewise to the future State, we shall find that
Afflictions are useful to prepare us for that, because they remind us of this
great Truth, that this World which we are now in is not our proper Place, this
Earth is not our Center; for if it were we should find Rest and Quiet in it: If
this were the Place designed for our Happiness, we should not be uneasy and
troubled in it. When therefore we see that we are continually liable to
Inconveniences, Distresses and Calamities in this lower World, we may thence
rationally gather, that this was not intended to be our resting Place, that we
have here no continuing City, and therefore we are put in mind of seeking one
to come. Thus the adverse Accidents of this Life fit us for Heaven, and prepare
us for a future Life. The Rod of the Almighty blossoms into a never fading
Crown of Glory. And therefore St. James, did rightly pronounce that Man blessed
that endures Temptations, i.e. Afflictions, for when he is tried, he shall
receive the Crown of Life, which the Lord has promised to them that love him,
Jam. 1.12

. 9. Let us then strive to attain to this pitch of Christian Sobriety, to think
favorably concerning the cross Occurrences of this present Life; whether they
have reference to our Bodies, or to our Estates, or Names, or to those who are
nearly allied to us; let us look upon them as they really are, when sanctified
to us, Blessings from Heaven. And the rather let this found Persuasion prevail
in us, because it will put us into an utter incapacity of envying the
Prosperity and Success of our most implacable Enemies, or of over lamenting the
Distresses that befall our selves or our dearest Friends, for theirs and our
temporal Afflictions will prove advantages to them and us, by increasing the
Felicity of another World. Thus a wise and sober Man considers the true nature
of worldly Things, and thence learns to despise the World, and to be reconciled
to the most afflictive Things in it, and to submit all to God.

. 10. And then on the other hand, Sobriety enables us to think a right
concerning the Conveniences and delightful Enjoyments of this World. Of
Sobriety as to worldly Enjoyments.
And this it does by sending us to the Holy Scriptures, which give us the best
account of these things, and impartially acquaint us that Vanity and Vexation
of Spirit are entailed upon them all, as Solomon, who had the amplest fruition
of them, assures us from his own Experience. And this must needs be so, because
most of the pleasureable Entertainments of the World are but seeming and
counterfeit, airy and fantastical, for even in laughter the heart is sorrowful,
Prove. 14.13. We can scarcely be said to enjoy those Delights whilst we have
them; and the time of our possessing them is but short, for that of St. John is
an experimented Truth, that the World passes away, and the Lusts thereof, 1 John 2.17. The sensual Accommodations and Pleasures of this Life soon forsake
us, and leave us big of Desires, but void of Satisfaction: and then we find the
Wise Man's words verified, The end of our Mirth is heaviness, Prove. 14.13. This
is always the case of those who extremely love this World's Delights, and then
are deprived of them; their extravagant Love of them breeds an excessive Grief
and Anguish, Disquietude and Torment in their Minds, so that they pay dear for
the short fruition of those Pleasures.

11. And further, if we enter into a sober enquiry concerning these things, we
shall be convinced that they are not only vain and vexatious, but even
dangerous and harmful. It is certain, that there is a greater variety of
Temptations in a plentiful Condition, than in that which is mean and
afflictive. It is unanimously agreed by all understanding Men, That it is an
easier Task to govern our selves in Adversity than in Prosperity; because the
inconveniences of the former are plainly seen and discovered, but the evils of
the latter are disguised, and we perish before we are aware of it. The danger
of Prosperity.
The Man is wounded with a Sting dipped in Honey; he is pompously slain, and
dispatched with a gilded Dagger. His Mirth is his Bane; he laughs himself to
Death, and Dances to the Grave. It is impossible to reckon up all the Evils and
Mischiefs which a great Abundance of the Things of this World betrays Men to.
It is generally the Mother of Pride and Arrogance, it is the Nurse of
Wantonness, Luxury and Lewdness; it is the Parent of Sloth and Security; it
keeps Men at a distance from Virtue, and alienates them from Religion, and
makes them forget the Almighty, for they wax sat, and kick, and forsake God,
who made them. Deuteronomy. 32.15. And by this means their Fullness and Prosperity
prove fatal and destructive to them. Like Haman at the Queen's Banquet, they
are caressed and regaled, but are soon hurried away to Execution. This is the
true State of those that indulge themselves in worldly Affluence, Riches and
Pleasures: And therefore a Sober Man will not glut himself with them, nor prize
them at a high rate, especially he will not prefer them before his immortal
Soul, and the Concerns of Eternity. He is one that will not be put off with the
Things of this World: These are not the Things that will satisfy him. He
abhors to be of the number of those wretched Creatures who have their good
things in this Life, and hereafter must be miserable. He reckons not upon the
outward and transitory Enjoyments of this World; he values not himself upon the
Thoughts of these; for he considers that these ordinary Gifts of Providence are
no Arguments of God's good will to him; nay, he is apprehensive that these
common Blessings may in the issue turn into real Curses and Judgments to him.
These are the sober Thoughts which he has concerning the World: and in all
other matters he has learnt to think and judge as it becomes him, that is, to
conceive of things as they really are. This is the first Part of the Sobriety
which Christianity requires of us.

. 12. II. As this Grace of Sobriety regulates our Judgments, and thereby has
an influence on our Wills and Resolutions, so it moderates our Affections and
Passions. Of the Government of the Passions.
First, Fear, so far as it is undue and unlawful, is to be suppressed; Of Fear.
that is a base and servile Fear of Men (though they be never so great and
potent) and of what they can do to us, is deservedly to be checked. We are not
to be daunted and disheartened at the thoughts of the Indignities and Injuries
we may suffer, and of the Persecutions we may undergo for Righteousness sake.
We must be content to run the risque, to venture all for Religion. We must
strive to be the best Men, and yet not displeased if we be counted by some the
Worst, yea, the filth of the World, and the off scouring of all things. We must
live well, and walk circumsp^ctly, and yet we must expect to suffer for doing
so. We must let it be seen that we can espouse Religion without a worldly
Dowry, that we take not up the Profession of it for base and sinister Ends, or
upon any carnal Respect and Considerations whatsoever. But this we cannot do
unless we banish Fear and Cowardice; and be like Solomon's Righteous Man, as
bold as a Lion. Such we should endeavor to be in a good Cause: we must not be
scared and frighted out of our Duty, but go on undauntedly, and act with that
bold^ess and confidence which beseem every sober and resolved Christian.

. 13. Secondly, Christian Sobriety is a moderating of Wrath and Anger, and
inspiring the Soul with Meekness and Gentleness. Anger.
He cannot be said to be Sober who is Wrathful and Choleric, and is
transported with Rage and Fury; but the mild and calm Christian justly Merits
that Title. This is he that takes a great deal of Pains to suppress all
unlawful and undue Anger, that is, when it is on unlawful and unjust occasions,
when it is excessive and immoderate, and when it produces such effects as are
sinful and hurtful. He takes care that his converse with Men be devoid of
Bitterness and Passion, and that he be Master of that Charity which is not
easily provoked, 1 Cor. 13 5. This excellent Temper fi^s him, to reprove others
in a mile and amicable way, and such as is like to prove beneficial to them:
and it also makes him capable of taking Reproof from others with Meekness and
Thankfulness, which will certainly make it advantageous to him. This Christian
frame of Soul enables him likewise to receive Affronts and Injuries with a
sedate and quiet Mind, with a calm and submissive Spirit, and to suppress all
thoughts of Revenge. It bids him spend his Anger upon his Vices, and show his
hottest Passion in that Cause. It pushes him on not to fight with others, but
to combat himself, and with the greatest warmth and vigor encounter his
sinful Lusts. This is Sobriety; but the contrary is a Degree of Raging and
Madness.

14. That we may attain to this excellent Grace, we are to use such Expedients
and Methods as these, Let us be very little concerned for the Things of this
World, and then we shall not free and vex our selves at any Disappointment. Let
us remember that all things are governed and disposed of by Divine Providence,
and therefore it is unsufferable Folly to be displeased at whatsoever happens.
Let us call to mind the Reason that St. James gives why every Man should be
slow to Wrath, namely, because the wrath of Man works not the Righteousness
of God, Jam. 1.20. that is, he that is of a wrathful and angry Spirit will
never be able to do that which was enjoined him by God, and the excellent Rules
of the Gospel; for this Temper is no ways suitable to the Evangelical
Disposition. And lastly, let us consider how slow to anger the God of Heaven
is; though we continually provoke him by our Sins, yet he is patient and long
suffering. What ground have we then to be incensed and enraged against our
Brethren, whatever their Provocations are? These are the ways to bring us to a
quiet and calm Spirit.

. 15. Thirdly, Sobriety is a moderating of those two Extremes, Grief and Joy.
Of Grief and Joy.
It curbs and restrains our Sorrows and Lamentations which worldly
Disappointments and Bodily Evils are wont to call forth, and it hinders them
from being extravagant and excessive. It teaches us with cheerfulness to enjoy
the temporal and outward Blessings which are conferred upon us by the Divine
Benefactor, but it bids us rejoice with trembling, and it checks all inordinate
and profuse M^rth. The sober Christian, as he is not basely dejected, so he is
not excessively elevated: He is neither over sad, nor over joy'd; but he bears
all Events with an even and composed Mind, herein following the admirable
advice of the Apostle, that those that weep be as though they wept not, and
those that rejoice as though they rejoiced not, 1 Cor 7.30. We are to keep a
true Poise of these Affections, we must never be so sorrowful as to forget our
selves, and never so lavish in our Mirth as to forget God. But our main and
principal Rejoicing must be in our Duty, in the pleasures of a Godly Life, in
the transports and ravishments of a good Conscience, and in the Favor of God,
which is the only spring of Peace and Tranquillity of Mind.

. 16. Fourthly, Of Sobriety in Love and Hatred.
Sobriety is a moderating of our Love and Hatred. It is true, God, the Infinite
Good, cannot be loved with too great Zeal and Fervor: And Sin and Satan (which
are God's Enemies) cannot be over hated: but our Miscarriage usually is about
the things of this Life, we hate all Adversity and Affliction, and we entirely
love Prosperity and the undisturbed Fruition of the Pleasures and Profits of
the World. And what we passionately love, we can hardly suffer our selves to
enjoy with moderation, for Love naturally betrays us to excess, because we
think we cannot have enough of what we love. But Christianity forbids us to
nourish this sort of Complacency; Love not the World, neither the things of the
World; and the Reason is subjoined, For if any Man Love the World, the love of
the Father is not in him: And further in the next Verse, For all that is in the
World, the Lust of the Flesh, the Lust of the Eye, and the Pride of Life are
not of the Father, but of the World, and therefore are unlawful, 1 John 2.15,
etc. And there are sundry other places of the New Testament from whence we may
be thoroughly convinced, that it is one part of Christian Sobriety to extirpate
our undue Love of the World, and the Entertainments of it. It might be a
sufficient curb to our impetuous Affections toward them, if we considered but
that one suggestion of our Savior, Matthew 6 32 After all these things do the
Gentiles seek. They are such things as Men who are ignorant of the True God set
their Hearts upon; they are such Objects as Men of low and base Principles, who
are tied to the Earth, and look not up to Heaven, are in love with. They are
good enough for Heathens and Pagans, but Christians must not set their
Affections on these things, nor stoop to what is so vile and unworthy, but they
must resolve upon a generous Contempt and undervaluing of them; and they must
be ready to part with them on a good account. This is the Self denial which our
Savior enjoins us, Mat. 16.24. and of which the Apostles and first Christians
were so eminent an Example.

. 17. And in order to this, our Desires and Wishes, which are so immediately
subservient to our Love, Sobriety in Desires and Wishes.
must be regulated and restrained, else we cannot be said to deny our selves.
First, it is necessary that we suppress our extravagant Desires after Earthly
Profit and Gain: For the true Gospel Sobriety is opposite to Coveteousness,
which is an excessive desiring and longing after worldly Advantage. No sober
Christian can allow himself in this S^ he is not one that is racked with
avaritious Thoughts, but is satisfied with the Condition God has placed him
in. Which is according to that Rule in Heb. 13.5. Let your Conversation be
without Coveteousness, and be content with such things as ye have. Be not
sollicitous and eager about the purchase of Wealth and Abundance, be satisfied
with your present allowance, sit down well pleased with the allotment you have.
So that it appears hence, that Contentment, as it is opposed to Coveteousness,
is an essential part of Christian Sobriety.

. 18. Again, as a Man of a sober and moderate Temper lon^s not after the Wealth
and Possessions, so not after the Preferments and Honors of this World. He is
not fondly tickled with Applause, his mind is not set on that gay Pomp which
attends those that are in high Places. Or if he be promoted to such a Station,
he affects not State and Grandeur, he chooses sometimes to pass Incognito, and
shu^s the Acclamations of the People: But he values the Approbation of Good and
wise Men, and most of all the Applause (if I may so speak) of his own
Conscience. In brief, True Sobriety is opposite to Ambition, it is a check to
Vain Glory, and the Affectation of Greatness in the World.

. 19. Moreover, by help of this excellent Virtue we are enabled to contract and
stint our Desires not only of Wealth and Honor, but of bodily and sensual
Pleasures, viz. to quell in us the excessive and Irregular Appetites of Eating
and Drinking, and to curb and allay all impetuous Inclinations after those
carnal Delights which are accompanied with Wantonness, Lewdness, and
Uncleanness. These poisonous Springs are to be dammed up betimes, all impure
Lusts are to be checked. Instead of feeding and pampering those fleshly
Appetites and corrupt Inclinations, we ought to starve and destroy them: and we
must resolve not to give ear to any of their importunate cravings. We are to
get the mastery over all our sensual Desires, to keep them under as Enemies to
our Happiness, and destructive to our nobler and higher Pleasures. And as to
our daily Desires and Wishes, they ought to tend toward Divine and Spiritual
Things: we must most affectionately breath after the Kingdom of God and his
Righteousness; we must hunger and thirst after these: we must pant after
Heaven, and passionately long for those exalted Mansions above, which are the
Blessed Receptacles that shall receive us when we have got clear of the dirt of
this World, and have left this dark Globe behind us. In a word, we are to
despise this World and to breath after another. Heavenly mindedness is an
inseparable attendant of Evangelical Sobriety. And thus you see this Grace is
the Governor of our Affections, it rightly orders and regulates the Passions
and Inclinations of our Souls.

. 20. III. It is not only a rectifier of our Judgments and Affections, but it
has a powerful influence on our Bodily Actions and Outward Behavior. Of
Sobriety as to outward Behavior.
And thus Sobriety includes in it Temperance and Continency, and a Decent
Deportment according to the Condition a Man is in, or according to that of the
Persons he converses with. First, Sobriety contains in it Temperance, which is
twofold, for it is not only a moderation in the use of Meats but of Drinks. Of
Temperance.
The Excess in the former is called Gluttony, and in the latter Drunkenness;
and we are equally obliged to avoid both Be not amongst Wine bibbers, amongst
riotous Eaters of Flesh, Pro. 23.20. i. e. amongst Drunkards and Gluttons, as
it is more plainly expressed in those words, Take heed to your selves, least at
any time your Hearts be overcharged with Surfeiting and Drunkenness, Luke
21.34. Be not drunk with Wine, wherein is excess, Ephesians. 5.18. Our merciful
Father has been pleased to indulge us an innocent use of his Creatures, not
only for the supply of our Necessities, but for Pleasure and Delight; and
particularly we cannot but acknowledge the Goodness and Wisdom of God in s^
ordering our Podies, and fitting Meats and Drinks to their use, that these
delight the Palate as well as nourish and sustain the whole Body. Seeing then
the Divine Providence vouchsafes to give us these suitable Refreshments, let us
not show our selves unthankful, by being profuse and wanton in the use of them;
and more especially as to the excess in Drinking, which generally proves more
dangerous and mischievous than the other of Eating; we must use very great
Caution, and never suffer our selves to be tempted to Excess by those false
Motives and Arguments which are commonly made use of to inveigle Men to
Debauchery.

. 21. And that we may be induced to observe a Moderation both in Meat and
Drink, it will be useful and proper to consider that hereby we do our selves a
great kindness both as to our Bodies and Souls. For it is certain, that
Sobriety gives us the highest gust and quickest Sense of Pleasure, The Benefits
of Temperance.
because by it we fully relish what we eat and drink; whereas Excess and
Intemperance vitiate the Taste, and really debauch the Palate as well as the
Person. So that hence it appears, that Religion is the best Master even of
sensual Pleasure, so far as it is harmless and innocent. And then as to our
Souls, our better and nobler part, but which depends much upon the Temper of
the Body in its Operations, these are infected and depraved by the gross Steams
of Intemperance and Immoderation, they lose their native Vigor and Activity,
they forget their proper Work and Employment, and degenerate into Sottishness
and Stupidity. But by using our selves to sober regular Meals, and more
especially to Temperance in Drinking, we fit our selves for serious Thoughts
and Business, we become grave and composed, and make way for a religious and
sedate frame of Mind. And sometimes Fasting is useful on this occasion, as it
is a check to Excess, and a help to Humiliation, and an act of Self denial and
Mortification, and consequently as it promotes the Welfare of the Soul as well
as of the Body. But of this I shall speak afterward, as it is to be considered
as an act of Godliness.

The shortest and the most comprehensive Rules or Directions that I can give
you as to the use of Meats and Drinks, and whereby you may certainly know
whether you transgress in either, are these (...)*

. 22. I. Neither eat nor drink to the prejudice of your Health. Rules to
observe and judge of our Temperance.
It may seem strange that any should need to be directed to this, for bodily
Health is so great a Blessing, that it invites us of it self to take all care
to preserve it. But such is the depraved Nature of Man, that he is careless of
the Welfare of his Body, as well as of that of his Soul, and for the short
Pleasure of gratifying his Appetite, voluntarily brings upon himself Pains and
Diseases. But this admirable Virtue which I am treating of, teaches you to
correct this gross Folly, and highly to prize your Bodily Health, that it may
be serviceable to that of your Souls, and that by both you may be fitted to
discharge those Duties which God requires of you. Therefore you must never
indulge your selves in those immoderate draughts, and that intemperate feeding
which you know will disturb your Healthful Temper, and end in Sickness and
Diseases: as it is certain most of the Distempers of the Body are occasioned,
more or less, by the undue and irregular use of Meats and drinks. Know then and
remember this, that Health is too precious a thing to be thrown away for the
pleasing of an unruly Appetite, or the gratifying the importunity of others.

. 23. II. Neither eat nor drink to the prejudice of you Reasons and
Understandings. Bodily Health is a great blessing, but Soundness of Mind is a
far greater, and therefore you must be careful to keep and maintain this. Which
you cannot do if you give way to immoderate Eating and Drinking. And hereby you
may know whether you go beyond the limits of true Sobriety, namely, when you so
load your Stomachs as to render your selves dull and useless, and when you
weaken and impair your Understandings by the portion of drink which you take.
If you find your selves disordered in your Minds, if the free use of your
Reason be hindered, so that you are not under the Command of that ruling
Faculty, conclude that you feed and drink to Excess, and that you transgress
the Laws of Christian Sobriety.

. 24. III. Let your eating and drinking be so ordered, that you consume not too
much of your precious Time. If there were nothing but this, namely, the loss of
so many Hours, which are usually spent in the Meetings of luxurious Persons, it
were enough to convince you of the Unlawfulness of this Exercise, and to
dissuade you from the practice of it. Though you proceed not so far as to
distemper your Brains, or to impair your Health, yet the lavishing away of so
much Time, is contrary to the Laws of Christian Sobriety. Your Time is given
you for the necessary Works of your Calling, for the Business of this Life, but
much more for the Concerns of another: And your Time is little enough for
these. Therefore spend none of it in the Society of debauched Men; embezel not
your precious hours, for if you do, you cannot be reckoned a sober Man, though
you should avoid being drunk.

. 25. IV. Cherish not any unlawful Passion by your eating and drinking. If you
find that Wantoness, Lust and Lewd Desires are advanced by that quantity or
kind of Meat and Drink which you take, know that it is immoderate, and learn
afterward to stint your selves. If you find that your Anger and Wrath are
stirred up by the portions of Drink which you use your selves to, conclude
immediately that you are guilty of Excess, and for the future take care to
restrain your selves. Briefly, then you eat and drink beyond the measures of
Sobriety, when you render your selves unfit for the Service of God, and the
Employments of your Callings, and when you promote in your selves or others any
vicious Habits or Inclinations.

26. Secondly, The Grace of Sobriety compriseth in it Continence or Chastity,
Of Chastity.
which is not only a subduing of Lustful Desires and Affections, as you heard
before, but an actual refraining from all carnal Delights that are unlawful.
This Virtue strictly enjoins us to avoid Fornication and Adultery, and all
manner of Uncleanness, because these are direct Deviations from the natural End
and Use of those Passions and Enjoyments which are permitted us; and therefore
the rectified Nature and rational Part of Man allow not of them. The Body is
not for Fornication but for the Lord, 1 Cor 6.13. As much as to say, our Bodies
were ordained for Holy and Religious Uses, and therefore must not be profaned
by Lust. They, as well as our Souls, were made to be employed in the Service of
our Lord Jesus; they are dedicated and devoted to his Honor, and therefore it
is a sacrilegious Alienation of them to make them serviceable to Uncleanness.
And as the Body is for the Lord, so the Apostle adds, the Lord is for the Body,
that is, Christ came to sanctify and redeem our Bodies as well as our Souls,
and therefore the one as well as the other must be consecrated to his Service.
And again, in the 15th Verse he reminds us, That our Bodies are the Members of
Christ: They together with our better Part are mystically united to Christ
their Head, and shall we then dare to defite them by Fornication, or any other
acts of Concupiscence? Shall we take the Members of Christ, and make them the
Members of an Harlot? God forbid; as the Apostle in the same place speaks.

Our care should be to be of the number of those who (as our Savior expresses
it) make themselves Eunuchs for the Kingdom of Heaven, Matthew. 19.12. that is,
such who subdue their carnal Lust, and mortify the Flesh, as knowing that
otherwise they shall never enter into the Kingdom of God. This is the meaning
of that Exhortation to the Thessalonians, That every one of them should know
how to possess his Vessel, that is, his own Body, in Sanctification and Honor,
not in the Lust of Concupiscence, 1 Thessalonians. 4.3, 4. that they preserve
themselves in perfect Chastity, whether in a single or a married Life. And to
this end we are to observe the Apostles Rule, to keep under our Bodies, and to
bring them into subjection, 1 Cor. 9.27. to fly from the Allurements and
Enticements of the Flesh, to prepare, and guard our selves against all its
sinful Charms, and never to tread in the steps of our first Parents, who longed
after no Fruit so much as that which was forbidden Yea, this Virtue which I am
speaking of obliges us not only to abstain from the unlawful Enjoyment and
Gratifications of the Flesh, but to be moderate in the lawful and innocent
ones. For if we take the liberty to go to the utmost verge and extert of what
we may do in this and the like Actions, we shall soon pass from what is
innocent and guiltless to that which is not so.

CHAP. VIII.
Of Sobriety in Speech, Countenance, Garb, Behavior, Recreations, Private
Accommodations. Of Watchfulness, as to Company, Time. Of Self Preservation. The
Second Part of Practical Christianity ^ontains our Duty to others in their
several Ranks and Degrees; in the Works of Justice, and Charity, and Actions of
a mixed nature. Of the Office of Kings and Magistrates toward their Subjects.
The Duty of Subjects. Of Loyalty. The Sin and Punishment of resisting the
lawful Authority.

. 1. THirdly, Sobriety is yet larger than what I have yet represented it to be;
and it takes in all the Decency and Fitness of Words and Actions etc. in a
Christian's Life. This engages us first to exercise a Government over our
Tongues, Of the Government of the Tongue.
and to speak the words of Soberness, as they are called, Acts 26.25. that is,
such words as become a sober Person, one that is Master of his Reason and
Understanding. A sober Christian is not Talkative, and Intemperate in his
Speec^, he is careful to set a watch before his mouth, and to keep the door of
his lips, Psalm. ^41 3. to utter nothing that is any ways offensive and
blameworthy. He considers that the use of Speech is an Especial and peculiar
Blessing conferred upon Man, for of all the Creatures in the World he alone is
able to utter his mind by words: and therefore it is reasonable that that
whereby Man Excels, and is distinguished from all other Creatures should be
Employed to some Excellent purpose, and there is none more Excellent then that
of Religion. Wherefore we are to be careful about our words and speeches, and
this rather because there is a general Neglect as to this very thing, and too
many of those that make profession of Sobriety otherwise, are defective and
faulty here.

Christian Sobriety does likewise discover it self in the Countenance, rendering
it grave and composed, and yet pleasant and amiable Our Savior, upon occasion
found fault with his Disciples for their sad and dejected Looks, Luke 24 17.
And much more he reproved the Pharisees for disfiguring their faces, and
affecting a sad Countenance, Matthew. 6.16. He would not have any thing unnatural
and disguised. And if the putting on of sower Looks was condemned, then
certainly the other Extreme is not allowable, namely an excess of Airiness and
Mirth in the outward Aspect, such as speaks the Levity and Vanity of the inward
Man. Both of these are disfiguring the Face, and consequently the one as well
as the other is forbid by our Savior as unworthy of those Persons who profess
the strict Religion of the Gospel.

. 2. The Apparel which we wear is another Badge of Christian Sobriety; Of
Apparel.
and these are joined together by the Apostle, 1 Timothy 2 9. That Women adorn
themselves in modest Apparel, with shamefacedness and sobriety. Modesty both
within and without are required: and the latter is a good sign and argument of
the former. Christianity concerns it self in the very Attire and Garb of the
Persons; it enjoins them to wear such a Habit as is not too curious or costly,
that is not above their Condition and Quality, that is not a token of Lightness
and Wantonness, that is not a mark of Pride; and it forbids them to affect and
study artificial Beauty, that they may seem to be younger than they are.

. 3. Lastly, in our whole Deportment, and in all our Actions whatsoever, we
ought to discover a great and unblamable Sobriety, Of sober Behavior.
by doing that which is most deccat and proper for us to do, and what our
particular State and Condition, and our present Circumstances require of us.
Among other things that go to the Composition of Christian Sobriety, this is
one, a discreet and composed Carriage. And accordingly we find these together,
to be Sober, and of good Behavior, 1 Timothy 3.2. because the one is an
ingredient of the other. Whatever some Men think, it is certain that Incivility
and Ru^ness, and will Conversation are not badges of that Religion which
teaches us to live soberly. There is no question but a comely and agreeable
Behavior is part of Christianity. We must commend our Profession, and adorn
our Religion, by being Courteous, Affable and Obliging: We must express in our
Lives a Christian Candor and Compliance, a willing Condescension and freeness
of Converse, with an Easiness and Cheerfulness in all that we do. We must have
a care that we mistake not Sullenness for Gravity, and Melancholy for Religion.

. 4. But on the other side, to addict our selves to Gaiety and Jollity is
absolutely against Christian Sobriety and Decencey, for a Christian must be
staid and serious, and do nothing that argues a vain and frothy Mind. Therefore
childish and foolish, trifling and unmanly Actions are unworthy of his
excellent Profession, and argue a light and fantastic Spirit. Much more ought
he to abstain from all Diversions and Entertainments that administer to
Wantonness and Lewdness, or any thing that is immoral and vicious. Of
Recreations.
He must have nothing to do with those Sports and Recreations which impair his
Estate, or injure his Bodily Health, or foster Idleness and take him off from
his Calling. He must shun all Pastimes that are accompanied with Intemperance,
Luxury, and excessive Mirth, or that stir Men up to Passion and Revenge, to
Quarrels and Contentions, or to Coveteousness, and a greedy desire of Gain. He
must avoid all such Diversions as take up too much Time, or carry off his
Thoughts from Religion, and whatever is serious: Such are Common Stage Plays
and the Games that are now in use among vain and dissolute Persons. They are
the immediate Instruments of Vice and Folly, and in their own Nature administer
to Looseness and Debauchery. They corrupt Men not accidentally (as some would
express it) but directly, and for the most part by the design and intention of
those that use them

Nay, we ought to be cautious in the use of those Recreations which are in
themselves Lawful, lest by our abusing of them they become the occasion of Sin
and Folly, Though we are in the World, yet we are not to reckon our selves to
be of it, and therefore we are to deny our selves as to some Customs and
Practices, which though in themselves simply considered are not Vicious, yet
are apt to betray us to what is so, and will certainly make us like the Men of
the World.

. 5. And I might add this, That we must always quit our private Accommodations,
Pleasures and Profits for the public and common Good, and more especially for
the sake of God's Church; as it is recorded of Nehemiah and Daniel, that they
denied themselves for a time the use of the Comforts and Refreshments of this
Life, to symphatize and condole with their afflicted Brethren and Nation, Neh.
5.18. Dan. 9.3.10.3. And I superadd this, with relation to these and all other
Accomodations and Delights of the World, that if God shall bring us into such
Circumstances that we cannot keep these things, and at the same time retain a
good Conscience, we must then be willing to part with them all, that we may
hold and keep the one thing necessary. This will be a convincing proof of our
sober and self-denying Temper.

. 6. Moreover, if we will acquit our selves as those that have this frame of
Spirit, we must shake off all Sloth and Security, and be Industrious and
Vigilant. Watchfulness.
These two, Sobriety and Watchfulness are inseparable Companions, and therefore
the Holy Ghost has joined them together, 1 These. 5.6. 1 Pet. 4.7.5.8. We
cannot be Sober, unless we cease to be drowzy and careless, unless we
continually be upon our Guard and Watch, and be very diligent and circumspect
in shunning all Temptations to Sin and Vanity. And to this end and purpose let
us avoid all wicked Converse and Society, let us not associate with Jewd
irreligious Persons, but join our selves to the Company of the Godly and Pious,
and we shall find the Happy influence of their Conversation upon us.

. 7. And next to our Company let us look to our Time, and be careful how we
pass our Hours: Of Redeeming our Time.
Of which I have partly spoken before, and now I cannot say enough of it. But
this must needs be said, that he that makes no Conscience of spending his Time,
will never be a sober Man or Christian. Wherefore let us ever be employed in
some lawful and useful Business, either such as belongs to our particular
Calling, as we are placed in the World, or such as appertains to our general
Calling and Profession, as we are Christians. Adam in the state of Innocence,
had his Work and Employment appointed him by God, Genesis 3.15. and after his Fall
we read he was set to his Work and Labor, Genesis 3.19. and no Man since can
plead exemption, unless he disclaims his descent from Adam. Every one must in
the sweat of his Face eat Bread, as we find it determined in that forenamed
place: he must live and subsist by his lawful Labor and Industry, by the sweat
of the Brow or of the Brain: he much spent his Time and Pains in doing what God
has set him about. We are not allowed to throw away our Hours on unnecessary
Employments and impertinent Studies, which is the great fault of the World.
Especially let not our Time be squandred away in idle Disputes, and needless
Controversies in Religion, let us not pursue Shadows, whilst we let go the
Substance. The Life of Religion is by this means devoured, for whilst Men are
taking up with needless Matters, they neglect the doing of many a necessary
Action, and such as would certainly please God, and edify their Brethren. Let
us then betake our selves with all care and application to the Practice of
Religion, and spend our Days in that Employment. How precious is every single
Minute! And yet with what speed does it hasten away; And when it is past it
cannot be recalled, it cannot possibly be retrieved. Therefore whilst it is
ours, let us improve it, and not be lavish of so rich a Treasure; having this
always in our mind, that in this short Life is got or lost that Life which is
Eternal. And because we have so ill Husbanded our past Time, let us be the more
sollicitous about the right managing those portions of it that are to come. Let
us labor to prevent our future Revolts by our present cleaving unto the Lord
with full purpose of Heart, by arming our selves against Sin by a firm and
steady Resolution: for this becomes a sober and fixed Christian.

. 8 I will mention one thing more, which necessarily relates to our Duty
toward our selves, and that is a Christian care of our Persons and Lives, Self
Preservation.
on which the doing of all other parts of our Duty depends. We must not
wilfully neglect, hurt, or injure our Bodies: as not by Excess and Intemperance
(of which I spoke before) so not by denying our selves those Things that are
fitting and necessary, and are for the support of our Lives and Health. But
especially we are forbid by the Laws of Christianity and Sobriety, to lay
violent Hands on our selves. Do thy self no harm, said St. Paul to the Jailer,
who drew his Sword, and would have killed himself, Acts 16.27, 28. To bereave
our selves of Life, and to procure our own Death, is not only a harming and
injuring of our selves, but an affront to God's Authority and Sovereignty, it
is a manifest proof of an unmanly Fear and Cowardice, of Impatience, Distrust
and Despair; and in a word, is an argument of Madness, and not of Sobriety.

. 9. And thus I have given you a Description of that excellent Grace of
Sobriety; which is generally mistaken, and therefore I have been the larger in
setting forth the just Limits and extent of it. Vulgar Heads think, that to be
Sober is only abstaining from Drunkenness and such like Excess; and others have
a very lame and imperfect notion of this Duty. But the true and complete
account of it is this, It is a rectitude of the Judgment, it is a freedom from
inordinate Affections, it is the Government of our Spirits, and the command of
our Actions. It is that holy Discipline of the Soul, whereby its unreasonable
Motions are restrained, and its unruly Appetites allayed, and made to submit to
the Laws of Christ. Hereby we do nothing to discompose the healthful plight of
our Bodies, nothing to dull the Faculties of our Minds, nothing to excite and
inrage our Passions. Hereby we are taught to be chaste and temperate, to be
humble, submissive and content, and to demean our selves in all Conditions as
becomes us. Hereby we are taught modesty in Words, Looks, Apparel and
Behavior. Hereby we learn to be moderate in the pursuit of Earthly things, and
to be wary and cautious in the use of them. Hereby we gain the Art of not being
disturbed with the Evils, or inveigled by the good Things of this Life. Here by
we live comfortably in this World, and are fitted for a better hereafter. These
are the excellent Things which this Grace is composed of; or rather, it is not
to be called a Grace, if you mean by it a single one, but a complication of
many.

. 10. And this shows that those who are possessors of those admirable Things,
are of a most excellent Spirit, and that they are acted by most excellent
Principles. And I need not prove, I think, that such Persons live a very
desirable and pleasant Life; for it must needs be delightful to keep the Mind
sound and clear, to be free from bomerous Passions and Lusts, to have none but
wholesome and regular Pleasures, and to have our Thoughts continually in Heaven,
and even here to cast of those unmixt Joys. Let the corrupt and debauched part
of Mankind say what they please, it is most certain that there is no Life so
pleasant and ravishing as this, none so sweet, none so delicious. So much for
this first Part of Religion, which properly relates to our Selves. For though
some of the Things I have named are o^ a middle nature, and may respect both
our Selves and Others, yet I have considered them at present only as they refer
to Us; for this was the thing which I was obliged to show, that a Man owes a
Duty to himself, and that the Virtue of Christian Sobriety is that Duty, which
I have fully displayed in its several Parts.

. 11. The Second Part of Practical Religion consists in those Actions and
Offices which respect our Neighbors and Brethren, and all Ranks and Qualities
of Persons that we converse with in the World. The Second Part of Practical
Religion, of Duty toward Others.
For being all Members of the same Body, we are joined together by a common
Tie, and are to act for the good of the whole, and of each other in Particular.
And hence arises the necessity, as well as the reasonableness of that sort of
Humane Actions and Duties, which the Apostle expresses by living Righteously or
Justly. This comprehends in it not only all acts of Justice strictly so called,
but likewise all acts of Mercy and Charity, and in short, our whole Duty that
we owe to others. That I may the more plainly and distinctly set this
Righteousness before you in its several Parts and Branches, I will begin first
with those acts of our Duty toward others which relate to the particular Ranks
and Degrees of Persons in the World, and which have a mixture of both Justice
and Charity. Secondly, I will proceed to those Duties, which strictly may be
said to be acts of Justice. And Thirdly, I will Discourse of the Offices of
Charity properly so called.

. 12. The most considerable Ranks, which also may be called Relations, of
Persons are these five: 1. Kings and their Subjects; together with Subordinate
Magistrates, and those that are under their Charge. 2. Spiritual Pastors and
their Flock. 3. The Husband and his Wife. 4 Parents and their Children. 5.
Masters and their Servants.

. 13. The First Relation is that of a King and his Subjects: and there are
proper Duties belonging to both. The Office of Kings and Supreme Governors, or
(as the Apostle calls them the Higher Powers) is thus briefly summed up in Romans
13.3. They are to be a Terror to Evil works, but those that do Good are to have
praise of them. It is absolutely required of Kings, The Office of a Pious
Prince.
that they restrain Vice by punishing it: and if there be occasion, they ought
to augment the Penalties of Sin and Wickedness, and make them more heavy and
grievous, that Vice may not be augmented and increased, by reason of the too
easy restraints that are laid upon it. And as there is need of prudent and
seasonable Severity, so on other occasions, Mildness and Clemency become a
Prince. To crush and squeeze his people, is the most abhorrent thought
imaginable, and the farthest from his practice, for he Remembers that he is the
Father of his Country, and therefore is to be Compassionate and Merciful, and
to bear a tender Affection to them, and to show by the Encouragements and
Rewards, which he distributes, that he has a singular Kindness and Favor for
those that are Virtuous and Worthy. A great part of his Royal work is to
Preserve and Assert the Civil Rights, Liberties, and Privileges of his
Subjects, to Defend and Protect them in their Possessions and Properties; not
to make his own Will the standard of his Actions toward them, but to keep the
Law, as well as they. For a King is he that Rules according to the Laws, and
always makes the good of his People, his Grand and Principal End: whereas a
Tyrant makes his own Will his Law, and never consults the welfare of his
Subjects. And as a good Prince maintains the secular Rights and Properties of
those over whom he is set, so in a more special manner, he upholds them in
their Religion, and thinks it an Honor as well as his Duty, to promote the
Fear and Worship of the most High among them. We think it well be comes our
high Place and Station, said the Emperors, Theodosius and Valentinian, to give
Admonitions and Injunctions to our Subjects concerning Religion. And those were
admirable words of Theodosius and Honorius, We do nothing else either in the
heat of War, or in the cool retirements of Peace, but Consult and Order bow the
good People of our Empire may truly Worship God, and spend their days in his
Service. Thus it is the Glory of Crowned Heads, to advance the Honor of the
King of Kings, to be Guardians of the Church, to be Patrons of Religion, and to
be eminently Pious themselves. And certain it is, that nothing is so dear to
Heaven, and so beneficial to Mankind as such a Prince.

. 14. Again, there is the Duty of Subordinate Magistrates, who are called
Governors that are sent by the Supreme Power, 1 Pet. 2.14. And the Apostle
there tells us, to what End and Purpose they are sent, viz. For the punishment
of Evil doers, and for the praise of them that do well. So that from comparing
this with what St. Paul had said before, The general Office of Christian
Magistrates.
it is clear, that the design of the Supreme Ruler, and of those that are
placed under him, ought to be the same, that is, to take care that Vice be
effectually restrained and that Virtue be encouraged; that Punishments be
Inflicted, and Rewards dispensed according to the Deserts of Persons. They
miserably pervert the End and Design of their bearing the Sword, if they turn
the edge of it to the good, and the back of it to the Wicked. Yea certainly,
because the good are not so numerous as the Wicked, those that are in Authority
ought more especially to exercise this Part of severity, which consists in
anim^dverting upon these latter, and punishing all obstinate Criminals and
Offenders. And here in a more signal manner it is required of them that they
take notice of those Sins and Enormities which prevail most in the places where
they are, the reigning Sins of the Age, such as Idleness, Drunkenness,
Whoredom, Swearing, Forswearing, Profaning the Christian Sabbath, excessive
Pride and Luxury, which last have been cured heretofore by Sumptuary Laws, but
now the Disease breaks out afresh: All these should be chastised and kept under
by public Penalties.

15. And it is requisite in order to this, that Magistrates be Persons of great
Courage and Resolution, and no ways affrighted at the thoughts of that ill
treatment they meet with in the discharge of of their Trust, and the faithful
Execution of their Office. They are the Physicians of the Body Politic, and
accordingly must remember, that it is scarce possible to oppose the Disease
with great severity, and to please the Patient at the same time: And therefore
they must resolve upon the unwearied performance of their Duty, although they
purchase ill will, and be loaded with obloquy for their pains. All that I will
add under this Head, is, that in Magistrates and Rulers a personal Goodness and
Worthiness, and a care of their own Families are requisite to make them exactly
fit for their Employment* for none can so effectually Rule over others, as
those that have the art of governing themselves and the Persons that more
nearly belong to them. Besides that, it is a shame for them to terrify Vice
abroad, and yet to cherish it within their own Doors. It is scandalous to
strike with the Sword of Justice at the Sins of the Town or Country they live
in, and yet suffer their own Habitations to be a Refuge of Profaneness and
Irreligion, a Nursery of Lewdness and Immorality. Must they check Vice only
because it is open and public, and walks the Streets and Marketplaces? and at
the same time must it be received into their Families and lurk within their
Walls, and there find Protection instead of Punishment? No, by no means. The
first thing they are to do is to extirpate Vice out of their own Lives, and
those of their Household, and then they may with confidence and success attempt
the reforming of the Public.

16. On the other side there is the Duty of Subjects, and all such as are under
Authority. There is a Fighteousness required of them toward their Rulers and
Governors, and it is called Subjection and Submission. Thus St. Paul commands
every Soul to be subject to the higher Powers, Romans 13 1. and St. Peter joins
with him, The Duty of Subjects.
bidding us to submit to every Ordinance of Man for the Lord's sake, whether it
be to the King as Supreme, or unto Governors sent by him, 1 Pet. 2.13, 14. But
more especially with regard to the former, that is, the Person whom God and the
Laws have invested with the Sovereign Power, our Duty is to pay a due Fear and
Reverence to him, Prove. 24.21. for God has communicated his Authority to the
Supreme Powers, and made them his Deputies and Representatives, and therefore
we ought to Reverence God in them. We are to Esteem and Honor them, according
to that Precept in 1 Pet 2.17. Honor the King; which we are to show in our
Words and Demeanor: And it is certain that their high Dignity and Place
challenge this of us. Nor are we bound only to give Respect and Honor to them,
but to Love them, as they are Good and Virtuous, as they are Religious and
Pious, as they are lovers of their People and sollicitous to promote their
Welfare in every thing, and to rule them in the fear of God. It is our Duty to
Pray for them, according to the pattern set us in the former part of the 20th
Psalm, and according to the Injunction of the Apostle, 1 Timothy 2.1, 2. We are to
implore the Almighty to preserve them as the Instruments of his Glory, the
Protectors and Fathers of their Country, and that they may serve the true ends
of Government and advance the Scepter and Kingdom of Jesus

It is our Duty also to pay them Taxes and Customs for the support of their
Government, Romans 13.7. and to aid and assist them of especially in Times of War
and Danger, to secure and protect their Persons in defense of our Rights and
Laws, but chiefly of our Religion; for it is just we should defend him who is
the Defender of our Faith. Lastly, we ought to obey all the just Commands of
our Sovereign, and to show our Loyalty to him in complying with all his lawful
Injunctions. And this we must do in Obedience to God and in conformity to the
Laws of our most Holy Religion, which teaches us the exactest Subjection to our
Superiors. But never let us reckon Profaneness and Debauchery as a badge of
our Allegiance: Let not Riot and Excess be tokens of a Loyal Principle. We are
to remember, that the Laws of the King strictly forbid these, and consequently
we show our selves Disloyal and Disobedient to him when we are guilty of
Swearing and Drunkenness, of Lewdness, or profaning the Lord's Day, or any
other Contempt of God and Religion. This I say, that our Obedience to the
Supreme Powers may be universal and complete.

. 17. And if Obedience and Subjection be a Duty, then Disobedience and
R^sistance are a Crime, and a dangerous one; for if any shall be so hardy and
presumptuous as to oppose and rebel against their Lawful Sovereign, whose
Character (as the Apostle tells us) is to be a Terror to the Evil, and a Praise
to the Good: The same Inspired Writer will acquaint them how heinous an Offense
this is, He that resists the Power, resists the Ordinance of God, Romans 13.2
He tramples upon the Divine Institution, and flies in the Face of God himself:
And his Punishment shall be answerable to his Crime, as we read in the same
place, They that resist shall receive to themselves Damnation, the Judgment of
God will attend them both here and hereafter. Wherefore let us listen to the
Dictates of Christianity, which forbids us to resist the lawful Authority of
Princes, and backs the Prohibition with so severe a Sanction. Let us cheerfully
submit to our Superiors not only for Wrath, but also for Conscience sake, Rom
13.5.

CHAP. IX.
Of the Duty of Ministers to the People, and of the People to Ministers. Of
Parents Duty to Children, to provide for them, to instruct them in the
Principles, and direct them in the Practice of Religion. To Pray for them. To
Reprove them. To Correct them. To Encourage them. To keep them from bad
Company. To set them a good Example. Of the danger of evil Example and bad
Company.

. 1. THE second Relation, or Rank of Persons that I am to speak of, is that of
the Pastors of the Church and their Flock. For next to Magistrates are the
Guides and Governors of the Church, The Duty of Ministers.
spiritual Instructers and Overseers of Souls, the Ministers of God's Holy Word
and Sacraments. And these have a particular Duty and Office with respect to
their Charge. They whose work it is to teach others their Duty, have a peculiar
one of their own, and that of a very large extent, and they, of all Men, are
the most obliged to discharge it with the greatest care and exactness. A
Minister, of all Persons, is more signally obliged to understand and pursue the
ends of his Calling, for though all other Employments are to be made use of to
pious Purposes, that is, in the honest and faithful discharge of them, the
respective Persons ought to glorify God, and do some good to Mankind; yet this
Calling is more eminently designed for those Ends, and more immediately fitted
for them. The Office of public Instructers and spiritual Pastors is expressed
in Scripture by such general Terms as these, Feeding the Flock of God, and
taking the oversight thereof, 1 Pet. 5.2. Waiting on the Ministry, Romans 12.7.
and taking heed to it, Col. 4 17. taking heed to themselves, and to all the
Flock, Acts 20.28. First according to the Apostle's Order and Method, they are
to look to Themselves, that is, their own Lives and Behavior: Here they must
begin, or else all their Labor will be in vain. Piety and Holiness must shine
in their Conversations, or otherwise their Doctrine will have but little
Influence on their Hearers. They are to addict themselves to Religion above the
ordinary rate of Mankind, because those that teach others to be good and holy,
ought to be much more so themselves. They are to consider that if they be
Vicious, their Actions and Behavior will do more harm than their Tongues can
do good: But on the contrary, the strictness and unblameableness of their
Lives, will Effectually commend their Admonitions and Precepts to the People:
and therefore they are concerned to be Examples to the Flock, 1 Pet. 5.3. To be
Spotless and untainted in their manners, and to strive to outdo all others in
Virtue and Goodness.

. 2. Then as to the particular branches, of their Care and Oversight of their
Flock, they are such as these, to admit Persons into the Church by Baptism, to
Eject those that are Scandalous, to Restore the Penitent, to Administer the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper to those that are worthy, to visit the Sick, to
offer up Public Prayers, privately to advise, admonish and Instruct; and
publicly to Preach the Gospel, which is their greatest and weightiest work.
Here their peculiar Office is to deliver to the People, in a Plain and
Methodical way, those substantial heads of Religion, which they are to be
Instructed in for their Souls health. They must lay their Foundation well, that
is, acquaint their hearers with the Necessary Principles of Christianity, and
so build them up in their most Holy Faith. They must endeavor to represent the
Christian Religion to them in its genuine shape, that they may have a true
account of it, and thence be thoroughly convinced of its beauty and excellency.
They must take care to Feed the Flock of Christ with wholesome Food, with sound
Doctrine, such as is grounded on the Holy Scriptures, and not on humane
Invention; and following St. Paul's example, they must keep back nothing that is
profitable to them, Acts 20.20. They must warn them that are unruly, and
comfort the feeble-minded, and support the weak, whether afflicted in body, or
under the sense of Sin and guilt. Every way they must apply themselves to the
needs and Exigencies of their Flock.

Nor is it their employment only to Inform and Instruct men's minds, and to
administer solace to them, but it is required of them, that they labor to
reform their Lives, and cause them, through the assistance of the Divine Grace,
to show the virtue of their Principles in the holiness of their Practices. To
which purpose they ought to use their utmost diligence, joined with great Zeal
and Fervor, in laying open the faults and miscarriages of men's lives, in a Free
and Impartial reproving of all Sin, and denouncing the Judgments of God against
offenders, in Pathetick Exhortations to a Religious and Godly Conversation, in
quickening and exciting them to the performance of all Christian Duties, and a
Conscientious observance of all the Sacred Ordinances and Institutions of
Christ, and a constant devoting themselves to the Service and Worship of God,
Father, Son and Holy Ghost; and a humble Submission to the Discipline of the
Gospel: all which are designed by the Wisdom of God, for the advancing of his
Glory in the World, and for the promoting of the Conversion and Salvation of
Mankind. This indeed ought to be the chiefest desire, Prayer and Endeavor of a
Minister of Christ, to convert Sinners from the evil of their ways, and to make
men Everlastingly happy, and thereby to enlarge the Kingdom of our Lord and
Saviovr Jesus Christ.

3. This is the nature of the Ministerial charge, this is that which the
Apostle calls fulfilling the Ministry. Col. 4.17. And making full proof of
their Ministry. 2 Timothy 4.5. That is, performing it thoroughly and fully and
discharging all the parts of that Office. There is this difference between
Ministers of the Gospel and others, that the latter are more especially to Look
to their own Salvation, but the former are obliged by virtue of their
particular Function, to make it their great business to look after the
Salvation of others. And therefore they cannot be said to Act Righteously, that
is, to perform the task which is required of them toward others, unless they
mind this great work. Yea, if they wilfully Neglect it, they are faithless and
perfidious, they betray the Cause of Christ, and are false to men's Souls.

. 4. There is also the proper and Peculiar Duty of the Flock; for the
Ecclesiastical Rulers, as well as the Civil ones, call for your Obedience and
Subjection: according to that of the Apostle, Remember them who have the rule
over you who have spoken unto you the word of God, Heb. 137. The Duty of a
Church to Ministers.
Remembe^ them so as to obey them, as the Apostle explains himself in ver. 17.
Obey them that have the rule over you, and submit your selves, for they watch
for your Souls. Obey them in all things which they enjoin you according to the
Word of God, and that for this reason, because it is their work to watch for
the good of your Souls, and to guard them from all Evil and Danger. Therefore
they may rightly Challenge from you Respect and Honor: you are (as the Apostle
advises 1 Cor 4.1. To account of them as of the Ministers of Christ (who come
not in their own Name and Authority but in Christ's) and as Stewards of the
Mysteries of God, such as have the Honor to be entrusted by him with the care
of his House, with the great Concernments of the Church which are full of
Wonder and Mystery. This is to know them who labor among you, and are over you
in the Lord, and admonish you, 1 Thessalonians. 5.12. as the Apostle interprets himself
in the following Verse, Esteem them, says he, very highly in love for their
works sake. And if you esteem and love the Pastors of the Church, you will
support them with an honorable Maintenance, seeing this also is of Divine
Institution, 1 Cor. 9.14. The Lord has ordained that they who preach the
Gospel, should live of the Gospel. And St. Paul would have the Elders that rule
well, especially they who labor in the Word and Doctrine, to be counted worthy
of double Honor; and he adds this Reason, For the Labourer is worthy of his
Reward, 1 Timothy 5.17, 18. Thus it is the Will and Appointment of our great
Master and his Apostles, that those who serve him faithfully in the Office of
the Ministry, should be provided for and rewarded by you, and that thereby you
should show that Regard which is due to them on the account of their Excellent
Employment and Function.

. 5. But in the next place I will mention your Duty toward your Spiritual
Pastors, as it exactly answers to the several parts of their Office toward
you. Thus as they are to be Patterns to you of all Goodness and Piety, so you
are to follow their Example, and to imitate them in all those Praise worthy
Actions which you observe in them. As it is their task to instruct you in all
the important Doctrines of Religion, so it is yours to give attention to their
Religious Instructions, and thereby to stock your selves with a sufficient
Treasure of Knowledge in the great Matters of Christianity. It is your Duty and
Concern to receive and imb^be with great willingness and readiness the
Principles' of the Christian Faith, that Faith which was once so solemnly
delivered to the Saints by our Savior and his Apostles; that Faith which is
the Standard of all Divine Truth, and the very Foundation of all our religious
Worship and Practice. Reckon those Teachers to be an unvaluable Blessing and
Gift of God to you, who are continually instilling into your Ears sound
Doctrine, as it is called Tit. 1.9. and wholesome Words, as the Apostle
expresses it, 1 Timothy 6.3. in opposition to erroneous and false Doctrines, which
are unsound and unwholesome, and deprave the health of the Soul. Especially in
this corrupt Age you are concerned to beware of Seducers, who make it their
business to unsettle and unhinge Religion, and call into question the most
substantial Points of our Faith. But see that you attend to the Apostle's
advice, 1 John 4.1. Believe not every Spirit (that is, every Teacher, every
Doctrine that pretends to the Spirit of God) but try the Spirits whether they
be of God, try them by the Holy Word impartially expounded. Now, if ever, that
Counsel is seasonable, Be not Children, tossed to and fro, and carried about
with every wind of Doctrine, Ephesians. 4 14. and so is that of the same Apostle, Be
not carried about with diverse and strange Doctrines, Heb. 13.9. Mark them who
cause Divisions and Dis^entions, viz by broaching new Errors, or reviving the
old ones, contrary to the Doctrine which ye have learned, and avoid them, Romans
16.17. Steadfastly adhere to those Guides who hold fast the form of sound Words
and thereby fix and establish you in the truly Primitive Christianity.

. 6. Again as they are by their Office obliged to reprove and rebuke you for
the omission and neglect of your Duty, and for the actual Miscarriages of your
Lives, so you are bound to be thankful to them for their plain Dealing with
you, and to improve those sharp Methods for your real benefit and advantage.
And when Threatenings and Judgments are denounced by them against you out of the
Book of God, you ought to entertain them with that fear and dread which becomes
you, and to look upon the severest Applications of his Ministers as the proper
means of procuring your Good and Welfare. And as it is another part of the Work
of Spiritual Guides to administer Consolation to you when you are afflicted and
dejected, so it is your business not to refuse to be comforted, not to spill
your Cordials, but to make use of them for your Refreshment, and in the
strength of them to perform your Duty with greater alacrity and readiness.

. 7. Further, as it is a Branch of the Pastoral Care and Employment to
admonish, exhort, entreat, and in Christ's Name to command you, so you lie
under an obligation to hearken to and comply with their Admonitions,
Exhortations, Entreaties and Commands, and not to hinder the happy Operations
of all those Arguments, Motives and Inducements wherewith they labor to
prevail upon you, and gain you to the practice of what is required of you. For
this is that which their Ministry aims at all along, that your Lives may be
reformed by those Divine Truths and holy Doctrines which they propound to you,
and inculcate upon you. This can never be more seasonably urged than in these
degenerate and licentious Times, wherein Iniquity abounds, and the love of so
many toward Religion waxes cold, and even is frozen and dead. Now therefore
show by your exemplary Conversations that you have Christian Heat and Life in
you, that the Preaching of the Gospel, and the Knowledge of the Truths of it,
have had an effectual Influence on your Hearts and Lives, and that you are not
Chrstians only in Name, but that you are really such, and resolve to evidence
it by your walking according to the Rules and Prescriptions of the Gospel. And,
in fi^e, seeing it is part of the Ministerial Office to preserve Order and
Discipline in the Church, and seeing it may be undeniably proved from the
Apostolical Epistles that there is an Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction and Spiritual
Government, think your selves obliged to obey the Laws and Constitutions of it,
as they are set down in those Sacred Writings: Follow herein the Directions of
the Governors of the Church so far as they are conformable to the Rules and
Directions given by our Savior and his Apostles.

. 8 The third Relation that I am to Discourse of, is that between Parents and
Children; and it is another eminent Instance of humane Righteousness, or of our
Duty to others Here first I will set down particularly what is required of
Parents toward their Children, and then what is due from these to them. The
Duty of Parents is comprehended in such Rules as these,

. 9. 1 st. Provide for your Children: allow them all things convenient for
their outward Man. Christianity requires and commands this, and condemns the
contrary Practice. If any Man, The Duty of Parents to Children.
says the Apostle, that is, any Man that is able, provides not for those of
his own House, be denies the Faith, and is worse than an Infidel, 1 Timothy 5.8.
by such Scandalous Deportment he shows himself to be no true Christian, but
does in effect renounce the Faith which he professes. Wherefore Parents are
indispensably obliged to make provision for their Children, to supply them with
Food and Raiment, and all things necessary for Life, to consult their bodily
Health, and endeavor to preserve them from Sicknesses and Diseases, and to
take care of their Breeding and Education. There ought not only to be a present
Maintenence, but a provident care for their future Sustenance according to that
of the Apostle, The Parents ought to lay up for their Children, 2 Cor. 12.14.
You are bound chiefly to contrive their Welfare and Support hereafter by
bringing them up to some commendable Art or Employment which may administer to
them means of Livelihood when you are gone. They must not be suffered to eat
the Bread of Idleness, and thereby become unprofitable Burdens of the Earth,
and like the barren Fig Tree cumber the Ground: but as soon as they are
capable, they are to be set into some way of Action, in order to their future
well-being in the World; that in some honest Calling or Station they may be
able to provide for themselves when they come to the Age of Men; that in a
lawful way they may eat their own Bread, and enjoy the Labor, not the Filching
of their Hands. And to this purpose Parents should observe the Inclinations and
Tendencies of their Children, and accordingly in due time fix them in such an
Employment or way of Living as is most suitable to their Genius. But the
principal care of Parents should be with respect to the spiritual Welfare of
their Children; and therefore all the following Rules will aim at this.

. 10. 2 ly then, Take care to Instruct your Children in the Principles of
Religion. Instruction.
Acquaint them betimes with the necessity and fundamental Doctrines which the
Holy Scriptures furnish us with. Let them have a knowledge of the State of
Man's Innocence, of his Falling from God, of his Misery thereupon, and of God's
merciful delivering them out of it, and of what Returns Man is to make to God.
And all the other Principles of Divine Knowledge, so far as they are able to
receive them, are to be communicated to them. To which end I desire Parents to
consult the first part of this Treatise, where I have set down all the
necessary Articles of Religion which are to be known and believed. Let them
thence furnish themselves with Principles of Religion, to impart to their young
ones; but let them take care to propound them in the most useful and edifying
manner, otherwise they will be of little use to them. If you are desirous that
they should effectually receive Instruction in those Divine Matters, forget not
to proceed leisurely and by degrees. These Vessels have narrow Mouths, and
therefore the Liquor must not be poured into them all at once, but by little
and little. Nor must it be too strong, you must not disturb their Heads with
difficult Points, but instill those Instructions into them which are most plain
and easy, Of the Education of Children.
and which exceed not their weak Capacities. Propound to them Generals at
first, and After that lead them gently to the particular application of Things.
But by no means trouble and amuze their Minds with unnecessary and doubtful
Opinions. This is the way to confound them, not to edify them. And therefore
till they approach to some greater Degrees of understanding, use the utmost
plainness toward them, and let them have no Doctrines propounded to them but
what are very necessary and useful, and also such as they are able in some
measure to apprehend.

. 11. 3 dly, Do not only instruct your Children in the principles, but train
them up to the Practice of Religion: Directing the Practice of Religion.
which is the end that all the Principles of Religion tend to. Call upon them
and be very earnest with them to discharge their Duty toward their Maker and
Redeemer, to serve God with all their Heart, with all their Soul, and with all
their Strength; to have a fear and dread of his Majesty, to love him for his
Goodness and Holiness, to hope and trust in his Mercy, to humble and submit
themselves under his Corrections, to honor and Worship him with their Bodies
and Souls, to dedicate their whole Lives to his Service, to repent unfeignedly
of all their Sins, and to rely wholly on the Righteousness and Merits of Christ
Jesus for Life and Salvation. Call upon them likewise to perform their Duty
toward their Brethren and Neighbors with all faithfulness, to do them no hurt
or injury in their Names, Bodies or Estates, Possessions or Properties, but to
do them all the good they can, by speaking the Truth, by kind and courteous
Words and Actions, by Acts of Justice and Equity, by works of Charity and
Beneficence, by forgiving their Enemies, by studying Peace and Amity, and, in a
word, by heartily desiring and endeavoring the spiritual and temporal
Advantage of others. Urge it also upon your Children, as their necessary Duty,
to have a mean Esteem of themselves, to be humble and lowly-minded, to be meek
and gentle, to be contented with the Condition God has placed them in to be
thankful for every Mercy, though (...) so small, to be watchful against
Temptations, to be moderate in the use of God's Creatures, to be diligent and
faithful in their Callings, to accustom themselves to modesty and Self-denial,
and all acts of Christian Sobriety.

. 12. Thus the Parent should, according to Solomon's advice, Train up a Child
in the way he should go, Prove. 22.6. And we may observe, that this was taken
care of in the Mosaic Law: Parents were obliged to teach their Children the
Contents of it, Deuteronomy. 4.10.6.7.11 9. they were commanded to Instruct them in
the Principles and Practice of Religion. And this all Christian Parents are
equally bound to observe, and to take care that their Children suck in Religion
with their Milk, and be inured to Christianity from their tender Years, and
that (...) the while they are with them, they be bettered by them. You that are
Parents can bring this to (...) with greater success than any others besides
because your Children continually attend upon you, and are under your eye, and
daily and hourly converse with you: on which account you become well acquainted
with their Tempers, and know how to manage them: and besides, you can take the
fittest Opportunities to advise and counsel them. And what you do thus, being
done seasonably, is doubly done.

. 13. 4 thly, Intercede with Heaven for your Children: Make Addresses and
Petitions in their behalf at the Throne of Grace, Praying for your Children
for this is a proper way of deriving Blessings to them. It was Plato's
Judgment that no Prayers were heard so soon as those of Parents for their
Children. There is no doubt of it, If they be the Prayers of the Faithful; and
it is certain that those Children rarely miscarry who are frequently and
heartily recommended to God in the ardent and affectionate Petitions of their
Parents. It cannot be, said St. Ambrose to Monica, St. Augustin's Mother, that
a Child of so many Prayers and Tears should perish; and she found the Truth of
it in the Conversion of her Son. If Prayers were oftener put up on this account,
it would be much better for the World, and especially for Parents themselves,
who would find the sensible advantage of it in the holy Dispositions and
religious Manners of those they have prayed for. Wherefore be frequently on
your Knees for your Little Ones: Begin to solicit for them even in their
Infancy; when the poor Babes cannot speak for themselves, speak to God for
them. And when they are advanced to any measure of Growth, still send up your
wishes to God in their behalf, pray as Abraham on the like occasion, O that
this Child might live before Thee! O that thy Grace may always prevent and
follow him, that he may faithfully serve thee, and bring Glory to thy great
Name. Nor does this exclude the personal praying of your Children on their own
behalf; wherefore you must often remind them of this great Concern, namely, to
pray as well as they can for themselves; and you are to take care that they
every day practice it. Take it not ill if I exhort you to bring up your
Children to be Beggars, that is continually to crave and beg the Mercy and
Favor of God, humbly to beseech him to bestow upon them all things necessary
for Life and Godliness, all Temporal and Spiritual Blessings.

. 14. 5 thly, If you would approve yourselves faithful to your trust, Reproving
their Faults.
remember to reprove and reprehend, to curb and check sin in your Children
betimes. This one thing would be unspeakably advantageous to you if it were
constantly observed, as we may gather from the contrary practice of Parents,
who are the Authors of a great deal of mischief to their Children by their fond
humouring of them, and suffering them to have their wills, and to say and do
what they please without any control. But unless you are resolved on the
Eternal ruin of those whom you profess so great a Love and tenderness to, you
must take another course. Whenever you perceive that they are in any measure
guilty of Lying, or Stealing, or profaning God's Name, or any undutifulness to
you, or any other kind of Vice or Misdemeanour, forbear not to rebuke them
sharply. If there be but the least appearance of any of these evils in their
Lives, stifle and crush them in the very beginning. In their first budding and
springing forth take notice of them with harsh Language, with Anger and Frowns,
and severe reprehensions. Be warned by Old Eli, that indulgent cockener of his
Sons, who could not find in his heart to snib and check them for their soul
miscarriages, but cherished their Sin, and favored their Crimes by a slight
and Superficial reproving of them. But be not guilty of his fault, lest you
incur as grievous a Punishment as he did.

. 15. 6thly, If sharp Reproof will not prevail, add a greater severity, that
is, fitting Correction and Chastisement: for the Rod and Reproof together give
wisdom, Prove. 29.15. But as the wise Man adds, A Child left to himself brings
his Mother to shame. Wherefore in ver 17. Correction.
he gives this advice, Correct thy Son, and he shall give thee test, ye he
shall give delight unto, thy Soul. These are the happy consequences of due and
timely Correction. And that this is a very necessary and indispensable Duty of
Parents, may be gathered from the frequent repeating of it by this Inspired
Author. He that spares his Rod (says he) hates his Son, but he that loves
him, chastneth him betimes, Prove. 13.24. Again in Chapter 19 and 18. Verse,
Chasten thy Son while there is hope, and let not thy Soul spare for his crying.
So in Chap. 22.15. v Foolishness is bound in the heart of a Child, but the Rod
of Correction must drive it far from him. I will mention but one place more,
though there be several others, Pro. 23.13, 14. Withhold not correction from the
child, for if thou beatest him with the Rod, he shall not die, that is, he
shall not perish Everlastingly, thou do wisely consult the Salvation of his
Soul, and his welfare to all Eternity; as is plain from the next words, Thou
shall beat him with the Rod, and shall deliver his Soul from Hell. Therefore
let not Parents be guilty of that fondness, which will prove Fatal and
Destructive to their Children: let them not be so foolish, as gently to stroke
them when they deserve stripes. But yet let them remember to Correct them with
prudence, and accordingly to moderate their Chastisements, and to lay aside all
Passion and Fury. For they are forbid by St. Paul to provoke their children to
wrath, Ephesians. 6 4. Namely by undue severity, by rigorous and ^ustere usage. Some
indiscreet Parents accustom their Children to brow beating, and blows on every
little occasion, and are Inhumane and Barbarous in their corrections when some
greater fault is committed: but this is a very blameable way of dealing with
them, and will dishearten them sooner than amend them; yea oftentimes it
renders them obstinate in their ways. If the crooked branches of a younger
Plant be warily and gently bent, they will grow straight: but if you handle
them too roughly, you take the way to break them. Wherefore let your
Chastisements favor of Pity and Affection to your Children: let your
correction be accompanied with mildness.

. 16. 7 thly, Of Encouragement by Reward and Commendations.
As you are to reprove and punish vice in your Children, so you are to take
opportunities of Encouraging and Rewarding them, w^^h their Dutifulness is very
conspicuous and Eminent. This you may do by taking notice of what is well done
by them, by commending and praising them for some very Laudable Actions, by
vouchsafing them smiles and favorable looks, by bestowing actual Kindness and
Favors upon them. Nay, it will be requisite, not only thus to recompense the
good behavior of your Children, but to win and entice them to it by the
proposal of some Reward. You may use little Bribes to invite them to their
Duty, and to make them love it. This is a good way of managing those Children
who have a sense of Ingenuity, and therefore you may successfully use it
toward such, and thereby spur them up to virtue, and encourage them to
goodness, and countenance and cherish it in them, and at the same time act like
true Parents, that is, such who abound with Love and Affection to their own
Flesh.

. 17. 8 thly. Look to the Company and Converse of your Children. To keep them
from bad Company.
Let them not herd with the Wicked and Profane, with suc^ ^s are addicted to
Lying and ^earing (for Oaths are even in the mouths of young ones now a days:)
let them not Associate with those that are Rude and Disorderly, and Disobey
their Parents, and behave themselves irrevently toward their betters, and have
no sense of Modesty and Humility. If you suffer them to frequent the Company of
such as these when they are abroad, you do in vain ply them with Admonitions
when they are at home. Their loved comrades and play-fellows undo all that you
have done. You must then lay restraint upon them as to this particular: If it
be possible, choose their Company for them, and let them be those who have some
awe of goodness infused into them, that thereby they may further and promote
Goodness in them whom they converse with.

. 18. 9 thly, and lastly, To give them a good Example.
Though your Children sometimes meet with Evil Examples without doors (and
perhaps in this Age it is impossible to prevent it) yet be sure, that they have
a good Example set before them when they are at home. My meaning is, that you
your selves be a pattern of all Holiness and goodness to them. Let me tell you,
all your Instructions, Exhortations and Persuasions, all your Reproofs and
Corrections, yea and your Offers of Rewards will signify little without this.
You will pull down more by your bad Example than it is possible you can build
up by the other means. Nor indeed can you reasonably expect that your Children
will be good and virtuous, when you endeavor not to be so your selves. Whilst
you indulge your selves in all manner of Sin and Folly, you cannot have any
ground to imagine that they will be strict and circumspect in their Lives; for
great is the force and prevalency of Example, especially among Children. It is
observed that they generally live by it, and even then when you think they take
no notice of you, they diligently mind how you behave your selves, and what
course you take, and they readily square their Manners by your Deportment. They
will not fail to write after your Copy, for that they think is Authentic; and
they persuade themselves that they cannot do amiss if they imitate you, and
follow your Steps. Be studious therefore to frame your Lives aright, to walk
exactly and circumspectly, because the Eyes of your Children are fixed upon
you. See that in the several Conditions you are in, you behave yourselves as it
becomes Christian Parents; be careful that you act nothing vicious in the Face
of your Children but that you go before them by your good Example. Practice
before their Eyes the several Duties of Christianity: First be Religious your
selves, and then there is great hope that your Children will be so too.

. 19. And thus I have given you a short Draught of the Duty of Parents toward
their Children? which may be more briefly summed up in this one thing,
Religious Education. I have insisted the longer upon this, because upon it
depend the Success and Happiness of whole Nations: for Children being the great
support and Hopes of Families, and these of Churches and Kingdoms, and all
public Societies, if the former be not virtuously brought up, we may despair
of the Welfare of the latter. For which reason I thought it was requisite to be
very particular in laying down Rules and Directions for the pious Education of
Children, that Parents might not be destitute of Helps in this matter.

. 20. But then I consider further, that Parents generally are not so defective
in their Knowledge of what they are to do in this Affair, as they are backward
and careless in performing what they know to be their Duty: And therefore I
will in the next place make it my business to press and urge them to the
practice of the foregoing Rules, by propounding such Arguments and
Considerations as I take to be very strong and forcible in this case. And here
likewise I shall be very copious, because I design this present Undertaking for
the use of Families chiefly. To prevail with you that are Parents to discharge
your Duty aright toward your children, in bringing them up in the nurture and
admonition of the Lord, ( Ephesians. 6.4) that is, in all virtuous Discipline and
Practice, as well as in the Knowledge of what is required of them, I will make
use of these following Motives, which shall be the Subject of the next Chapter.

CHAP. X.
The Duties of the foregoing Chapter enforced by several Motives. Parents ought
to labor to extinguish those corrupt Affections they did originally convey.
Childrens natural Affections promise greater Success to Parents Labor with
them than that of others. Parents love to Children should express it self
toward their better Part. Several Motives drawn from the promising Season of
Childhood and Youth, as it is a time wherein Instruction finds an easier
Entrance and Impression, and is likely to be most Lasting. A Consideration of
the Judgments following the neglect of such Education. Parents must give an
Account of their Children. Of the Advantages and Blessings following the
discharge of this Duty of Pious Education.

. 1. I. YOU that are Parents are the Persons that first conveyed Sin and
Corruption to your Children, and therefore you are bound in an especial manner
to do all you can toward the Rooting Vice out of them, and the implanting of
Grace and Holiness in them. By your means Defilement was derived to their
Nature, and by reason of that defiled Temper they have contracted a proneness
to all Evil, and an averseness to whatever is good: So that you are engaged on
this account to endeavor, as much as in you lies, to heal that Infection which
they catched of you, to cure that contagion which you imparted to them. You set
them into a sinful and miserable World, and therefore you must prevent their
being beguiled by it: You must labor to enlighten and rectify their Minds,
and to bring them to a love of Holiness and Piety. It must be your chiefest
care that your Children may be Born again; otherwise their first Birth will be
sad and deplorable, they will have cause to Curse the Womb that bore them, and
the Paps that gave them Sack.

. 2. II. You that are Parents have the greatest Room in the Affections of your
Children, and therefore on that account you have the advantage, above all
others, of instructing them, and doing all Offices of Religion toward them.
Your Children are prompted by the Dictates of Nature to love you, and what is
there which Love will not excite them to do? You are their best Friends and
Benefactors: They are beholding to you for their Being, and their whole
allowance is generally from your hand. They will therefore hearken to you, and
comply with your Directions and Admonitions, when you call upon them to
consider their Ways, and bring Credit both to you and to themselves by a
virtuous Behavior. Your kindnesses to them are so many and so great, that,
besides the natural Instinct of Love, they will find themselves obliged to do
any thing that you fairly propound to them, and to return your Kindnesses in
that way which they are capable to do. The Lacedemonian Women, when their
Children proved undutiful and refractory, were wont to lay open their Breasts,
and to show them their P^ps, to remind them of their Love and care in suckling
of them and bringing them up, thereby (if it were possible) to reduce them to a
sense of their Duty, and to shame them into Obedience and good Manners. And
certainly with Children of any Ingenuity this is a very cogent and powerful way
of dealing with them? but especially if they consider further that they were
not only nourished by their Parents, but have since received all manner of good
things from them, they will see that they have yet a stronger Obligation on
them to do whatever their Parents enjoin them. Wherefore on this score you have
a vast Influence upon them, and may hope to prevail with them, and fix your
pious Counsels and Precepts upon them.

. 3. III. As Children are tied by the Law of Nature to love their Parents, so
you that are Parents are bound by the same Law to love them. They are part of
you, and therefore the natural Affection which is in your Breasts teaches you
to love them as your selves. Especially the Mother's Love is reckoned as the
greatest, because she is supposed to have Nursed and Suckled her Children,
which is not only a sign of natural Affection, but a great increaser of it in
that Sex. But though this be much laid aside of late by an ill Custom, yet
however, there is an inbred principle of Love in Mothers, as such. And
moreover, Christianity promotes and improves the natural Instinct of Love in
both Parents, and also directs it to the highest end. It stirs them up not only
to consult and procure the bodily good of their Issue, but it bids them love
them chiefly in such a manner as is most conducible to the good of their Souls,
and their everlasting Happiness. The active Principle of Love in them forcibly
moves them to this; for if they really love their Children, they will strive to
make them possessors of the greatest Good, and of the chiefest Blessings; and
such are the Favor of God, Grace and Holiness, and eternal Life. Wherefore you
that are Parents must mind this in the first place, else you cannot be said to
love your Children as you ought, that is, to love them with the true Love of a
Parent. This we may gather from those places of Scripture where the Great God
is pleased to express his Love and Care to us by Paternal Affection, yea not
only by the Love of a Father, but of a Mother: For can we think that he
consults only the Welfare of our Bodies? Does he not show his Love by his
regard to our Souls and our future Happiness? What a poor Affection is that
which extends no further than the outward Man?

. 4. Say not then that you love your Children when you are not concerned in the
least for their better Part, and the Welfare of their immortal Spirits. Say not
that you love your Offspring, when with indiscreet Fondness you connive at
their Faults, of even allow of them. You do not love, but hate them, whilst you
act thus; for the Softness and Indulgence which you use to them will but sooth
them into Hell, and thus you become unmerciful and cruel to their Souls; you
show your selves more savage and barbarous than those Idolatrous Parents of
old, who made their Children pass through the Fire to Moloch. Surely no one
will call this Love. But then you may be truly said to exert this Affection
toward your Children, when, besides your care of that part of their Education
which relates to their Bodies, and outward Concerns, you look to their Souls,
and mind their everlasting Good, when you help them, through the divine Grace
and Assistance, to the possession of the one thing necessary which cannot be
taken from them, which Thieves and Invaders cannot rob them of, which Power or
Policy cannot extort from them, which Poverty and Exigence cannot deprive them
of, which Sickness and Diseases cannot impair in them, which Banishment and
Persecution cannot spoil them of, which Death it self and the Grave cannot
hinder them from, but rather help to put them into a full fruition of. This is
the true Love you ought to bear to your Children.

. 5. And the reason of it is plain, because the Souls of your Children ought to
be more precious to you than their Bodies and temporal Advantage. Whence it
follows, that it is an huge instance of Folly and Indiscretion to be very
sollicious about leaving an Estate to your Children, and yet not to concern
your selves in the least for their spiritual Welfare and Happiness. This is a
very preposterous and absurd way of acting, and such as becomes not Reasonable
Agents; and yet you are every day putting it in practice. So if your Child
falls into the Fire or Water, you lament and cry out most passionately, and the
whole Family is disordered at the unhappy Accident, and not without cause: but
who can observe that you are grieved and troubled when through your wilful
negligence your Child runs headlong into Hellfire, and drops into the
bottomless Pit, and the Lake which burns with Fire and Brimstone? Does not this
show that you have not a true and real Affection for those whom you pretend
most heartily to love? I beseech you lay this seriously to Heart, Wherein true
Parental Love consists.
and for the future convince the World that you bear a True Love to your
Children, whilst you labor to secure their eternal Bliss, by instructing them
betimes in the Principles of Religion, and by being instrumental in seasoning
their young Years with Grace. Promote this good and necessary Work, though it
be with some Cost and Charges to you. Persuade your selves that your Money is
well and wisely laid out, when you disburse it in order to Religion, and
particularly when you are at some Expenses to Educate your Children in the
Knowledge of God and their Duty, and to procure wholesome Instructions for their
Souls, and to build them and your selves up in your most holy Faith, and to be
in constant Enjoyment of those Means which through the Divine Blessing, will make
you wise unto Salvation. For this you must always bear in your Minds, that the
Souls of your Children are chiefly to be taken care of, and that in order to
that they are to be fraught with godly and virtuous Principles; and that this
is the most eligible Portion and Estate that you can provide for them.

. 6. We find that those who were most Improved among the Pagans were not void
of this apprehension, as appears from what Phocion, a noted Athenian, used to
say when he was solicited to look after his Children, and get them Estates. If
my Sons, says he, be Virtuous, I shall leave them enough: but if they be
Vicious, more would be too little. And that was an admirable saying of
Xenophon, He that makes his Son a Man of worth, viz. by sound Principles and
good Behavior, gives him much, and makes him a very Rich man, although he
leaves him but a very mean Fortune. You then that are Parents may learn hence,
how to show your Affections to your Children: then you approve your selves very
kind to them, and then you entail upon them the greatest Riches and Revenues
when you furnish their Minds with Divine knowledge; and bring them up in the
Service of God and the Exercise of Religion. Set about this in good earnest,
and Consecrate your Children unto God. Let these little Images and Pictures of
your selves have his Image upon them. Show your tender Love to them by making
them like to him. For that is the Motive I have been using all this while, viz.
That your Natural and Inbred Love to your Offspring, ingages you to the
performance of what I have set before you as your Duty. The Law of natural
Affection leads you to this, because if you truly love your Children, you will
love them in the best way, and procure them, as far as you can, the greatest
Blessings: for then you Act like Loving Parents indeed.

. 7. 4 thly, Instruct your Children in Religion, and bring them up in the Fear
of the Lord, because this is the Fittest Season for this work. Now you may hope
to be successful in your Attemps of Planting Grace in them, and Seasoning them
with Religion. Which is not so spoken or meant, as if it were in the absolute
Power of Parents to Extirpate Vice out of their Children, or to Implant the
virtues of the Holy Spirit in them: No, it is not Birth or Breeding that
entails Religion on a Family. Cain and Abel were Instructed alike, as well as
they were from the same womb: and so were Esau and Jacob. And in daily
Instances we see that Education does not always prevail, Religion runs not in a
Blood, is not by descent from the Parent to the Child. It is God's Grace that
makes the distinction between Persons. But yet it is as true that God makes use
of Religious Parents as Instruments for the instilling of Holy Principles into
those of younger years, and sowing the seeds of Grace in them betimes, and he
is pleased to give a Blessing to their Endeavors. And Parents may be Excited
and Animated to set about this work on this double account, 1. Because it is
most probable that those Instructions which they infuse into Persons in their
First and Early years, will have the easiest Reception. 2. They will be the
more deeply Impressed, and last the longer.

. 8 First, you are encouraged to inform your Children concerning the Christian
Faith, and the practice of Religion, and to weed out of them what you find to
be Vicious and Harmful, because God has placed them under you in that Season
wherein they are most capable of receiving those Informations and Instructions,
The benefit of Early Instruction.
and of submitting to that Nurture and Discipline which you make use of for the
Rooting out of Vice. The Spring of the Year is the fittest time for Purging and
Cleansing the Body, in order to the Establishing a good State of Health. It is
certain, that the early and blossoming Years of Youth (which I may call their
Springtime) are the most proper and advantageous Season you can choose to
cleanse and purify their Minds, to cure their Diseased Inclinations, and to
prepare them for a sound and hale Temper of Soul in the remaining part of their
Lives. Your Children are to remember the^ Creator in the days of their Youth
and Vigor, Eccl. 12.1. But lest they should neglect this, it lies upon you to
be their faithful Admonitors and Remembrancers, often to remind them of this
Duty, and to urge them to the practice of it: And you have this to encourage
you, that this is the fittest Time to begin, and set about this Work, because
now they are in the prime of their Years, in their budding A^e, which is more
easily managed than that which succeeds it. You cannot then discharge this
Office at any time better than now: it is not probable you will ever be more
successful than in this present juncture. This Manna must be gathered in the
Morning, in the Morning of Youth, in the early dawning of their Years; or else
afterward this Manna may become unsavory, loathsome and useless. This moist and
soft Clay (for that has been the fit and proper Comparison, as well as
Character, to set forth Youth) will suffer it self to be molded and wrought as
you please; but if you let this Season slip, it will grow hard and dry, and you
will find it a difficult, if not an impossible Task, to handle and fashion it
as you would.

. 9. Secondly, Let this encourage you, that the good and wholesome Lessons
which Parents give their Children in their younger Years, are generally
observed to make a deep impression upon them, and are commonly retained by them
a long time. The reason why the wise Man advises Parents to train up their
Children in the way they should go, is, because when they are old, they will
not depart from it, Prove. 22.6. Religious and holy Admonitions bestowed upon
them betimes, will not loose their virtue and power upon them, but will be
happy Conducters of their Life even in old Age. There are indeed some Instances
to the contrary in all Times, but that which we can gather from them is only
this, that if good and virtuous Principles sucked in betimes are not always
able to preserve Persons from Apostasy, and running into all sorts of evil, how
dangerously infected must those needs be, and how unavoidable is their Sin and
Destruction who in their very tender Years were brought up in the practice of
Vice, and were acquainted with no other Principles but such as lead them to it?
The consideration of which should prevail with the Person I am applying my self
to, to devote their Children to Religion whilst they are young, to ground them
in Knowledge and Virtue at first, as ever they desire they should adhere to God
and Goodness, when they arrive to riper Years. For such is the influence and
efficacy of Religious Education, that those who are dedicated to God in their
early days, generally and for the most part prove very good and holy Men.

. 10. Wherefore be persuaded to inure your Children to the Yoke of Christ in
their younger Days, and then it will be easy to them afterward; for by your
suppressing and taming their youthful Lusts and Inclinations, the remaining
part of their Lives will become more compliant with Religion. So that this is
the best Method you can use for the fixing and establishing them in Goodness,
and hindering them from revolting from it when they grow up in Years. But if you
be neglectful in this point, if you take no care of your Children betimes, you
do in vain promise your selves that they will do well hereafter. Children are
like Arrows, says the Psalmist, they are indeed like them in this, that if
they go wrong from the String at first, they are generally shot at rovers, and
reach not the mark designed. And then they will prove Arrows in another sense;
they will be fatal Shafts in their Parents sides, yea, they will wound and
pierce their Hearts.

. 11. This may be sufficient to commend a pious Education to you, for it is
this that through the Divine Blessing gives Parents hopes of the Welfare of
their Children for the future. This has been the true reason why all sober and
considerate Persons, not only among Christians but others, have taken so much
care about the Training up o^ Youth, and have so highly extolled the Practice
of it. It was the usual Saying of Agesilaus, one of the Lacedemonian Kings, who
made very wise Laws about the bringing up of Children, We must, says he, teach
Children now what they shall do when they are Men. And on the contrary the
Mischiefs that follow the want of a strict and virtuous Education have been
noted by the wisest and most intelligent Men, insomuch that Aristotle, who was
one of them, painly and boldly tells us, That by the neglect of this sort of
Education and Discipline, Mankind becomes the worst of all God's Creatures.
Whence we learn the absolute necessity of Disciplining of Youth unless we are
content that our own kind should be transformed into that which is Brutish,
yea and become worse than that. Hence also we learn, that it is a Task worthy
of a Christian Parent to institute Children betimes in the way of Godliness,
for this lays the Foundation of their future Life and Happiness; and the
greatest Things to come are owing to this present undertaking. See as it is in
Husbandry, the whole expectation of a plentiful Crop and Harvest lies upon the
Sowing, Tilling and Cultivating of the Ground; so it is here, the hopes of a
good and religious Life hang very much on the first Principling and Seasoning
of Youth, the sowing in them the Seeds of Godliness betimes. All the future and
lasting Prosperity of your Children depends upon this present ordering and
managing of them. And the reason is, because those Impressions that are made in
Youth, generally remain afterward, and are not easily defaced. The Vessel
retains the smack and savor of that Liquor which it was first of all seasoned
with. This should encourage you to furnish the Minds of young ones with pious
Instructions, for as that is the Season wherein you are like to do good upon
them, so the good which you do them will have a lasting effect upon them.

. 12. V. Another Motive that I will make use of is this, viz. the Consideration
of the Judgments and Punishments which attend the wilful neglect of this Duty.
The Judgments that usually follow the neglect of pious Education.
God generally punishes those Parents who are guilty in this kind with
undutiful and ungodly Children, Children of Belial, and such as prove
unsuccessful in the World, and meet with some signal Mark of the Divine
Displeasure. Observe the Judgment of God upon Eli, and gather thence what it is
that God expects Parents should do for their Children. That fond and indulgent
Man used too much Lenity toward his Sons, he was cold and careless in his
Reproofs, and thereby hardened them in their Impieties: and those grieved their
Father's Heart, and at last pulled down Vengeance on their own Persons. For so
it is that God punishes the Parent in inflicting Punishment on the Children.
The former suffers the latter to go on in their Sins, and some remarkable Curse
lights on them, and so both become the Examples of Divine Severity; for the
Evil which befalls the one redounds to the other. You that are Parents, read
that dreadful P^ssage in 1 Samuel 3 13 14. I will judge Eli's House for ever for
the Iniquity which be knows and ^^nisheth not, because his Sons made
themselv^ (...) and he restrained them not (or, as it is in the Original, he
frowned not on them) therefore the Iniquity of his House shall not be purged
for ever. Because he was so favorable to his Sons, I will be the more severe
to him; I will let him know how great and crying a Sin it is in Parents to
connive at the Wickedness of their Children: This too indulgent Father shall in
a short time receive the uncomfortable Tidings of his Sons being cut off in
Battle; and he himself overloaded with Grief shall fall from his Seat backward,
and break his Neck, and his whole Family shall be discharged and cast often. Let
Parents often think of this remarkable Judgment of the Almighty on Eli and his
House, and tremble at it. If they knew of the Iniquity of their Children, and
restrain them not, if they do not according to their Ability hinder them from
running into vile and lewd Courses, they may expect the Hand of God to be
stretched out against them and their House; they and their Children shall fall
under the strokes of Divine Vengeance, For the Evil is Reciprocal: The Parents
are cursed for the Childrens Miscarriage, and the Children for the Parents.

. 13. I pray consult another very notable Passage in the History of the Old
Testament, 2 Kings 2.23, etc. whence you will be convinced that even the Sins
of Young Children do not escape the Wrath of God, and their Parents are sharers
in their Punishment; for he is wont to send his Judgments on Children, to
punish both them and their Parents. The Narrative runs thus, Elisha went up
unto Bethel, and as he was going up by the way, there came forth little
Children out of the City, and mocked him, and said unto him, Go up thou
Bald-head, Go up thou Bald-head. And he turned back, and looked on them, and
Cursed them in the name of the Lord. And there came forth Two She bears out of
the Wood, and tare Forty and Two Children of them. As the Psalmist informs us,
that out of the Mouth of Babes and Sucklings God has ordained strength, Psalm
8.2. Even these little ones may have the Seeds of Grace Sown in them betimes,
something of God and Goodness may be found in them; so on the contrary, here
these little Children by Reason of their Natural Depravity, and Evil Education,
and Ill Examples set before them, discover the Diabolical Spirit in them. As
soon almost as they have the use of their Tongues they employ them against God,
and jeer at his Servants. Alas poor wretches they had heard Older ones Flout at
this Man of God, they had seen Prophets abused and affronted, they had learnt
of their Parents at home to despise the Messengers of God, and to speak
unworthily of the Aged: and now they think they may safely follow their Parents
steps; there could be no fault in imitating of them.

Think of this, you that are Parents, remember how prone your Children are to
do as you do, to make you their President and Example, and to look upon your
words and actions as the standard of theirs. Consider this, that if Holiness be
despised, and Religion laughed at, and the Ministers and Ambassadors of Christ
derided by you, you must expect that your Children will behave themselves after
the same sort. The Children cried Hosanna unto our Savior, and here they cry,
Go up thou Bald-head to that Prophet: it is probable that this diversity of
behavior was shaped by different Education and Example. The good Prophet could
not pass the way, but a Company of rude Children followed him at his heels, and
abused him: and it is not to be wondered at, because they were of Bethel, and
consequently bred up an Idolatry from their Cradles, and by continual Examples
before their Eyes, were taught to mock at God's Prophets, and to vilify their
Persons, and contemn and scorn their Function. Whereas they ought to have
Reverenced this Holy Man, to have Respected his Age, and honored his Sacred
Profession, and that Extraordinary Spirit which he was endued with, and which
was become Famous throughout all Israel, they on the contrary Irreverently
scoffed at him, and reproached his Old Age, and hooted at him for his Years:
They whose hair was scarcely grown, derided the Prophet because his was fallen
by Age.

Where by the way let Parents be reminded to inculcate this betimes on their
little ones, that they must by no means despise any Persons for their Years,
nor mock at any for their natural Defects and Infirmities. If they be not
carefully checked as to this particular, they will in time laugh at their
Parents, and scorn them when they are Old: they will upbraid them for their
Weaknesses and Failings, which are the Constant and Inseparable attendants of
declining Years. Let Parents therefore Rehearse this Remarkable Story in the
Ears of their Children, and cause them to Remember what was the Fate of that
young crew who vilified the Man of God. They jeered him for his Old Age; and
their punishment for it was, never to Arrive to it. They laughed at Elisha's
Bald-head, and for a Recompense, were not honored themselves with gray hairs.
They Ridiculed his Years, and for a Reward were not permitted to live out half
their Days, no not a lesser portion; for we read that they were forthwith
devoured by such Savage Beasts as the next adjoining Wood was furnished with.
So dangerous it is to mock at the Aged, to affront our Elders and Betters,
especially the Messengers of God. There are Instruments ready to Execute the
wrath and Displeasure of the Incensed Majesty of Heaven, so that Sin shall not
go unpunished. Yea, we find that it was doubly punished here, for not only the
Children were severely dealt with, but the Parents were punished in the loss of
them. Wherefore be seriously concerned for the Sins and Miscarriages of your
Children, because you know not how soon you may be sharers in their punishment.
You are obliged for your own sake to take care of your Children, lest you be
joynt-sufferers with them, for your contributing to their Sins by your own
wilful Indulgence.

. 14. And not only at present but hereafter the neglect of your Duty toward
your Children, whilst they were under your Tuition, will be accounted for; for
it is certain that you must Answer another Day for the Souls of those who were
so nearly related to you. It is true they must give an Account for themselves,
Parents must give an Account of their Children.
but it is as true that you must likewise, because they are your proper Charge
as you are their Parents. You are set over them on purpose to effect their
real good, and therefore you must discharge this trust with faithfulness. Read
those observable words in Ezekiel. 16.20 21. Thou have taken thy Sons and thy
Daughters, and these have thou sacrificed unto them (that is, the Idols) to be
devoured. Is this of thy Whoredoms (that is, of thy Spiritual Whoredom, which
is Idolatry) a small matter that thou have slain my Children, and delivered
them to cause them to pass through the fire? Where you are to take notice that
your Children are God's Children and therefore are to be disposed of according
to his will: and it is his will and pleasure that you should dedicate them to
him and his Service, and nor Sacrifice them to Moloch, not devote them to
Satan, and deliver them up to him to be devoured. They are my Children, says
God, but he has appointed you to take care of them: he has given them to you
to Instruct them, and to make them better. Therefore you are not permitted to
do what you will with them, you are not left to your liberty to neglect them if
you please. But as the Ministers of the Gospel are to watch for men's souls, as
they that must give an Account, so you must be watchful and careful about the
Souls of your Children because you must reckon for them: and as God said to the
negligent Prophet, that if any Soul perish by his carelessness, the blood of
that Person shall be required at his hands, Ezekiel. 10.20. So if you that are
Parents wilfully suffer these who are your peculiar Charge to miscarry, you
must answer it to God at your peril. O that you would consider this, you that
let your Children go on without control in all manner of Vice, and restrain
them not! Be it known to you, that their blood will be required of you, because
it is your fault that they were such oftenders, or at least you have in a great
measure contributed toward their guilt by your winking at them. Therefore it is
just you should be called to an Account for what they have done, and if you
have not Repented of your gross failing here, you will assuredly feel the hand
of Divine Justice hereafter. But though you unfeignedly Repent of it now, yet
the Reflection on such a miscarriage, which is like to prove so Fatal to any of
your Children, will be very Troublesome and Tormenting to you as long as you
live, for it must needs make you very uneasy, to consider that you have brought
up any to be Inhabitants of the Regions of Darkness: that by your means the
number of the Damned is Increased, and that any of your Offspring are gone out
of your kind Embraces, into the Arms of the Implacable and Malicious Spirits
below.

. 15. 6 thly, I will proceed next to a Motive of another and quite different
nature, The Blessings that follow a Conscientious discharge of the Duty of
pious Education.
and that is the Consideration of the great Advantages and Blessings which
attend the Faithful and Conscientious performance of the Duty which I have been
discoursing of. By this means 1. You derive a Blessing upon your selves. 2. You
entail one upon your Children. First, I say you take the Right course to make
your selves Blessed and happy. It will be a great and Comfortable benefit to
you, if your Consciences truly acquaint you, that you have sincerely
endeavored to Instruct your Children in the Knowledge and Fear of God, and to
make them thoroughly apprehensive of their great Interest as they are
Christians: it will be a mighty Solace and Refreshing to you, that you have
thus performed what was your proper business and Concern, a you are Parents.
Nay, say that your Children prove wicked, lewd and Debauched, and by their
vile Actions disgrace you as well as themselves, yet it will be some
Alleviating and Calming of your Spirits that you have discharged your
Consciences, that you have not been wanting as to your part, that you stocked
them with Religious Principles, and acquainted them with their whole Duty, and
besought God for them, and by Exhortation and Example, and all other good means
labour^d to establish them in the way of Virtue: it will be a great refreshing
to your minds if you have thus done, whatever the event of it be.

. 16. But then, on the other hand, if God shall vouchsafe to give a Blessing to
your undertakings, and your Children prove Good and Holy, and make it their
chief Study and business to serve God and obey you, then your Comfort and Joy
must needs be very great and overflowing. You will then think your Labor and
pains well bestowed upon them, and you will Reap the happy Fruit of all your
Cost and Trouble. They will make you amends for all your Care and Kindness,
your painful watchings and weary ^ights: they will a succor you in your
declining Age, supply your needs, consult your safe^y, and by their Prayers be
unspeakably serviceable to you. All the Esteem and Renown which they acquire by
their Worthy actions, yea, all the honor they bring to God, will in some sort
be yours: and your Memory will be precious for their sake. So that if you
consult your own Benefit and Advantage, you are concerned to listen with great
Attentiveness to the Doctrine I have been treating of. Whosoever you are,
Fathers or Mothers, who Educate your Children in the ways of Holiness, you do
most wisely contrive your own welfare, and that in this World. You shall
Receive a sufficient Recompense for your pious Instructions, you shall gain by
your Childrens godliness. For if they obey God, they will be obedient to you;
if they Fear him, they will Reverence and Respect you; if they serve him
Uprightly, they will be True and Faithful to you; if they Love him entirely,
they will be kind and Affectionate to you; and give demonstrations of it by all
Acts of Filial obedience. Pleasure, Contentment and Peace shall be the
Blessings of your Family: your Children shall be like Olive-plants (the Emblems
of Peace and Quietness) round about your Table. Behold! thus shall they be
Blessed that fear the Lord, and Teach their Children to do the like. Discord
and dissension shall be banished their dwellings, and Tra^qu^lity and Love
shall take place: and thus the private Felicity of a Family, shall be a step to
Eternal and never failing happiness in the highest Heavens.

. 17. Again, as you derive a Blessing on your selves, so you convey it to your
Children. To this purpose is Psalm 103 17.18 The Mercy of the Lord is from
everlasting to everlasting upon them that fear him, and his Righteousness to
Childrens Children to such as keep his Covenant and to th^se that remember his
Commandments to do them. Here is an assurance that God will show favor to
those that fear him, and that that Favor shall be even transmitted to their
Posterity, yea to Childrens Children. As God visits the Iniquity of the Fathers
on the Children, so he shows Mercy unto thousands of their Posterity that love
him and keep his Commandments, Exodus 20.5.6. Of the godly Man the Psalmist
pronounces that his Seed is blessed, Psalm. 37.26. And mark what this great
Observer of Providence has related for your comfort in the foregoing Verse, I
have been young, and now am old (and therefore you may expect from him some
useful Experiment, and it is this which follows) yet have I not seen the
Righteous forsaken, nor his Seed begging Bread. God will Bless the Righteous in
their Seed; their Children shall fare the better for them; they shall be looked
after and maintained; they shall find Relief in their greatest Streights and
Extremities. Say then that they are reduced to a very low Condition; yet some
Body will take pity on them, and succor them: For the sake of a Righteous
Parent many a Child has found Friends and Favor. The precious Name and Memory
of a pious Father or Mother have been advantageous to their Off spring. The
Prayers that they put up to Heaven for them, and the Blessings they have
distributed among them have procured a Succession of Mercies to them for many
Years. Especially if their Children tread in the holy steps of their Religious
Parents, there is a farther assurance to them of a plentiful Store of
Blessings. Do therefore what you can to imprint Religion on the Minds of your
Children, and manage them by good Counsels and good Examples, and then it will
be joyful to you to think that when you shall leave this World, you shall leave
those behind you that are in the favor of the most H^, and that as he is your
God, so he will be the God of your Seed, and never leave them nor forsake them.
Let this c^ear you in the midst of those Fears and Cares you are subject to in
respect of your Children.

. 18. I imagine some of you sitting down, and molesting your Minds with such
Thoughts, and uttering them in such words as these; Alas! we have but a poor
Pittance to bequeath to our Children. Some of them are little Shittless Babes,
that are scarce able to ^spout our Names or their own, and they can hard^y tell
that we are their Parents. And those others, who are of more Years, are like to
be left in a forlorn Condition, when we, who are their best, it not their only
Friends, shall be taken from them. We next to God, the Father of all, gave them
their Being, and we would fain contribute toward their well being. We first
brought them on the Stage of the World, and we fear the Parts they are to act
on it may be too troublesome and even Tragical. It is certain we must in a
short time be summoned into another World, and it grieves us to think how our
Children will sh^^t in this We cannot carry them along with us, and yet they
can hardly stay behind us; for they poor silly Creatures are unprovided of
M^an^s and Livelihood. We cannot guess what hazards and difficulties they may be
liable to when we are gone. Who knows but that Rags and Begg^ry may be their
Portion? In brief, it will be sorrow enough to part from them, but this will be
more s^^ and u^su^^erable that we must leave them to the wide World, and that
we cannot ^^ve to see them settled and provided for.

But enough, nay too much of this distrustful Language. If your Children truly
fear God, they have a sufficient Portion. Do what you can to secure to them the
Divine Favor and Blessing, and then you need not be sollicitous about what may
befall them after your Death. The more helpless they are, the more signal and
remarkable will the Providence of God be toward them. Question not God's
Goodness, but be careful to do your Duty toward him, and toward your Children
whilst you are with them. I pray peruse that notable place of Scripture, Jer.
49.11. Leave thy fatherless Children: I will preserve them alive; and let thy
Widows trust in me. The strange Situation of which words is worth our taking
notice of, for in the four preceding Verses, and in the twelve following ones,
nothing but Calamity, Ruin and Destruction are threatened: So that there seems
to be no connection or dependence of this Passage on the Context; and therefore
one would be apt to wonder how this Verse is brought in and inserted in this
place. But you may suppose with me that the words were uttered on this or the
like occasion: Some good Man or other in the midst of the public Calamities
and Judgments, foreseeing yet greater and more grievous Plagues which were to
come, and being deeply affected with his Countries Miseries, and overcome of
Grief, was weary of living any longer: But that which in a more particular
manner took up his Thoughts at this time, was the Concern which he had for his
dear and near Relations. What will become of them, says he, when I am departed
from them? Who is there that I can leave them too, and expect they shall meet
with good usage? Who will be so kind as to look after them? Whom can they trust
and rely upon in these evil Times? Whilst thus the good Man is starting of
Questions, and raising Scruples, and vexing himself with his present
Circumstances, he that has styled himself a Father to the Fatherless, and a
Husband to the Widow, silences all his Doubts, removes all his Scruples, and
gives a gracious Answer to his Demands, saying, Leave thy fatherless Children
to me, I will be their Father, their Guardian and Protector. Commit your
Orphans and Widows to my care, and I will secure them; though they be poor and
shiftless, I will provide for them; though they have no Friends, I will be a
Friend and a Parent to them, if they will trust in me. I feed the young Ravens,
and shall I suffer the Seed of the Righteous to famish? I cloth the Grass of
the Field, and shall I let my Children go naked? Wherefore comfort ye one
another with these words, and distrust not the divine Care and Goodness; only
let this be your care, that your Children be brought up in the fear of the
Lord, that they be taught to serve and obey him; and then you secure the Favor
of God to them. I bese^ch you consider what I now say, for the sake of your
Offspring and Families, that those that proceed from your Lords may stand up
and call you Blessed. For they will have great reason to do so, if you put them
into an effectual way of purchasing God's Blessing, which is the thing I have
propounded, and so often explained to you, and inculcated upon you. Thus you
are surrounded with Arguments and Perswesives to excite you to the practice of
this excellent Duty. Look which way you will, you are powerfully invited to
this necessary Task.

CHAP. XI.
A further Encouragement to the Duty of pious Education, taken from some
eminent Examples in Scripture and History. An Enquiry into the strict Sense of
1 Timothy 2.15. Of Childrens Duty to their Parents; Reverence, Love, Gratitude,
Submission to Counsels, Admonitions, actual Obedience to their Commands; to
relieve them in their Poverty; to Pray for them; and follow their good Example.
Several Motives to this Practice. The Curses following Disobedience. A Motive
taken from Christ's Subjection to his Parents. Of Masters Duty to their
Servants. The Blessing following the religious Care of Servants.

. 1. FOR the farther Encouragement of Parents, I will in the last place set
before them some Examples of Holy Men and Women, who are renowned upon this
account, viz. for their Instructing and Educating their Children in the ways of
God. Abraham the Father of the Faithful is the first eminent Pattern of this
kind; concerning whom God himself said, I know him that he will command his
Children and Household, to keep the way of the Lord, Genesis 18.19. and accordingly
he took care to bring them up in the practice of Godliness, as appears from the
pious care he had about his Son Isaac's Marriage, and from the happy
propagation of Religion in that Race and Family. Another illustrious Instance
of a Godly Parents concern for his Children is holy Job, of whom it is thus
recorded, Job. 1. ^, 5. His Sons went and feasted in their Houses, every one
his day, and sent and called for their three Sisters, to eat and drink with
them. And it was so when the Days of their Feasting were gone about, that Job
sent and sanctified them, and rose up early in the Morning, and offered burnt
offerings according to the number of them all: For Job said, i^ may be that my
Sons have sinned and cursed God in their Hearts. Thus did Job continually. It
is evident, that Job's Piety was not only Personal, Chap 1. Verse 1. but
relative, that is, extended to his Children; of which here is a very singular
proof from his godly Fear and Jealousy. He was afraid his Children had too
freely indulged some unlawful practice in the time of their Feasting and Mirth,
and ha^ thereby offendad God. Or, suppose they were not outwardly and visibly
profane, but had been so secretly and in their Thoughts, for that may be the
meaning of Cursing God in their Hearts: Although their Words and Actions did
not betray any Irreverence toward the Majesty of God, yet he feared their
Minds might inwardly conceive something unworthy of him. Which excellent
Pattern should remind all Parents of rendering the good of their Childrens
Souls, and taking care that they offend not God in any thing. They are usually
heard to say when their young ones are long out of their sight, It may be the
are come to some harm, it may be some Evil has befallen them, they have been
beaten, or abused, or the like. Thus do Parents express their Fears concerning
their Children, but seldom or never in the Language of this good Man, It may be
they have sinned, and cursed God. Observe the Style, It may be: a possibility
of the thing, and a mere suspicion were ground enough, you see, for his Godly
care and fear; so extremely tender was he of his Childrens good.

Which also appeared from the Means he used for their safety, He offered
burnt-offerings according to the number of his Children, and in order to this
he sanctified them, that is, he solemnly prepared them for that sacred
performance, that it might prove successful. Job's Children had refreshed
themselves with free Eating and Drinking at one another Houses: Now he takes
care that their Minds be intent upon Religion. Friendly Repast is followed with
Piety and Devotion. As they Feasted together, so Job would have them meet and
Pray together, and lament their past Miscarriages, and thankfully acknowledge
the Mercy and Goodness of God to them, and jointly endeavor by Sacrifice to
avert his Displeasure. Thus did Job continually, that is, as often as his Sons
and Daughters met together, he never forgot to call upon them to examine their
Hearts, and search into their Ways, and to make their Peace with God. The same
Principle that set him on work at first, carried him through it, and caused him
to persevere to the End. May all Parents imitate this holy Man in his Religious
and pious care of his Children.

. 2 I will Instance next in Solomon's Parents, from whom (as he tells us
himself) he received such Instructions as these, Get wisdom, get Understanding:
Wisdom is the Principal thing, therefore Get Wisdom, and with all thy getting
get Understanding. Prove. 4.4, etc. And in other places he lets us know what
excellent Lessons they instilled into him. Not only his Father, but his Mother
took upon her the care of Instructing him in his Younger years, as is evident
from the last Chapter of the Proverbs, the former Part of which is the Prophecy
that his Mother taught him. ver. 1. She infused into her Son the Reverence of a
Deity betimes, and constantly prayed that God would be with him, whence perhaps
he is styled Lemuel, and she furnished him with Divine Sayings and Proverbs to
settle his Judgments and direct his Practice. Thus Bathsheba was both Mother
and Tutouress to Solomon: and in part of requital he endited a Panegyric of
her praise, and in the Commendation of all those of her Sex who imitate so
Royal and Religious a Pattern, as you my read at the 10th ver. of the last
Chapter of the Proverbs, to the End. Happy had he been if he had always listened
to so Excellent a Teacher and Councellor, especially if in his Riper years he
had called to mind and practiced her holy Admonitions. But this is the thing
which at present we are taking notice of, that both Fathers and Mothers ought
to be Exemplary in their Religious Educating of their Children. My Son hear the
Instruction of thy Father, and for sake not the Law of thy Mother, Prove. 1 8.
Where we see that not only the Fathers Instruction but the Mothers Law is
mentioned, that Law which contains all those wholesome Lectures which she gives
her Children, for the right framing of their Lives and ordering of their
manners: these have the force of a Law, and oblige the consciences of their
Children.

. 3. It is plain then that the Instructing and Educating of these in Religion
are the Duty of a Wife, Education the Woman's care as well as the Man's.
as well as of a Husband; nay, they seem to be more particularly the Care and
Employment of the former because she is most Conversant with these young ones,
and has the opportunities of informing their minds, and sh^ping their manners.
And it is as true likewise that Mothers, if they be vitiously inclined, are by
reason their more intimate and frequent converse with their Children, capable
of doing them the greater harm by Instilling of corrupt Principles into them.
And therefore it is perhaps that in the History of the Kings of Judah their
Mothers names are mentioned, both of the Religious and Irreligious Kings, as
bearing a part in the Commendation of their Sons that were Good, and in the
Disgrace and Infamy of them that were wicked, because they were so Instrumental
and Serv^ceable toward either. The extraordinary piety of King Hezekiah may
perhaps be partly Attributed to the wholesome Admonitions of his Mother Abijah,
2 Chronicles. 29.1. As on the contrary, King Ahaziahs Government was the worse by
reason of his wicked Mother Athaliah, who was his Councellor to do wickedly, as
it is expressly said, 2 Chronicles. 22.3.

, 4. If we pass to the New Testament, we shall meet with other Examples of
Parents who have been careful about the Religious Educating of their Children.
There also we shall find that this has been the Employment of the Female Sex:
thus of Timothy it is said that from a Child he knew the Scriptures, 2. Tim.
3.15. Which was owing to the pious care of his Grandmother Lois, and his Mother
Eunice, 2 Timothy 1. 5, who nourished him up in the words of Faith, and good
Doctrine, 1 Timothy 4.6. and thereby fitted him for the practice of Godliness. St.
John's 2d. Epistle is addressed to the Elect Lady and her Children, because the
former was so Famous for her Instructing and Educating of the latter. This St.
John highly commends her for, and greatly Rejoices in, that he beheld the
Fruits of her Godly care, that be found her Children walking in the truth, ver.
4. That is, according to the holy Rules and Precepts of the Gospel of Truth,
which she had instilled into them.

. 5. Besides the Examples mentioned in the Inspired Writing, I might name
others, as that of the Mother of the Seven Sons spoken of in the 2d Book of
Maccabees, where we Read how Zealously and Affectionately she Instructed and
Admonished them, Confirming them in their Duty, and Encouraging them to suffer
Death for the Truth. Among the Primitive Christians the Pious Industry of
several Women in the bringing up of their Childern, and those of Noble Birth
and Families, Examples of Pious Education.
is Recorded by the Writers of the Church. In order to which they were wont to
consult the gravest Divines and Guides of Souls; and these most readily
furnished them with proper Rules and Documents, witness St. Jerome's Directions
to Laela about the educating of her Daughter Paula, wherein he advises her to
season her Mind first of all with Piety and the Fear of God, with Medita^^on
and Prayer, and Reading the Scriptures, and such like holy Exercises. So we
read that Macrina, the Mother of Gregory Nyssen and Basil, took care to
instruct them in the Faith, and to initiate their young Years in Religion and
Holiness, as they themselves testify. Nay, let me adjoin an Instance or two
out of the Pale of the Church. One of the Ancient Philosophers had his (...).
Laert. in Aristip.
Surname from his being taught of his Mother. Roman History acquaints us that
the Graechi were fashioned betimes to all moral Virtue by their excellent and
accomplished Mother Cornelia. Of which Roman Lady it is likewise said, that
when she had any great Personages came to her House to pay her a visit, she
used to make a Show of her Children, as of the choicest Ornaments of her House,
whilst it was the Custom of others o^ her Sex to boast of their Attire, to
expose their Plate and Jewels, and to vaunt the Images and Statues belonging to
their Families. The excellent Emperor Antoninus tells us that he (like another
Solomon) learnt of his Royal Mother the study of Piety and Religion. We read
that Alexander Severus, another of the Roman Emperors, proved mild and
courteous to the Christians on the account of his being instructed and tutour'd
by his Mother Mammea, who was brought to a good Opinion of the Christian
Religion by the pious Doctrine which she had received from Origin, who
nourished at that time.

. 6. And if Mothers can thus prevail on their Sons when they are arrived to
some Maturity of Age, and are as it were at their own disposal, much more are
they able to influence upon them when they are younger, and under their Wings,
and wholly at their Command. Wherefore let Mothers make use of their Authority,
and whilst they have their Children at their Becks, train them up to what is
good and holy, instruct them in the Law of God and the necessary Matters of
Salvation, inure them to pious Discipline, and order their Lives aright.
Remember that this is a work that properly belongs to you, it is your
particular Office, and therefore discharge it faithfully; and thereby you will
both save your selves, and those that are so nearly related to you. Let the
Apostles words in 1 Timothy 2.15. be your Encouragement: It (...) place well worth
your taking notice of, and I mention it the rather because I would clear it
from some mistaken Interpretations of it. She (that is, the married Woman)
shall be saved in (or by) Child bearing, if they continue in Faith, Charity and
Holiness, with Sobriety. Which some Learned Divines of our own, as Dr. Jackson
and Dr. Hammond, understand concerning the Virgin Mary's bearing of the Child
Jesus: But I conceive it is improbable that this is meant here, because the
Apostle speaks of the Woman's Salvation only, and of the particular Conditions
required of her in or let to her being saved, but by the Virgin Mary's Child
bearing, that is her bearing and bringing forth the promised Seed Christ Jesus
(which was the means foretold for breaking the Serpents Head) not only Women
but Men are saved. Therefore I do not see there is any reason to interpret
these words concerning the blessed Fruit of the Virgin's Womb. Others
understand the place concerning Women's escaping safe from the pains and perils
of Childbirth, but this cannot be the meaning because very few of that Sex are
exempted from the pains and difficulty of Childbearing, and because several of
them are not saved from that Fatal Peril which sometimes attends it. And
besides, to be saved or delivered in this Sense, is a favor granted not only
to the Faithful, but others; whereas this Text speaks of some particular Act or
special Behavior which is peculiar to some Women only, and that is bringing up
their Children in the fear of the Lord.

This I take to be the true sense of the Words, for it is likely that Child
bearing is here put for the whole discharge of the Office required of a Married
Woman in her domestic Capacity, which is usually most exercised and seen in
bringing forth and breeding up of her Children. By Child bearing, as I
apprehend, is chiefly meant Educating of Children, because in vain are they
Born, unless they be Instituted and Educated; the one is wholly in order to the
other, and therefore it is no wonder that it is mentioned in the place of it.
To strengthen the Interpretation it may be observable, that it is usual in
Scripture to mention and assign one particular thing instead of all the rest of
that kind and sort: And so here, conformably to that way of speaking, Child
bearing is named, but it comprehends under it all other Duties that belong to
the Mistress of a Family, and especially with relation to the Children of it,
who are to be brought up by her in a religious Manner. S^e is to take especial
care of this, as she expects Salvation and Happiness. For so here we are told
by the Apostle that the wedded Woman by her bringing up her Children after she
has borne them, by her careful looking to them, and consulting the good of
their Souls as well as their Bodies, by this religious Course, I say, as well
as by other Christian means and ways, the Woman shall be saved And that the
bearing of Children is here put for breeding them up, is manifest from the next
Clause of this Verse, If they continue in Faith, etc. where the word they
refers to the Children so bred up and continuing in Faith, and all other
Virtues: And then the sense is, If Mothers take care that their Children be
taught their Duty, and be religiously brought up, and thereby continue in
Faith, Charity and Holiness with Sobriety, they shall be happy both here and
hereafter, for that is meant by their being saved. Thus it is manifest that
Religious Education equally conduces to the Salvation both of Parents and
Children.

. 7. And so much for the Description of the Duties which concern Parents, and
the Helps and Encouragements to them, which I have fully and amply treated of,
because there is very great need of it in this dissolute Age, and because if
Parents can be prevailed with to perform their p^t with great Industry and
Vigor, that of their Children toward them will be the more easily
accomplished. If the former would conscientiously discharge their Duty, the
latter would have the less need to be taught what is theirs: of which I come
now to speak.

8. The Duties of Children toward their Parents are such as these, First,
Reverence. Ye shall fear every one his Mother and his Father, Lev. 19.3. Duty
of Children to Parents.
The filial awe which is due to them is grounded on their Authority over their
Children. By the Law of Nature Parents have a Command and sway over them;
Reverence.
and therefore all Children ought to have a dread of them, and to be under a
continual fear of offending them. Honor must always be the Companion of Fear
and Reverence, and accordingly the Fifth of the Ten Moral Precepts runs thus,
Honor thy Father and thy Mother, Exodus 20 12. which is repeated by our
Savior, Matthew. 15 4. and by the Apostle Ephesians. 6.2.

. 9. Secondly, Love is due to our Parents, as well as Honor and Respect: Love.
For as these latter are a Tribute that we ought to pay them by reason of their
Authority, so the former is justly owing to them for their Tender heartedness
and Kindness, to us. Love begets Love and therefore we cannot but answer their
endearing Carriage toward us with a most ^earty affection. To which end we
ought often to recount how they softe^'d and cherished us when we came naked
and shiftless into the World, and how ever afterward their compassionate Eyes
and Hands have been toward us to support and succor us, how they have in^ured
our Peevishness and Fro^ardness, how they have compiled with our (...) and
(...), how they ^ave sympathized with our Gr^^^s and Pains, and how they have
made both our M^^ery and Wel^re their own. How can we but love them when we
consider these things? Though it is true none can so well judge of and estimate
the Affection of Parents to their Children as Parents themselves, yet Children,
if they be not void of Sense, cannot but own their Affection to be exceeding
great, when they behold so great effects and fruits of it, so clear tokens and
demonstrations of it. Thus they are tied to their Parents by the Bond of Love
and Gratitude, and the very dictates of Natural Affection; and it is certain
that that Knot which Nature has ^uit, is made yet faster and surer by Grace
and Christianity.

. 10. Thirdly, Children are to listen attentively to the wholesome Instructions
and Admonitions of their Parents, and to suffer these to take deep Root in
their Minds. A wise Son hears his Father's Instruction, Prove. 52.1. by this
he not only shows that he has attained to some degree of Wisdom, but that he
is desirous to have a greater measure of it, and therefore he hearkens with the
greatest diligence to those Rule and P^ecepts of Wisdom which direct (...) to
the p^^ct^^e of Religion, and the lea^ing (...) holy (...). Nor is he backward
to give ear to their (...) Reproofs and sharpest Rebukes (...) remind him of
his neglect of the ^or (...) Instructions and Precepts. Nay, he patiently
submits to (...) ^stisement and Correction, because he (...) these are the just
Recompense of his N^gligence and Folly, and that they are designed for his good
and advantage.

. 11. Fourthly, Actual Obedience.
Actual Obedience and Subjection (...) from Children to the^ (...). They are
not to (...) of Commands, but to obey them. Which they will readily do, if they
consider that it is not only their Parents Injunction, but God's that they be
Duti^ul. Therefore the Apostle thus expresses it. Children, ob^y your Parents
in the Lord, Ephesians. ^.1. Your Obedience must be for his sake, and you ought to
remember that in pleasing your Parents you please Him. But yet your Obedience
must be in the Lord in this respect also, that it be in Subordination to Him,
who is the Great Parent, and that it be consistent with your Obedience to Him.
T^u^ obey your Parents in all things. Col. 3.20. that is, all things that are
of a lawful and innocent, or of an indifferent Nature, all things that are not
forbidden by the Word of God. Thus let your Obedience be universal and
unlimited; conscienti^sly observe what either of your Parents enjoin you. There
are some Children that pretend a reverend Regard to the Admonitions of their
Fathers, whose austerer Carriage keeps them more in awe, but they light and
disrespect the advice of their Mothers who for the most part are indulgent to
them. (...) let it be you^ ^re to pay an equal Obedience to both, and to show
the sincerity of your Obedience by it; for i^ you ^earken to your Father with a
real desire to please God, you will likewise regard the Counsels and Commands
of your Mother, for God (...) one no less than the other; and he that obeys not
both, does truly obey neither.

To succor them in their Poverty if they are able.
12. Fifthly, You are obliged to support and maintain your Parents i^ they be
in want, and you be able. When the Patriarch Jacob was forced to fly into the
Land of Egypt, it is recorded that his Son Joseph nourished his Father and all
his Household with bread, Genesis 47.12. And the case is the same when any other
Parents are reduced to Streights and Necessities; their Children are then
obliged to relieve them and succor them: And, if being in a capacity to do it,
they refuse it, they show themse^ves unnatural and inhumane. Wherefore our
Savior acquainted the Jews that no pretense whatsoever, ^o not of a Vow (such
as that of giving to the Corhan) could excuse them from their Duty in this
particular, Mark 7.10, etc. but he urged upon them the necessary Obligation of
the Fifth Commandment, Honor thy Father and thy Mother, which includes in it
Relief and Maintenance. And Christians as well as Jews are under the same Law
as to this, for even according to the Prescripts of Christianity Children are
to requite their Parents, 1. Tim. 5.4. that is, thankfully to repay their care
and love to them, which implies more than bare relieving of them: and the
Apostle adds, that this is good and acceptable before God.

. 13. Sixthly, To Pray for them, and follow their good example.
Another thing required of Children is to Pray for their Parents, to beg Mercy
for those who have been Instruments of so much kindness to them, and have so
often solicited Heaven on their behalf. And lastly, They must not forget to
follow the good Example of their Parents, and to think it an Honor to do so.
And in a word, the Duty of Children answers to the several parts of the Parents
Duty, which I have before described.

. 14. It remains now that I offer such Reasons and Motives as will be most
serviceable to excite Children to the practice of what I have commended to
them. St. Paul exhorts them to obey their Parents, because this is right, Ephesians.
6.1. it is due by God's Law, and the Law of Nature, and therefore is most just
and right. Parents, next unto God, are the Authors of our Lives, and the
preservers of them, and is it not highly reasonable that we should Honor and
Love them on that account? Does not natural Justice tell us, that we ought to
obey those who begot us, and brought us up? That we ought to have a great
Passion and Zeal for those who have provided and taken care for us from the
beginning, and have expressed a tender concernedness for us all our Days?
Wherefore I reckon our Duty to our Parents among the Acts, of Righteousness and
Justice which are required of us. But I have already showed how Rational, and
how suitable to the natural Dictates of Mankind this is, and therefore I
proceed to another Motive.

. 15. Children are to consider that God who is their Great and Sovereign
Parent, has commanded them to Honor and Obey their Natural Parents, and
consequently if they disobey them, they disobey Him. What is done to the Parent
is judged to be done to God himself. A Disobedient and Undutiful Child is a
Rebel against his Maker. He that despises his Parents Admonitions, despises
not Man, but God. Consider this you that are disrespectful to your Parents, you
that scorn their Instructions, and laugh at their Counsels, and deride their
Old Age, if they have arrived to that.

. 16. The Apostle makes use of another Reason, and a very weighty one it is,
Honor thy Father and thy Mother, says he, because this is the First
Commandment with Promise: And he explains himself in the next words, That it
may b^ well with thee, and that thou may live long on the earth, Ephesians. 6.2, 3.
as much as to say, there is a promise of long Life and Happiness to those tha^
Honor and Regard their Parents: therefore if you love Life and would see many
Days, if you would be blessed and prospered upon Earth (as well as qualified
for Heaven) faithfully perform this Duty.

But on the contrary we are to know that all ill Things attend Disobedience;
Examples of the Punishment of Disobedience.
there have been and ^re daily fearful Instances of God's Judgments on Wicked
and Undutiful Children. In History there are eminent Examples of the Divine and
Severity upon them: but because the Bible is of unquestionable Authority, I
will only select some thence. We read that Cham was Cursed for mocking and
deriding his Father; we read that Ishmael and Esau, whose Irreverence and
Disobedience to their Parents are particularly taken notice of, were Accursed
both in their Persons and in their Seed, and were separated from the Church of
God. Onan, one of the Sons of Judah, was killed by God's own hand for
Disobeying the Command of his Father, Genesis 38 9, 10. For the same offense the
Sons of Eli were Slain both in one Day. Absalom's days were shortened, who
showed himself so un^utiful to his Father, and even Rebelled against him. And
without doubt this Sin, which is so common and crying in our times, has
brought down the like Judgment of God on many young Persons.

. 17. Finally, I suggest this as another Consideration and Motive, that the
more Holy any Persons are, the more Dutiful they are to their Parents. This is
an Observation that will never fail, and it hugely Commends unto us the
Excellency of this Duty, and convinces us that it is an high strain of Goodness
and Religion. It is recorded of our Blessed Savior himself that he was Subject
to his Parents, Luke 2.51. And when he was on the Cross, and leaving the World,
he took particular care of his Mother, and commended her to the care of the
Apostle St. John who accordingly looked after her, and provided for her, and
used her as kindly as if she were his own Mother, John 19.27. Behold an eminent
Example of Filial Piety! Our Lord in the midst of his unspeakable Agonies and
Torments showed his Respect and Love to his dear Mother. This proves what I
said, that the holiest Persons are most observant of their Parents: as on the
contrary, there is no greater sign of profligate mind than a Contempt of them.
And we find that those that are Disobedient to Parents, are reckoned among the
most Heinous Sinners and Offenders, Romans 1.30. 2 Timothy 3.2 Such as are justly to
be hated both of God and Man. This I hope is sufficient to deter all those who
are in the Relation of Children from being guilty of this Sin.

The Duty of Masters.
. 18. The Fourth Relation that I shall speak of is that between Masters and
Servants; for this must not be omitted when I am Discoursing of Acts of
Righteousness, or our Duty to others. I begin then with the Duty of Masters and
Mistresses (for they are both concerned in a Family, and therefore may be
mentioned together) and what I have said concerning the Offices of Parents, may
be applied to these with a little alteration. You then that are Masters or
Mistresses ought to take care of your Servants, and especially of their Better
Part. After you have laid a good Foundation, and Instructed them in the
necessary Doctrines of Religion, and the grand points of Christianity, you are
to look to their Lives and Manners, and by Admonitions and Exhortations to
acquaint them with and stir them up to their Duty. And more especially you are
to call upon them to Read those Portions of Scripture which contain their
particular Duty toward you (which I shall mention anon,) and seriously to
meditate upon them, and pray unto God that they may be enabled to practice
them. To these you must add Reproof, for Sin is to be checked in your Servants,
as well as in your Children. The old Spartans, forced their Slaves to drink to
Excess, that their Children thereby might be brought to a d^slike of
Drunkenness, when they saw how Base and Loathsome a thing it was in their
Servants: but you must not suffer either Servants or Children to be guilty of
that fault or any other, without severe Rebuke and Control. And by all other
ways, you must show your selves desirous to promote the Spiritual welfare of
your Servants, and the good of their Souls. To which end, it will be requisite
to enquire what Company they keep, for this has a mighty Influence on their
Lives and Practices; and all your Almonitions and Precepts of Religion will be
quite lost without this. Warn them against Vicious and Ungodly Associates,
deba^ them converse with Drinking, Gaming, Swearing and Lascivious Companions,
for nothing marrs Religion and Manners more than Evil Company.

. 19. Again, you must consult not only the good of your Servants Souls, but of
their Bodies. Wherefore you must provide for these latter, and let them have
convenient Food, and whatever else is necessary and fitting for them. They are
part of the Family, and therefore you must make provision for them, and not
imitate the scandalous practice of some House-holders, who though they are kind
to their Children, yet almost starve their Servants, and allow them not such
conveniences as are proper for them, especially in time of sickness. This is
not only Unjust but inhumane. And you are concerned also to provide for their
Future Livelihood, by Teaching them that Art or Mystery which you have
Undertaken and Engaged to Instruct them in, and to which end they were Entered
into your Family, and became your Charge. Too many Masters make no Conscience
of this, and thereby the Money which was given with the Servants and
Apprentices is lost, and their time is spent in vain, and the Youths are
disappointed of a Livelihood. This is both Unjust and Uncharitable, and indeed
downright defrauding of them: therefore no Man of Conscience will allow of
such a Practice.

20. Further, you that are Masters ought to Correct and Humble those Servants
who stand in need of such Discipline. For if you forbear to do it, this
likewise may be called a defrauding them of what is their due. If they will not
be Reclaimed by Admonitions and Reproofs, you are permitted to use a severer
course, and to Chastise them for their Follies, especially if they be of
younger years, and if their Parents have transmitted that Power which they had
over them unto you. Solomon has well observed in Prove 20.^9. A Servant will
not be Corrected by words: that is, sometimes these will not work upon him, and
then a Moderate and Discreet Correction is become his Right, and you can no
more detain it from him then you can deny him his daily Food. And certainly if
you Exercise such Discipline, and that Justly, toward your own Children, it
can be no harshness (whatever some think) to treat your Servants after that
manner. For nothing Inhumane and Cruel is meant by this; the Divine Law
commanded the Jews to be merciful to their Servants, and not to Rule over them
with Rigor, Lev. 25.43. and Christianity, which is a gentle Institution, much
more requires it. You must by no means delight in Severity toward them; you
must never Chastise them without a necessary cause; and when you are forced to
it, your Correction must be mixed with mild Admonitions and Instructions. The
short is this, avoid this severe method as much as you can: but lest your
Authority should be wholly neglected, make use of it when there is occasion,
toward those who by Reason of their Age are not above it, and who have obliged
themselves by free Submission and Compact to be at your Command and Disposal.
If these will not obey you out of a Principle of Love, they must be made
sensible of your Power, and comply with your commands out of Fear and Dread.

21. This also must be added that Encouragement is due to Good and Faithful
Servants. When you find such, remember to put the Apostles advice in practice,
forbear threatening, Ephesians. 6.9. That is, use not harsh Language and rigorous
Behavior, but deal with them in a kind and obliging manner, not Roughly and
Angrily. There is this Justice owing to Servants, to take notice of their Care
and Industry, and to Encourage them. And this will be Advantageous to Masters
themselves, because it will be an Encitement to their Servants future Diligence.

. 22. Lastly, you are wanting in your Duty toward your Servants, if you do not
set them a Good Example, especially seeing they are sometimes very much
inclined to follow it. If you would have them live in the Fear of God, and the
Practice of Holiness, you must reform and retrench your own Lives if they be
amiss; and then by your Exemplary Behavior you will produce the like in those
that are under your Roof. This will be an effectual means of winning those to
Goodness and Virtue who are daily observers of your Lives. But on the contrary,
it is fond and unreasonable for a profane and dissolute Master, to expect a
Religious and Well-ordered Servant. Nay, assure your selves that if you be
Vicious and Wicked, they will think that all their Crimes are justifiable.
Wherefore above all things order your Conversations aright.

. 23. Thus briefly I have told you what is required from you toward your
Servants. The Advantages of keeping Religious Servants.
The sum of all is, that you are obliged to do them good both with respect to
Religion, and to their outward concerns: but more especially take care to train
them up to the former, and that for these three Reasons; First, because those
Servants who are most Religious toward God will prove most faithful to you. If
their care of your Business be founded on an upright Conscience, and a true
sense of the Obligations which are laid upon them by Christianity, they will
then behave themselves in their places as it becomes true Christian Servants.
Think not that any will do their Duty aright, and persevere in it, unless the
Principles of Godliness and Righteousness have taken fast hold of their Hearts.
We read in Genesis 39 9. what it was that made Joseph so true to Potiphar, his
Master: how can I do this great Wickedness, says he, and sin against God? As
much as if he had said, I cannot be false to my Master who has entrusted me
with his Household Affairs and all his Estate: I cannot be injurious to my
Mistress by complying with her Temptations, I cannot be unfaithful to either,
because I have a greater Master to serve, and I dare not displease and offend
him. St. Paul was urgent with Philemon to take Onesimus again into his Service,
because being Converted he would be profitable to him, Ver.11. he being now a
good Christian, would prove a good and useful Servant. You then that are
Masters and Mistresses of Families, be exhorted to instruct your Servants in
Religion, call upon them to make Conscience of their ways, and to be truly
Virtuous, because thereby they will be in a capacity to serve you faithfully.
It is your Interest to acquaint them with the Will of God, and to allure them
to the love of it: Your very worldly Advantage obliges you to this, for you
will find a present Benefit accruing to you by it, and you will be abundantly
recompensed for your Care and Pains; for most certainly Religion makes the best
Servants; and they are always found to serve their Masters best, who serve them
for God's sake.

24. Secondly, This is another Reason to be thought of, That pious Servants
derive a Blessing on a Family. Joseph, whom I mentioned before, is an eminent
^^^t^^ce of this; Genesis 3 39. The Lord made all he did to prosper in his hand:
and Ver. 5 It came to pass from the time that Potiphar had made him overseen in
his b^use, and over all that he had that the Lord blessed the Egyptians house
for Joseph's sake, and the blessing of the Lord was upon all that he had, in
the house and in the field. How instrumental was Naaman's Servant (who it is
probable was a Proselyte to the True Religion) in promoting the Welfare and
real Good of his Master; How profitable even in this sense was Onesimus to his
Master Philemon? You that have Servants under you, use your utmost endeavors
to further Religion and Goodness in them, for one Religious Servant may bring
down a Blessing upon a whole House. By minding the Spiritual Good of your
Servants you may be rewarded in your secular and wordly Affairs. As on the
contrary, you may be blasted in your worldly concerns for the sake of one or
more impious Servants that you keep in your Families. For as I observed before
that Parents and Children mutually derive a Blessing or Curse on one another,
so it is as true* that Masters and Servants do the like.

. 25. Thirdly, Let this be considered, That wicked Servants will corrupt your
Children, and set back all the Instructions you gave them, and therefore on
this account endeavor to check all Vice, and nourish all goodness in your
Servants. As you desire that your Care and Pains about your Children may prove
successful, see that you promote Religion among your Servants, take care that
they serve the Lord as well as you. Encourage Piety in them as much as Industry
and Diligence. Nay, you should be more troubled at their offending of God than
your selves. And you ought more sharply to check and reprove them for
Irreligion and Profaneness toward Him, than for Dishonesty or Disobedience
toward you.

CHAP. XII.
The Duty of Servants to their Masters, Of Husbands and Wives, wherein the
Duties proper to each, and common to both, are stated and enforced. The second
Part of Righteousness toward others comprehends all Acts of Justice toward our
Neighbor: And, First, of Honestty or of Justice between Man and Man in
Commerce, the Christian Standard of Traffic in that Golden Rule, Mat. 7.12. Of
Restitution. Of speaking Truth. Of Flattery. Of Injustice to our Neighbor's
Reputation. Of Theft, Sacrilege, Unlawful Usury, Murder. Of Personal Injuries
leading thereto. Of D^elling. Of Fornicatian and Adultery as Injustice to our
Neighbor. So^ Rules for the Preservation of Chastity.

The Duty of Servants to their Masters.
2 NExt I am to speak of the Duty of Servants to their Masters: and this is set
down very particularly in Ephesians. 6.5. etc. Servants, be obedient to them that are
your Masters according to the Flesh, with fear and trembling, in singleness of
your Heart, as unto Christ: Not with eye service, as men pleasers, but as the
Servants of Christ, doing the will of God from the heart: With good will doing
Service as to the Lord, and not to Men: knowing that whatsoever good thing any
Man does, the same shall be receive of the Lord, whether he be bond or free.
And this account of their Task is enlarged and amplified by the same Apostle,
Tit. 2.9, 10. Exhort Servants to be obedient to their own Masters, and to
please them well in all things, not answering again: Not purloining, but
showing all good Fidelity, that they may adorn the Doctrine of God our Savior
in all things. If we should search all the Moral Philosophers that ever writ,
and rifle all the Precepts and Rules of the most improved Masters of Ethics,
we shall find that there is more delivered in these few Verses by St. Paul
concerning the Duty of Servants, than in all the Writings of those men about
it. So full and accurate is Christianity in giving Directions concerning this
Matter. From these Texts and some others that treat of the same Subject, we may
gather that some part of the Duty of Servants to their Masters is the same with
that of Children to their Parents; but other Parts of their Duty are proper and
peculiar to themselves.

. 2. The Duties that are common to both are these two, Reverence.
I. Reverence; and therefore in the foregoing Directions it is said, That
Servants are to discharge the Office of their Places with Fear and Trembling,
with Reverence and Awe of their Masters, so as to be afraid of incurring their
Displeasure. Which is the Sense of another Apostle, 1 Pet. 2.28. Be subject to
your Masters with all fear. And this Passion is always attended with a due
respecting and honoring of them; They must count their Masters worthy of all
honor, 1 Timothy 6.1. And they must take care to show it by their respectful
Carriage and Behavior. Obedience.
II. Obedience; and this must be universal, Col. 3.22. Servants, obey in all
things your Masters, submit to all their lawful Injunctions, do whatever just
Thing is commanded you by them. The Apostle acquaints us, That the ready
compliance of Servants with their Masters Will must be testified by their not
answering again, by their not disputing or contradicting their Commands: But
especially a saucy and rude Replying or Answering again is here forbidden. They
must not use such words as betray an impudent Spirit, and signify that their
Will not their Masters, shall take place. This is wholly inconsistent with that
Obedience which is required of them.

Industry.
. 3. The peculiar Duties of Servants are these that follow, First, Industry and
Diligence in their respective Callings and Employments. Abraham's chief
Servant, whom he sent on Business, would not eat or drink, when he came to his
Journeys end, before he had done his Master's Message, before he had told his
Errand, Genesis 24.33. So likewise a Servant is to mind the Work he is set about,
or the proper Charge which is incumbent on him, as he is of such or such a
Trade or Profession. Here then Negligence is to be condemned in one of this
Relation. All Carelessness and Sloth and Idleness, yea and even that Sanntring
Humor which possesses some Servants, are unsufferable; for it is of the very
Essence of a good Servant to have his Thoughts upon his Business, and
industriously to pursue it.

. 4. Secondly, Faithfulness or Honesty is another peculiar Requisite in one of
this Relation. Fidelity
He must show all good Fidelity, he must in every thing be True and Trusty. And
more particularly the Apostle condemns all Purloining in a Servant, that is,
keeping back and detaining to himself any part of that profit which belongs and
is due to his Master. Honesty requires of him that he waste not or Imbezel his
Masters Goods, that he no ways Cheat and Defraud him, or be privy to others
doing so; but that he consult his Masters advantage in all things, and prefer
his Interest before his own private concerns, In short he must remember that he
is under an Obligation to do his Master True and Faithful Service, and he must
be careful to perform his Engagements.

. 5. Thirdly, Sincerity is another qualification, for you see this it often
mentioned, Sincerity.
and that in variety of Expressions. Servants are bid to Obey their Masters in
Singleness of heart, or (as it is in the Greek) in simplicity of heart, out of a
Simple and Incorrupt Principle, out of a hearty desire and Intention to do
their Duty, and to discharge a good Conscience. And they are enjoined to do
Service unto their Masters as unto Christ, as if he were the Immediate Master
under whom they served. And the Apostle adds that they must look upon
themselves as the Servants of Christ, they must own his Authority in that of
their Masters, and they must chiefly endeavor to please Him, and not Act as
men-pleasers, that is, for Base and Sinister ends; they must not obey with
Eye-Service, that is, do the Part of Servants only when their Master or
Mistress is present, and has an Eye upon them: but they ought to Act out of a
sense of their Duty, and therefore do it Faithfully, whether any takes notice
of them or no. With good will they do Service, they perform it Freely and
Cheerfully, because God has enjoined it, and it is pleasing to him. Thus you
see what is required of Servants as to the Principle and manner of their
Behavior toward those who are set over them: it must be with Sincerity and
Uprightness of heart. And they may consider further, that the Apostle in^ers
from their serving the Lord Christ, that they shall Receive the reward of the
Inheritance, Col. 3.24. They serve a Good Master, who will abundantly
Recompense them for their Faithfulness and Integrity; he will certainly Reward
them, though it should happen to be their Lot to be Ill requited by their
Earthly Masters. And so much for the Duty of Masters and Servants.

The Duty of Husbands and Wives.
. 6. The Fifth and last Relation is that of Husband and Wife: and there we
shall see what are the mutual Acts of Righteousness and Justice, mixed with
Charity, that they owe to each other. If this pair of Relatives do not
discharge their Duty aright, the rest of the Family never can; yea, the
miscarriage of Persons in this State of Life may not unfitly be Assigned as a
main cause of their misbehaviour in those other Conditions and Capacities
before mentioned; and therefore it is necessary that I speak particularly
concerning these, that the good Deportment of these Chief Heads of the
Domestic Body may be secured. In order to this a Good Foundation is to be laid
at first: the Married Life must be commenced Wisely and Discreetly, with great
Deliberation and Thoughtfulness. The Man must make choice of a Meet Help, one
that is Religious and Virtuous, and suitable to him as to his Estate, Age,
Calling, and other Circumstances. And the Woman must make choice of a Godly and
Prudent Guide, and faithful Yoke Fellow, else the State of Matrimony, like an
Error in the first Concoction, will never, or very rarely be mended. Here then
great Care and Study, Prayers and Endeavors are to be made use of, that a
condition of Life which is of so vast moment and importance, may be blessed
with a good beginning and afterward prosper'd with a constant Happiness. And
this cannot he otherwise than in the careful practicing of those Duties which
are required of these Persons. And these Duties are either Proper or Common.

. 7. The Duty proper and peculiar to the Man, is, The Duties proper to the Man.
to Maintain and Provide for his Wife. For, according to his solemn Engagement,
he is to make her partaker in his worldly Goods: And by help of that Calling or
Employment which Providence has determined him to, or of the Estate and
Revenues which he either brought to her, or had with her, or by both, it is
incumbent upon him to make sufficient Provision for her, that they may jointly
share in that comfortable Subsistence which their Station and Rank in the World
call for. But yet this is to be taken with some Limitation; for if the
Condition and Circumstances of the Woman be such, that she is in a capacity to
contribute personally toward the maintenance of the Family, by some Skill in a
lawful Employment of her own, or by giving assistance to her Husband in his,
she then is engaged to be serviceable in the support of her Household. But
however, she is always obliged to be instrumental in adding to the Incomes of
the Family by her good House-wifery and Frugality. Hence in Solomon's Character
of a good Wife, it is said, She works diligently with her hands, Prove. 31.13.
She gives meat to her household, and a portion to her maiden, Ver. 15 She
lays her hands to the Spindle, and, her hands holds the Distaff, Ver. 19.
She looks well to the ways of her Household, and eats not the Bread of
Idleness, Ver. 27. But still the great care of the Household lies upon the Man,
and it is his peculiar Task, namely, by reason of that converse and skill he
(...) to (...) wordly (...) and ^ff ^ns, which the other Sex generally ^e not
to capable of, or fit for. It is his proper Task, I say, to manage his Calling
or Estate with that Wisdom and Industry that, by the Divine Blessing upon them,
he may continually be able to supply his beloved Yoke Fellow with what is
convenient for her comfortable support in the World. This is what the Apostle
means by giving honor to the Wife, as to the weaker Vessel, 1 Pet. 3 7. That
is, having a tender and honorable respect to her, and taking special care of
her, and providing for her, because or her inability to shift so well in the
World as Men do.

8. The Duty that is proper to the Woman is reverential Obedience and
Subjection. The Duties particular of the Woman.
Let the Wife see that she Peverence her Husband, Ephesians 5 33 Wives, be in
subjection to your own Husbands, 1 Pet. 3 1. The reason is rendered by the other
Apostle, 1 Cor. 11 3 The head of the Woman is the Man: And that this
^uperiority of the Man may be the more taken notice of, he repeats it in Ephesians
5.23. as a sufficient ground of the Woman's subjection, For the Husband, says
he, is the head of the Wife He is so in respect of the Pre-eminence of the Sex,
and more (...) of the Dignity and Authority which God involved him with when he
first made him. So that it is evident from Sacred Scripture, That the Wife is
to own her Husband as her Head and Governor, her Guide and Director, and
accordingly to submit to his Conduct, that is, if he be wise and prudent, are
be able to give good Counsel, and to order Affairs, and superintend in the
Family. But if the Man be weak and shallow, or dissolute and regardless of all
his Concerns, and supposing the Woman to be wise and prudent, in such cases it
was never intended that the Man should give Rules, and under color of his mere
H^ ^sh p^ruine his Wife and whole Family. And (...) is to be added, That Wives
have a particular ^p^ere of their own to act in, namely in Arts is o^ the
Family that are their peculiar concern; and this is called by the Apostle,
Guiding the House, 1 Timothy 5.14. which he declares to be the proper Office of
the Married Woman, and the Husband is not to intermeddle in it. But otherwise,
the Order and Government, founded on the Man's Superiority, ought to be duly
observed by the Wife; and these to remember that she is forbid by the Laws of
the Creation, and the appointment of Heaven to be imperious and to domi^eer
over her Husband. Nay, the Laws of Christianity forbid the same; I suffer not a
Woman (says the Apostle) to usurp Authority over the Man, 1 Timothy 2 12.

Having assigned the Proper Duties of the Husband and Wife, I am next to
mention those which are Common to them both, and they are such as these.

. 9. I. Mutual Fidelity and Chastity. Mutual Fidelity and Chastity.
They are both equally obliged by that solemn Vow which they entered into a
Marriage to be true and faithful to each other, and to preserve entire the
Bonds of Wedlock. Marriage is honorable in all, says the Apostle, it is by no
means to be despised by any Persons, but is to be highly esteemed and respected
by all, and so is the Bed undefited, the Bed that is kept free from Adultery;
but on the contrary, the violation of the Conjugal Vow is to be abhorred and
avoided by all, not only because it is a perfidious breach of a solemn Promise
made to each other, but because it will certainly be attended with a Curse, as
the Apostle in the same place adds, Whoremongers and Adulterers God will judge,
Heb. 13.4. Therefore let not only the Justice and Equity of the Duty I am
speaking of, but also the Penalty that attends the breach of it be seriously
considered, and prevail with those that are in Wedlock to keep themselves from
undue and unchaste Communications.

. 10. II. Mutual Love is another requisite in every Married Couple. And indeed
it is necessary on the former account, Mutual Love.
namely for the preserving of mutual Fidelity: for where there is an entire
Affection, there will be no Infringement of the Conjugal Faith. Wherefore let a
strong tie of ardent Love strengthen and confirm the Matrimonial Knot,
according to that Apostolical Counsel. Husbands, Love your Wives, Ephesians. 5.25.
and to show that this Passion must be great and vehement, he adds, Even as
Christ loved the Church. And in Ver. 28, he expresses it thus, So ought Men to
love their Wives as their own Bodies; he that loves his Wife, loves himself;
for no Man ever yet hated his own Flesh, but nourishes and cherishes it, Ephesians.
5.29. Therefore seeing Man and Wife are but one Flesh (as was pronounced at the
first Institution of Marriage, Genesis 2.24.) their Amity and Friendship ought to
be most intimate, sincere and complete. When the Apostle had exhorted the
Husbands among the Colossian Converts to love their Wives, he adjoins this, Be
not bitter against them, Col. 3.19. As much as to say, If you would maintain
that passionate Love to your near Relations which I commend to you, see that
you be not harsh and rigorous in Word or Behavior, use no froward or angry
Language, be not cross and peevish, give not way to Strife and Contention, but
bear with one another's Infirmities, cherish Peace, Agreement and Compliance;
and study to be friendly, kind and obliging. And to prevent all bitterness, yea
and to sweeten this State of Life, you are permitted and authorized to make use
of the lawful Gratifications and Endearments which are proper to it: Let the
Husband render unto the Wife due benevolence, and likewise the Wife unto the
Husband, 1 Cor. 7.3. And the neglect or denial of it is said to be a defrauding
one another, Ver. 5.

. 10. III. Care of each other's Souls.
A tender care of one another's Souls, and their everlasting Welfare is the
chiefest Concern of those near Relations, and they ought to improve the
intimacy of their Conversation to this very end; for it is certain that this
great nearness and familiarity may exceedingly contribute toward the promoting
of Piety, and is an advantage to be made use of to religious and Holy Purposes.
If the Husband be better instructed in matters of Religion, he is to inform and
teach his Wife; and they are both of them to reprove and exhort one another, to
remind each other of their Duty, and effectually to excite to it; and (that all
their endeavors may be successful) to recommend themselves to God in their
constant Addresses to him, and most devoutly and heartily to pray for one
another: That so as they live together here, they may be undivided Companions
in the heavenly Mansions hereafter. Thus they are to sanctify the state of
Wedlock, thus they are to be helpful to one another in the ways of Virtue and
Godliness; yea, they are to strive and contend which of them shall serve God
most entirely and faithfully. This is a happy Contest between Man and Wife,
this is a commendable Strife, and will prepare their way to the Regions of
undisturbed Peace and Happiness.

. 11. Thus I have given you an account of the several distinct Relation,
wherein the particular Acts of Justice or Righteousness, together with those of
Charity, are plainly discerned. And (to close this Head) we must know that True
Goodness is always accompanied with unfeigned Desires and Endeavors of
glorifying God in our Relative Capacities. We can neither satisfy our selves
concerning the realty of Grace in us nor give an evidence to others of the true
sense of Religion on our Minds and Consciences, unless we let them be seen in
the Government of our selves as we are related to others.

. 12. But besides the Duties Founded in these Individual Relations, there are
General ones, which refer to all Persons whatsoever. And accordingly we may
observe that after the Apostle had acquainted the Roman Christians what was due
from them and all others toward their Superiors, he proceeds to an universal
display of their Duty and informs them that they stand obliged by Christianity
to render to all Men their dues, Romans 13.7. They must deal justly and rightly
with every one, for Justice is giving to every one his due. And here I shall
pass to the Second Part of my proposed Method: viz. to mention those Acts and
Performances which in the strictest sense are Branches of Justice, and
therefore are carefully to be observed by us. For though the word Justice be not
in this New Testement, yet the Exact Rules and Measures of this Virtue are
there set down, and we are not only forbid by the Evangelical Laws to Injure
others, but we are commanded to perform positive acts of Justice, and they are
such as these,

. 13. First, Of Honesty.
it is necessary that you be righteous and Just in all matters of Traffic, in
all your Commerce, Contracts, and Covenants. Do all things fairly and honestly,
without couzening and overreaching, without endeavoring to go beyond and
defraud your Brethren in any thing, 1 Thessalonians. 4 6. In buying and selling, in
Trading and making of Bargains addict your selves to honest Dealing; and that
Golden Rule of Justice prescribed us by our Savior, will carry you safe
through all Cases and Emergencies of this nature; Whatsoever ye would that Men
should do unto you, do ye even so to them, Mat. 7.12. This alone, if
conscientiously and impartially attended to, will direct you in all Matters of
Traffic and Commerce with your Neighbors, and is certainly the exact and
unerring Standard of all your Dealings with them. if you be a Buyer, it will
not suffer you to disparage and vilify other Men's Wares, on purpose to bring
down the price of them. If you be a Seller, it will not allow you to Deceive
any by hiding the Faults of what you sell: It will not permit you to Screw up a
Chapman, to get as much as you can of him. It will instruct you to demand no
more for your Goods than they are really worth, and above all things to hate
False Weights and Measures, which are so particularly forbidden in the Holy
Scriptures. If you he guided by this Rule, you will never be immoderate and
griping, you will not pursue any Methods of beguiling and imposing upon your
Brethren, be they never so weak and ignorant, never so careless and neglectful
of what they do: you will not take Advantage of the Poverty or the Ignorance of
any Man, but in all your Dealings you will be just and Upright.

. 14 We are to be guided also by the Custom and Practice of the most
understanding and upright Persons: which perhaps one of the Ancients referred
to when he defined Justice to be a Virtue consisting in Mediocrity, as a wise
Man shall determine it. Likewise in matters relating to public Commerce and
Justice, we are to have respect to the Law of Nations, namely, what whole
Countries and Kingdoms have agreed upon and practiced as most conducible to the
good of Society. Moreover, we must govern our selves by the known Laws and
Constitutions of the place we live in, they being generally most agreeable to
our Circumstances; but especially we must act according to the dictates of our
Reasons and Consciences as they are improved by the Sacred Laws prescribed us
in the Writings of the New Testament, for the Gospel requires of us an exact,
Honesty and Integrity in matters of Traffic.

. 15, And as in making, so in keeping and performing your Bargains and
Contracts you must be very Just and Righteous. You must use no Arts and Fetches
to bring you off from the discharge of your Promises and Engagements. Strictly
keep your Faith, although you are losers by it: In some cases, though it be to
your own hurt, you must not change, Psalm. 15.4. If that were Righteousness and
Justice under the Old Testament, it is certainly so now under the New, which
obliges Men to stricter Rules of Virtue. Christianity requires that you be very
punctual, that you stand firm to your word, and that you perforn the very same
Things you engaged your selves to do.

. 16. Under this performing of Contracts (which is one of the most essential
Parts of Justice) I might reckon the paying of Debts. Not to discharge these
according to our known Obligations, is a gross injury to the Creditor, and an
high act of Injustice. So to detain the Wages or Hire of Workmen and Laborers,
is a signal instance of Unrighteousness and unjust Dealing; for though in such
cases sometimes there be no solemn Obligation and Contract, yet by Conscience
and Custom, and the Reason of the thing it self, Persons are interpreted to
have bound themselves to satisfy those whom they so employ, and set about
their work, insomuch that to deny them Payment is a palpable detaining of their
Dues, and an open violation of Honesty.

. 17. Of Restitution.
Among the several Instances of just Dealing I must not forget this, That there
is Revaration to be made for any wrong or damage we have done to our
Neighbors. As we must make Restitution of what was taken away from them
unlawfully, so if we have wronged them in any other kind whatsoever, we must
make them what Satisfaction we are able. This I may call an After-Justice, a
making some Amends and Recompense after we have been guilty of unjust Acts: and
we find it expressly commanded by God in the Law, Lev. 6.2, 3, etc. Number. 5.6.7.
and practiced by a Gospel-Penitent, Luke 19.8.

. 18. And lastly, under this Head, I cannot but mention Speaking the Truth, as
another necessary part of Justice to Mankind. If we must give every one his
own, then it is certain we ought not to detain the Truth from them, for this is
their own, and they may claim it as their due. Besides the contrary may prove
very hurtful to them, and so we shall be injurious to them. For a Liar, one
that loves and makes Lies, wrongs and injures his Brethren; yea, he spoils
all Society and Converse, for there can be no Faith or Credit among Men (which
is the support of all Humane Society) if Truth be laid aside, and Falsehood
takes place. Speech was given us by God to declare our Minds and Thoughts to
others, that thereby a mutual Converse and Communion might be maintained: But
Lying, which is speaking contrary to what we think or know, perverts this end
and design of Speech, and therefore must needs prove very destructive.
Wherefore follow the Apostolical advice, Col. 3.9. Lie not one to another, do
not utter and deliver that as Truth which you know to be false; but putting
away Lying, speak the Truth every Man with his Neighbor, Ephesians. 4.25. And the
Apostle there adds this Reason, For we are Members one of another: As much as
to say. All Men are Fellow Members, they belong all to the same Body and
Society of Mankind: Therefore it is unatural and monstrous for one Member to
defraud and deceive another. On this account we must not Lie to any Man in the
World. And not only as we are Men, but much more as we are Christians, we are
Members of one another, being united unto Christ Jesus our Head: and therefore
we must not dare to Lie, and thereby deceive and hurt our Brethren to whom we
are so nearly related. Nay we are not permitted to tell a Lie, though we were
sure it would hurt no Body, nay, though we were certain it would tend to our
own or others Safety and Advantage: And the reason is this, because we are
forbid to do evil, that good may come of it, Romans 3.8.

. 19. Next unto Lying is Flattery, which is no less pernicious and hurtful in
the Life of Man, Flattery.
for they that use themselves to this sort of Communication never speak as they
think, and they endeavor to make others think contrary to the Truth and
Reality of things; which are both very mischievous. The Complimenting Humor of
this Age may be reckoned under this Head. Who sees not fair and plausible Words
and mere Flourishes supply the place of what is real? It is now grown a modish
Thing, under the Notion of being Genteel and Civil, to forget to utter what is
True. Their Language has nothing of their Heart; and Ceremony and
Dissimulation have almost banished Truth and Sincerity out of the World.
Wherefore it is high time to retrieve our selves, and to become true and hearty
in Conversation, especially when it is that which the very Laws of Justice and
Righteousness challenge of us.

. 10. Besides these Acts of Justice which relate to Commerce, there are several
other parts of it which we owe to our Neighbors. The next I will mention is
our Duty to them in respect of their Name and Credit. If detaining of Truth
from our Brethren be a great act of Injustice and Wrong, then we shall be much
more unjust if we speak Evil of them. Of Injustice to our Neighbors good Name.
Therefore it is one of St. Paul's excellent Directions for Conversation, That
we speak evil of no Man, Tit. 3 2. which is backed by St. James, chapter 4. ver.
11. Speak not evil one of another. And St. Peter gives the same advice, namely,
That we lay aside all evil speakings, Epist. 1. chap. 2. ver. 1. Thus those
three great Apostles call upon us to observe that useful and necessary Rule of
Righteousness, whereby we are forbid to hurt or endamage our Neighbors good
Name by any of our Words and Speeches. We are apt to cherish too high Thoughts
of our selves, and to applaud our own Actions, but we are too forward to
indulge groundless Suspicions concerning others, and to speak meanly of their
Performances, yea, to censure and condemn them: but herein we act very
unjustly, because generally this passing of a rash Sentence upon others,
redounds to their prejudice and harm. It is unworthy of a Christian to make the
worst of Men's Actions, and to represent them to others as such; but it is much
more base and unworthy, ye utterly to be abhorred, to detract from our
Neighbors Credit out of a Principle of ill Will and Malice toward them. It is
abominable either to invent or to take up false and evil Reports concerning
others, and to Back-bite and Slander them, and say those ill things of them
which they no ways deserve, merely because we bear a hatred to them. This is
highly unjust; and hence it follows, that it is an Act of Justice to have a
tender regard to the Reputation of our Neighbors, and to preserve their good
Name and Credit as far as in us lies, and when we know them to be Reproached
and Defamed, to vindicate their Reputation. And our hearts must concur with our
Tongues in this work.

. 21. Next, Of Theft.
according to the Laws of Justice and Righteousness, we are obliged not to
injure others in their worldly goods and possessions. For they have a just
Title to what is their own, and it is not Lawful for any man to invade it.
Wherefore if either privily or openly we take away or detain from another,
without his consent, what is his proper Goods, we are guilty of the Sin of
Stealing. The most heinous kind of Theft is Sacrilege, which is a taking away
or misemploying of those Goods or Lands which were given to charitable uses, Of
Sacrilege.
and set apart for Religious purposes, and even consecrated to God and his
Service. This is a great Profanation, as well as Injustice, and therefore is
deservedly condemned in the Word of God. Prove. 20.25. Mal. 3.7, 8. Romans 2.22.
And indeed it must needs be a Sin of a very high nature, to alienate and abuse
sacred things, and such as were peculiarly Devoted to Pious and Holy uses; for
this is properly Robbing of God; but because the things are in the possession
of, and for the use of Men, I bring it under this head.

. 22. To Stealing may be reduced Unlawful Usury, against which the Scripture so
often speaks: Of Unlawful Usury.
for by Usury in the Sacred Writings, is always meant that which is Griping and
Unlawful. And the reason is, because the Usury that was generally then in
practice was Unmerciful and Cruel. It is this that is forbid, and no other
absolutely. For it cannot be Unlawful and Sinful in it self, for a man to demand
a moderate benefit for the use of his money, if he has let it out to one to
whom the lending of it was a kindness. He may without doubt lawfully take some
Allowance for the courtesy he has done. And the borrower finding this
Beneficial to him, may Lawfully recompense the Lender. Even Gratitude dictates
this; besides that Justice and Equity require it of him. So that it is plain,
that Usury is no Sin when it is not against Charity and Justice.

. 23. But when it offends against both these, or either of them, it becomes
Sinful and Wicked, and no good man ought to plead for it, nay, he ought to
detest and abhor it, and to declare against it. Usury is always Unlawful and
Vicious when it is exercised toward the Poor and Necessitous, for to such we
must freely Give, or Lend without looking for any thing again, as our Savior
has enjoined us, Mat. 5.42. Luke 6.35. Again, it is unlawful to require
Increase for the use of money, when it appears that there has been a Sincere
and Honest Endeavor in the Borrower, to improve What he borrowed, and yet he
has been hindered by something that has happened to him not by his own fault.
It is certain that Rigor and Exaction in demanding the Interest, where there
have been unavoidable Losses and Disappointments, is Unjust and Inhumane. We
must ever make Abatements, as we see occasion: otherwise we Act unchristianly,
and against that Law, Do as ye would be done to. We must never use Extremity
and Severity, or take advantage of the Disability and Necessity of the
Borrower. In short, let us be firmly persuaded of this, that it is absolutely
Unlawful and Sinful to retrieve Increase for money lent if there be any
Injustice and Extortion used in it. This is Biting and Oppressing Usury, and
may well be ranked with Stealing and Thieving.

. 24. And so may all the ways of Defrauding and Cheating our Neighbors, as
Falsifying and Counterfeiting of Writings and Instruments, the making or
putting off of False Coin, all Unlawful Gaming, all overreaching of others by
Tricks of Law, and all the Arts of Trapanning, which are now so numerous and so
frequent in the World. These are plain Transgressions of that Commandment, Thou
shall not Steal.

. 25. But there is likewise a Positive part of our Duty which has Relation to
this Commandment, and that is to do what lies in our power to preserve and
secure the Goods and Possessions of our Neighbors. It their Right be invaded,
we are according to our ability to help them to regain and recover it: and in
all our Dealings and Converse with them we are to maintain and promote their
just claim and property.

. 26. As we must not injure our Neighbors as to their Goods and Estates, so
not as to their Lives and Persons. Therefore all maiming and wounding, or any
other way of hurting the Bodies of others, but especially the shedding of their
Blood, and bereaving them of their Lives are manifest Acts of Injustice. The
latter of these, Of Murder and Personal Abuses.
if it be wilful, is the horrid Sin of Murder. The Heinousness of which is
sufficient to deter us from the Acting of it: For it is in its own nature the
most Execrable Fact that we can be guilty of, and has always been reckoned
such by those that have any sense of Humanity or Religion. This is a Crime that
for the most part meets with a severe Punishment even in this Life. Murderers
have seldom escaped the Judgment of God in this World. And accordingly it is
confirmed by the Experience of all Ages, that this Crying Sin has been
discovered and brought to light in a most Strange and Wonderful manner. Let our
hearts then be wholly set against this soul sin, which is so heinous in it
self, and which God has made such provision aagainst, and which he so severely
punishes.

. 27. The best Direction that I can offer to you is this, Be careful to
suppress and avoid those sinful desires and corrupt Inclinations which are the
Root of this Vice: as first, Lust and Lewdness, which have frequently betrayed
men to this wicked practice, as we see in the Example of David, who contrived
the Death of Uriah, that he might Accomplish his lustful desires. Again if you
would guard yourselves from this sin, you must avoid Drunkenness and
Intemperance, and Excessive heating of your Blood by Wine and other strong
Drinks; for the World can witness that these have oftentimes ended in Slaughter
and Bloodshed. Likewise, Anger and Excess of Passion, which push men on to
Contentions and Quarrels, are the frequent occasions of this Bloody Crime: and
therefore we are concerned to cherish a meek and peaceable temper, and to
Banish all Wrath and Fury. Further, we are to be sensible that Covetousness and
Love of Riches have stirred up some to this wickedness: and others have been
moved to it by Ambition and a greedy desire of Greatness and Dominion: for
which reason both these vicious Inclinations are to be kept under and subdued.
And so is that dangerous sin of Pride, which has often been the spring and
cause of Bloodshed. For a Proud and Haughty Spirit thrusts men on to Revenge,
and will not suffer them to think of any such thing as passing by of affronts,
and forgiving of injuries: and then it is no wonder that the effects of Rage
and Fury are seen, and that Blood touches Blood.

. 28. Of Duelling.
Hence arises the common practice among us of Fighting of Duels. The Persons
who are concerned in this Bloody Enterprise, are not acquainted with the
Christian Duties of Forhearing and Forgiving: but their minds are possessed
with this strange and unchristian apprehension, that it is base and Ignoble,
and unbecoming a Gentleman to put up Affronts and Injuries: and therefore,
rather than they will do so, they venture on a Combat, with the apparent
hazard of their own and other men's Lives. But if their minds were furnished
with the true sense of things, they would pronounce it a scandalous and
dishonorable thing either to give or accept a Challenge; for that must needs
be so, which outbraves not only the Laws of the Nation but of Christianity.
Such an enterprise certainly is very Base and Reproachful, and has nothing of
True Valor and Fortitude in it: for no man can be said to be Valiant in
affronting the Laws and Religion. And as for the Commonness of the Fact, let no
man think that the Heinousness or Scandal of it are thereby abated, but rather
that they are Increased and Aggravated: as most certainly they are. Briefly, to
conclude this Particular which we are now Discoursing of, this is a standing
Rule of Righteousness toward men, that we are not to Injure and hurt their
Bodies, much less to Endanger their Lives, or to take them away; but that we
are bound to presv^ve and promote their safety, Health and Life.

. 29. Lastly, Continence or Chastity is another Act of Righteousness which
Respects our Neighbors. Of Chastity.
For though (as I showed before) this is a Duty we owe to our selves, yet it is
as true that it has regard to others, and may deservedly be styled an Act of
Justice toward them: and the contrary, viz. Incontinence and Uncleanness are
Acts of Injustice and Unrighteousness, for it is plain that these are Injuries
to others. Fornication, which is the Corrupting of an unmarried Woman, involves
her as well as the man himself in guilt, and thereby is Wrongful to both, Of
Fornication and Adultery.
and is indeed a Crime of that high nature that they forfeit their Christianity
by it, and exclude themselves from the Society of Christians. Their own
Consciences Excommunicate them, and tell them that they have no part with the
true Servants of God here, and Dying Impenitently they shall be for ever shut
out of the Kingdom of Heaven. This is the plain Truth without any Disguise,
notwithstanding the too common and Fashionable Custom of this Age of palliating
this Vice under the style of keeping a Mistress.

. 30. And as for Adultery, which is the Debauching of a Married Woman, that is
a Fact which is yet much more Unjust and Unrighteous, for besides the stain of
Lewdness there is a breach of Faith, and a perjurious violating of the Bond of
Matrimony. Therefore of the Adulteress it is said, Prove. 2.17. She forgets
the Covenant of her God, that is, she profanely breaks that Solemn and Sacred
Covenant which she made at Marriage. For the Conjugal Bond is fitly called the
Covenant of God, because it was at First Instituted and Ordained by him, And as
God is the Author of it, so he is the witness to it, his Sacred Name being
called upon for the Confirming and Ratifying of it. Further, it will appear
that Adultery is an high Act of Injustice because it is an Invading and
Encroaching upon the Rights of the Conjugal state, which should remain firm and
untouched: it is a Robbing of the offended party of his Rightful Possession,
which is such an Injury as can never be repaired. And where this sort of
Lewdness is tolerated, it must needs be very injurious to the Community, for by
this means it often happens, that Children are not owned, nor provided for,
Husbands are hated or despised, Women become cotemptible as soon as their
Beauty fades, or their Youth declines, or Lust is satisfied, and so a great
part of humane kind will be rendered miserable, and many other Instances of
Disorder and Confusion might be named.

. 31. There is likewise Injustice in all Incest, which is then committed when
those are Married together, Incest.
who are too near one another by the Laws of nature and blood, or by Affinity
and Marriage, or when there is an Abusing and Defiling any such without
Marriage. I say there is Injustice in these and such like Instances of
Boundless and Extravagant Lust, for where this is unbridled and unlimited,
there cannot but be a great deal of Wrong and Mischief ensuing upon it.
Wherefore it is reasonable and fitting that Carnal Commerce be kept within the
bounds of Lawful Marriage, for this gives a due check and confinement to
Concupiscence, and is a Legitimating of those Desires, which othewise would be
exorbitent: For this reason it is impossible to exert or enjoy the Carnal
Delight in a due and lawful manner, unless in a state of Wedlock. And it is as
true, that it is impossible to observe the Laws of Justice between one another
in that State, unless the Contract of Marriage be faithfully kept, and none
defile his Neighbor's Bed, or wrong another Chastity.

Now, that you may be thus Chaste, Pure and undefiled, observe these following
Directions,

. 32. I. Keep a vigilant Guard over your bodily Senses. As these may be made
serviceable to Religion by a due ordering of them, so it is as true, that they
may be, and usually are made instrumental to Vice by taking no care of them.
Particularly, where these are not looked after, there is a Door set open to
Wantonness, and all manner of Lewdness and Lustful Practices. He that takes no
care of his outward Senses, will soon betray his Chastity. When the Eye and Ear
are always kept open, Lust will easily enter. Therefore shut these Doors, upon
occasion, if you are desirous to keep it out.

. 33. II. That you may abstain from those impure and unlawful Pleasures which
attend Fornication and Adultery, shun all the Occasions of Lust, fly from the
Temptations which lead to it. Carefully observe that Rule of the Apostle, Make
no provision for the Flesh, to fulfill the Lusts thereof, Romans 13.14. Do not by
Idleness, or Luxury, or vain Company, or any other way cherish the Seeds of
Lust. Avoid all Incitements and Provocations to it: remove the Fuel from the
Fire, left it end in everlasting Burnings.

. 34. III. Keep up and maintain that Modesty and Shamefacedness which are so
great a preservative against this vile Sin. Modesty is fitly styled by one, the
Faces Chastity: and it ought to appear most signally in the Female Sex. Blushes
are the only Paint that becomes them, and which will certainly be helpful to
secure their Innocence, Therefore the Apostle exhorts Women to adorn themselves
with Shamefacedness and Sobriety, 1 Timothy 2.9. In a word, Modesty is not only a
sign of Virtue, but a help to Chastity in particular.

. 35. IV. Weigh well the Danger and Mischief of the Sin of Uncleanness and
Whoredom. It has this peculiar to it, above some other Vices, that is so
blinds and besots those that are addicted to it, that they seldom return unto
God by Repentance. Which Solomon long since observed, Prove. 2.19. None that go
unto her (that is, to the Harlot) return again, neither take they hold of the
paths of Life. As much as to say, Those that give themselves up to Lewdness, do
not easily and speedily return into the Ways of Virtue: If they be restored and
recovered, it is with great difficulty: With many Tears and long Importunities
they obtain their Pardon in the Court of Heaven. It is a signal act of Grace
that they are admitted into Favor at last. So few are the Persons that are
pardoned and saved, in comparison of the great Multitudes that perish in this
Sin, that they are here said to be none. Such is the Nature of this heinous
Vice, when persisted in, that it is attended generally with Impenitence. For
(as the Prophet tells us) Whoredom (no less than excess of Wine) takes away the
heart, Hos. 4.11. that is, it is a Sin of that quality that it deprives the
mind of all sense of Goodness, it stupifies the Conscience, and naturally
hardens those that commit it. It makes them insensible of their Guilt, though
it is the greatest imaginable; and it causes them to take no notice of their
Danger, which yet is as great as can be. For thus Solomon expresses the
miserable Condition of a Lewd Woman, and those that have sinful Converse with
her, Her house enclineth unto death, and her paths unto the dead, Prove. 2.18.
And again, in the Fifth Chapter, and the 4th and 5th Verses, Her end is bitter
as W^rmwood, sharp as a two-edged Sword: her feet go down to death, her steps
take hold on hell. And the New Testament is yet more express and positive, for
there we are assured, That Whoremongers and Adulterers God will judge, Heb.
13.14. Neither Fornicators nor Adulterers shall inherit the Kingdom of God, 1
Cor. 6.9, 10. No Whoremonger nor unclean Person has any Inheritance in the
Kingdom of Christ and of God, Ephesians. 5.5. And concerning these vile Offenders it
is peremptorily denounced, That they shall have their part in the Lake which
burns with Fire and Brimstone, Rev. 21.8. These Things being seriously thought
of and laid to heart, will, by the Divine Grace, make such an impression on
your Minds, that you will be powerfully inclined to hate all Uncleanness and
Lewdness, and to addict your selves to a chaste and pure Conversation.

CHAP. XIII.
The Third Part of Righteousness toward our Neighbor consists in Charity; and
first of Charity to the Souls of Men in several instances. Secondly, of Charity
to the Bodies of Men. The most constraining Motive to Charity drawn from
Christ's love to us. The True Notion of Charity cleared from Mistakes, and
stated as to Matter and Manner, The necessary Qualification of true Charity, in
Four Particulars. Several Rules for the discreet Management of Charity. The
true Character or Genius of Charity, in Six Particulars. Incitements to this
Duty. The Necessity of it.

. 1. I Proceed now to the Third Thing I undertook to speak of, viz. that Branch
of Righteousness which is commonly known by the Name of Charity or
Mercifulness. Of Charity.
By Virtue of which we are bound to do all the good we can to our Neighbors
whether they stand in need of our Spiritual or Temporal Aid. Our Charity which
respects their Spiritual Good, consists first in teaching and instructing those
poor Souls that are blind and ignorant and are not acquainted with their State
or with their Duty. We must endeavor to enlighten those who sit in darkness,
Of Charity to Men's Souls.
and in the shadow of Death, and to bring them to the acknowledgment of the
Truth, which will be both Light and Life to them. Instructing the Ignorant.
It is not enough, That no corrupt Communication proceed out of your Mouths,
but that moreover your Discourse be good to the use of edifying, that it may
minister Grace unto the Hearers, Ephesians. 4.29. that it may be such Communication
as is serviceable to infuse divine Knowledge into their Minds, and to make them
fall in love with that which is virtuous and good. If you meet with poor
ignorant People (and there are too many of that sort every where) take occasion
to instruct them in the great Fundamentals of the Christian Religion, acquaint
them with the things of another World, direct them into the Way that leads to
Happiness. Where you see any making profession of Religion, but denying the
power of it, placing the whole business of Godliness in Words and Show, labor
to undeceive such Persons, and to convince them of the true Nature of
Christianity, which requires a Practice proportionable to our Knowledge, and
forbids us to usurp the Title of Christians, when we are Strangers to the
Temper and Genius of the Gospel.

. 2. Secondly, Reducing them that go astray.
Your Christian Charity must be discovered, not only in your directing Sinners
into the right way, but by bringing them back again when you see they are gone
out of it, and wander in the ways of Error and Vice. This is best of all
managed by severe Reproofs and Rebukes. The Man who is in a Swoon, must not be
gently stroked: It is a courtesy to use him roughly, and so he will esteem it
when he is come to himself. Let the Righteous smite me; it shall be a kindness:
and let him reprove me; it shall be an excellent Oil, which shall not break my
head, Psalm. 141.5. If we would effectually recall and reclaim Sinners by our
Admonitions, we must be downright and severe with them, we must come home to
them (as Nathan did) with a particular Application, Thou art the Man. If we
deal not thus with them, we spare their Sins, and thereby endanger their Souls,
and so under the pretense of being tender and compassionate we prove most cruel
to them. And yet I do not mean that he who reproves Sin, should not do it
courteously, meekly and lovingly, that the Party who is the Delinquent may
plainly see that he bears a love to his Soul. If the Reproof should be
otherwise, it would manifestly offend against the Apostle's Rule in Gal. 6.1.
If any Man be overtaken in a fault, you that are spiritual, restore such a one
in the spirit of meekness. But this does not hinder you from a bold and
impartial correcting of Vice, for you show your compassionate Meekness in your
free Reprehending and Rebuking of your Brother for his Faults. To this purpose
we may take notice of the Connection of those words in Lev. ^9.17. Thou shall
not hate thy Brother in thy heart: thou shall in any wise rebuke thy Neighbor,
and not suffer Sin upon him. If you would show that you hate not your Brother,
but that you truly love him, you must rebuke him. Some think it unneighbourly
and unkind to reprove others for their Miscarriages; they pretend that they
shall disoblige them, and be thought to show themselves uncivil to them, if
they find fault with their Actions: But this is a false Notion, for we never
oblige our Neighbors more than when we freely lay open their Faults before
them. And truly I look upon it as one great cause of the General Corruption in
the Lives of Men, that we are negligent as to this matter, that we do not take
the boldness to check Vice, and thereby give a Proof of our Charity to our
Brethren. And we may show this Charity further, in adding pathetical
Persuasions to our Reproofs, and in an earnest Exhorting them to leave their
Sins, and to return to the Ways of Virtue and Godliness.

. 3. A Third act of Mercifulness in respect of Men's spiritual Condition is to
comfort the Weak and Disconsolate, Comforting the Disconsolate.
to cheer and encourage those that are drooping, to resolve and satisfy the
Scrupulous, to support and succor the Desponding. This and the two former
Instances of Charity to the Souls of Men are, as I have showed before, the more
especial concern of those that are Dispensers and Preachers of the Gospel: But
yet they are in some measure to be the design and endeavor of you all. This
more particularly, which I Am now speaking of, is an universal Duty: When you
see any of your Christian Brethren dejected, reckon them the deserved Objects
of your Christian Pity and Compassion. Labor to be instrumental, by that
Knowledge and Experience which you have, toward the comforting of them; excite
their slagging Spirits; pour Oil and Balsams into their wounded Consciences,
and tell them what God has done for your Souls, and what they may expect God
will do for theirs. According to Christ's own method of dealing with such, you
must not break these bruised Reeds, but strengthen and confirm them, you must
not quench this smoking Flax, but blow it up into a flame.

. 4. To pray for the Miserable.
It is another indispensable Act of Compassion and Charity to Pray for others,
to make your humble and ardent Addresses to Heaven in their behalf, to beseech
God to alleviate their Sorrows, to supply their spiritual Wants, and to be
every way gracious and merciful to them. Pray one for another, Jam 5, 16. Here
is a way for even Beggars to give Alms, for the poorest and meanest to show
their Love to their Brethren. If they cannot relieve them with their Purses,
they may with their Prayers; and thus they may be considerable Benefactors to
others, even when they are indigent themselves.

I might add in the next place, that to the Charity I am now speaking of
belongs the Communion of Saints. If there be a true Love stirring in us, it
will put us upon conversing together in the way of Religion. We shall maintain
a holy Fellowship, and be Companions of them that fear God, and our delight
will be in the Saints, and in the Excellent. Particularly we ought to
demonstrate our Charity to others, by conferring with them about the matters of
Religion, by frequent discoursing concerning the Principles of Divine Truth,
and the Practice of Holiness. This is the meaning of that Command in Deuteronomy. 6.7.
Thou shall talk of them (that is, of the Laws and Precepts of God) when thou
fittest in thy House, and when thou walk by the way, and when thou lie
down, and when thou risest up. As much as to say, Religion and the concerns of
it ought to be the matter of your daily Conference; you must take all Occasions
and Opportunities of discoursing about them, and of being thereby beneficial to
the Souls of your Brethren.

. 5. And if you have arrived thus far, you will not forget to evidence your
Love and good Will to the Souls of your Neighbors, as well as to your own, by
putting in practice that large and comprehensive Duty commended to us by the
Apostle in 1 Timothy 5.22. Be not partakers of other Men's sins; be not sharers in
their sins, by advising and counselling, by persuading or enticing them to what
is Vicious: Partake not of other Men's Guilt, by assisting and aiding them, or
by setting them an ill Example; no nor by sinful silence and connivance. But,
in brief, take all occasions of advancing the Welfare of Men's Souls, that so by
all means you may save some. Endeavor the promoting of Goodness in the minds
of Men, labor that the Image of God may be more visible and prevailing in the
World; do what you can to make them Serious and Pious, and discover unto them
the Excellency of that Religion wherein you find so much content and
satisfaction your selves.

. 6. And to excite you to this work, let me remind you that there is great need
of it every where. For want of this so few are saved, and the most go to Hell.
Because this Duty is so seldom practiced, the Devil has a very numerous
Retinue, and a great multitude of Servants and Votaries. How necessary a work
then is it to snatch Men out of Satan's Hands, to pluck these Firebrands out of
the Fire, to bring seduced and perishing Sinners into the right way, and secure
their Everlasting Happiness? And farther to stir you up, let me remind you of
this also, that this is a Divine and Heavenly Employment, and such as is truly
worthy of a Christian. To show Mercy to the Souls of Men is the greatest and
noblest Charity, The saving of one Soul is infinitely preferable to the Gain of
the whole World. I will shut up all with the words of the Prophet Daniel, chap.
12. ver. 3. They that are wise (or, as it is in the Original, they that are
Teachers, whether Ministers or People* who endeavor to reclaim and convert
others) shall shine as the brightness of the Firmament; and they that turn many
to Righteousness as the Stars for ever and ever.

. 7 Again, we are engaged not only to advance the spiritual but the temporal
benefit of our Brethren. Charity to the outward Man.
Charity ^xtends it self not only to the Souls, but to the Bodies and outward
Concerns of others. As it is considered in this latter Sense, it is either
inward or outward. First, it is the inward Disposition of the Mind, whereby we
resent the bodily Wrongs and Injuries that befall others, and are grieved and
troubled at it; To Symphatize with their Misery.
whereby we have a compassion toward all those that are in Want and Necessity,
whereby we are nearly concerned in the outward Welfare of all Mankind; whereby
we are so far from fostering any Hatred or Envy, any Spite or Malice against
them, that we wish them well from our Hearts, and desire and pray for their
bodily Good, and rejoice in it, and find Contentment in the Success and
Prosperity of others. All this is briefly comprehended in the Apostles words,
Be ye kindly affectioned one to another, Romans 12.10. There is required of us a
kind and benign inclination of the inward Man, a compassionate Affection toward
all that are in a necessitous Condition.

. 8. Secondly, To the inward Disposition or Habit of Charity, must be added the
outward works of it, To Communicate to their Necessities.
viz. To do good and to communicate, to relieve the Necessities of the indigent
and distressed, to feed the Hungry and to clothe the Naked, to give to him that
asks thee, and from him that would borrow of thee not to turn away, Matthew
5.42. To show kindness to the Widow and the Fatherless, the Poor and the
Stranger, and to do all Offices of Love to our necessitous Brethren. But
especially those who are blessed with an abundance of this World's Goods, are
concerned in this Duty, 1 Timothy 6.17 Charge them that are rich in this World to
do good, to be rich in good Works, to be be ready to distribute, and willing to
communicate. This Rank of Persons are particularly charged to make their Plenty
serviceable to the Relief of those that are in want: for it is not fit that
these should starve whilst the other are glutted. It is just and equal that
those who enjoy the freedom of a Festival, and the plenty of a well-furnish'd
Table, should not forget the empty Bellies of the Poor. The Rich Man mentioned
in the Gospel is signally described by his Purple and fine Linen, by his
costly Provision, and faring deliciously every day: But this had not been
objected against him as a Crime, if Lazarus, poor Lazarus, had not laid almost
famished at his door. That was it which heightened his Fault, and inhaused his
Doom, that he enjoyed so much of this World's Goods, and yet had no heart at
all to part with any thing to the Poor: That he could keep a great House, and
have abundance of costly Fare, and seed a great Retinue of Servants, and of
Dogs too (as appears from that Story) and yet a poor distressed Beggar could
not find an Alms at his Gate, no not so much as the Crume which sell from his
Table. His Quality and Estate allowed him to eat and drink freely, and to be
richly clad; but then he was bound to relieve his necessitous Neighbor, to
feed and clothe him, and to save him from perishing. God gave him plenty and
abundance, not to maintain his Wantonness and Luxury, but to enable him to
abound in Charity and good Works toward the Distressed.

So must it be with you, whoever you are that God has blessed with great
Revenues and Incomes; if he has prepared a Table for you (as the Psalmist
expresses it) you must remember to prepare and provide something for the Poor:
Or else your Plenty will prove a Curse and Judgment to you: And when you come
to sit down and consider of it, it will be a bitter and tormenting Reflection
to you; especially if God shall be pleased to blast your Estates, and suffer
you to fall from great abundance into grett penury. How sad and aggravating
will it be for a Man to reflect thus upon himself, and say, I had once the
Blessings of this Life in a considerable measure, I enjoyed the affluence of
this World, I might then have spared my poor necessitous Neighbors many an
Alms, I might have clothed some naked Orphans, I might have cheared some
sorrowful Widows, and many a good Action lay fair in my way. But I passed them
by, and pampered my self, and indulged my Folly. I threw away Pounds upon ^le
and dissolute Companions, I expanded my Revenues in the maintaining of my
Pleasures, but I could not afford to part with the smallest Sums to those whose
low and indigent Condition cried aloud for Relief. I spent that in Sin and
Vanity which I might, and ought to have employed in charitable Undertakings.
That which I should have bestowed on the Needy, I squandered away in Gaming and
Drinking, in Pride and Lewdness, in contentious Suits and Controversies, in
pleasing my own extravagant Fancies, or that of others. What comfort now can
there be in such Reflections as these* Nay, how great most the Anguish and
Torment be which always accompany such Thoughts? For when a Man thinks with
himself that he had an opportunity to do good, and yet that he wholly neglected
it, it is the most dreadful Sting of Conscience imaginable. The Exhortation
therefore of the Apostle takes place here, As we have opportunity, let us do
good, Gal. 6.10. Let every one to whom God has given this World's Riches and
Plenty, remember to give again, for he knows not how soon he may be deprived of
them, for his abusing them.

But the greatest and most powerful Motive to Brotherly Charity, is that which
the Gospel furnishes us with, and which was unknown to the most improved
Moralists among the Heathens, viz. the transcendend Love which Jesus Christ
showed to us. The Love of Christ the most powerful motive to Charity.
Seeing he was so compassionate as to lay down his precious Blood and Life for
us, let us not think it too much to part with some Portions of our earthly
Goods to our afflicted Brethren.

. 9. Put because we learn from the Apostle, That a Man may bestow all his Goods
to feed the poor, and yet have not Charity, 1 Cor 13 3. He may be very kind to
those that are in Necessity, and do many things that are beneficial to them,
and yet they may ^ot amount to that which is truly Charitable, because they are
defective either as to Matter or Manner: Wherefore in the first place we must
see that our good Works and Beneficience toward the Poor be Righteous as to
their Matter; by which I mean this, that what we give and bestow on these
accounts, must not be the Fruits of any Evil Gettings and Unlawful Purchasings,
but must be acquired by honest and lawful Means. The Hire of a Harlot was not
permitted by the Law to be brought into the Temple; nor is it lawful to make
any Lust, or any undue Practice whatsoever, to administer to Charity and
Alms-deeds. Some scrape together great Revenues by their base, sordid and
parcimonius way of Living, and then at last make the Poor their Heirs, but this
is not true Charity, for the Materials of it were ill got; and it is certain,
That Covetousness ought not to be the Foundation of Liberality. Others gripe
and oppress their Neighbors, and by their unjust Dealings with them squeeze
out an Estate; but if these should build Almshouses, and turn Benefactors to
the Poor, they cannot be said to be Charitable, for we must not call that
Charity which was gotten (and perhaps partly from the Poor) by Extortion and
Oppression. We are not to think that Charity is to be built upon Injustice: but
in such a case as this, Restitution ought to be made. And so as to any other
unlawful Ways of getting Gain, we must never reckon these as the Basis of
Charity and Good Works; but if we are desirous that our Charity should be of
the true and right Kind, we must be careful that the Springs which feed and
supply it be good and lawful.

When you have thus taken care about the Matter of your Charity, the next Thing
is to look to the Manner of it. Accordingly,

The true Notion of Charity: It must be free.
. 10. I. Let it be free Thine heart shall not be grieved when thou give unt^
thy po^r Brother, Deuteronomy. 15 10. And if this was a Qualification of Charity under
the Law, it must needs be (...) under the Gospel, and thence we are enjoined to
given t^ grudgingly, 2 C^r. 9 ^*. and t^ use Hospitality one to another without
grudging, 1 Pet. 4 9. Some Men's Alms (...) choiced and ex^ted from them by a
vehement Importunity, and as it were Violence; but this is a very great Blemish
to their best Deeds, and in a manner spoils the very Nature of them, for it is
improper to call that Charity which is not free. Let our good Deeds therefore
flow from a willing Mind, and then they will be of the right kind, and they
will be acceptable to God, for he loves a cheerful giver, 2 Cor, 9 7.

11. II. With a good Intention.
Let your Works of Charity be performed with a good and right Intention. The
Charity of Papists is founded on the Opinion of Merit: I do not say all their
Charity, but they generally do it to expiate some great Sins, and to merit
Heaven: Which undue Intention is the bane of their best Works. Others give
Alms, and are very beneficial to their distressed Neighbors, but it is out of
a love of Applause and Vainglory, and thereby they mar all they do. Which
g^ve occasion to our Savior's advice, Take heed you do not your Alms before
Men, to be seen of them, otherwise ye have no reward of your Father which is in
Heaven. Therefore when thou do thine Alms, do not s^u^d a Trumpet before thee
as the Hypocrites do, in the Synagogues and in the Streets, that they may have
glory of Men, Matthew. 6.1, etc. Where Christ alludes to Players and Actors on
the Stage, and that very fitly, because the Greek word he uses, and the name he
calls those Vainglorious Men by, signifies both Disemblers or Hypocrites, and
also Stage Players; and he condemns the Vain Ostentation of those, who, when
they do a^ct or Charity, appear as upon a Theater, and do all to be seen of
Men: they do as it were blow a Trumpet, and hang out a Flag to draw Company in
to be Spectators of what they do, to see the Show of their Alms. Our Savior
lets such know that he has a great abhorrence of this Histrionical kind of
Acting, and that what is given to the Poor out of a principle of Vainglory is
of no value, and that a Man loses his Gift, and nulls all his Charity by
proclaiming it, and that his being applauded, is all the Reward that he shall
ever have.

Wherefore it highly concerns us to act with a good Design and Intention when
we bestow our Alms, and relieve the Necessities of our Brethren. These things
must be done for God's Glory, and not for our own. And though they may be done
before Men (as our Savior would have our Light shine before them) yet not with
this design and aim, to be seen of them. But they must be done to set forth the
Praise of our Maker to exalt the Honor of our Master, to credit Religion, to
grace and adorn our Profession, to stop the Mouths of Gainsayers, to win upon
the Wicked and Depraved, and to gain Proselytes to the best Religion in the
World: and the Root of all must be an hearty Love of God and of our Brethren.
Let Love be with us dissimulation, Romans 12.9. in opposition to Hypocritical
Appearances and mere Shows of Charity. Do what you do cordially, sincerely,
uprightly. He that gives* says the Apostle, let him do it with simplicity*
Romans 12.8. with a good and upright Design. T^is will make it acceptable to God,
this will render it comfortable to our selves, and this will make it most
successful to our Brethren.

. 12. 3. Let your Charity be Full and Liberal: show your selves Bountiful and
Generous when you see occasion. When great necessity calls for it, give with
both hands, and though some Persons of mean and Contracted Spirit should blame
you for it, It must be full and Liberal.
yet persevere in so noble a Work. It is true the Apostle has told us that if
there be first a willing mind, it is accepted according to that a man has
(though it be never so little) and not according to what be has not, 2 Cor
^.12. And we read in the Gospel of St. Mark (Chap. 12 42. ver.) of a Poor Widow
that cast in bu Two mites into the Treasury, which was the Poor man's Box that
held the Gifts and Alms which the people offered in the Temple: it was placed
in the Women's Court, and so this Widow stood in her own Apartment when she
distributed her Charity, which though it was but Two Brass half-farthings, yet
our Savior tells us, that she cast in more than all the great and Liberal
Givers; though not more in quantity, yet more in Respect of the inward and
hearty Affection which she had, and also as to the proportion of her Gift, for
she gave all that she had at that present time. Which is unspeakable
Encouragement to all those who are desirous to do works of Charity: for if they
do them according to their Ability, though they be never so mean, they are
Accepted and Applauded. A cup of cold water shall be Reckoned and Rewarded, as
if it were a draught of Generous Wine or a Rich Cordial.

. 13. But though this be true, yet it as true that if God has Blessed you with
Abundance, then you are not Excused from giving Liberally and Largely, and
according to the proportion of your Estate. Thou shall open thy hand wide unto
thy Brother, Deuteronomy. 15.8, 11. And this the meaning of what the Wise man says,
Eccl. 11.2. Give a portion to Seven, and also to Eight. Where that precise
Number of Seven or Eight is not strictly to be understood, as if we were
commanded to bestow our Charity on just such a number of Persons. No: this is
the thing which is meant by these words, that we ought to be Charitable not
only to a few but to many. For that is the meaning, of giving to Seven and also
to Eight, as is clear from the like way of speaking in other places of
Scripture, Psalm 12.7. Prove. 24.16. Mic. 5.5. The Extent and Largeness of our
Charity are to be such as God requires. We must not be Niggards, but stretch
out the circle of our Charity as wide as we can, and take in as in many as we
can into its Circumference. But when I speak thus, I do not advise you to any
thing that is Immoderate and Extravagant, and unsuitable to your Condition and
Circumstances, and therefore,

. 14. 4 thly, I add this, let your Charity be Discreet, It must be discreet,
directed by Christian Prudence.
let it always be directed by Christian Prudence and Wisdom. And accordingly I
will offer these following Rules to you: First, let not your Charity exceeed
your ability. You are not obliged to impoverish your selves, to Accommodate
others. Indeed it is recorded that the Collection for the Service of the
Tabernacle was to be levied o^ the Rich and Poor equally, Exodus 30.15, 16. The
Rich shall not give more, and the poor shall not give less than half a sh^kel.
Bur there is a Mystical sense of that Order, for it was done to Teach us that
in Spiritual things there is an Equality, because the Souls of the poor and the
Rich are alike. But this is no standing Rule in other cases, Some Rules of
Discretion in dispensing Charity.
and particularly in the commmon Offices of Charity. It is Indiscreet and no
ways Allowable to give beyond our proportion. If you be of a narrow and mean
Estate, it is Folly for you to vie with wealthy Persons. When it is said, that
the Primitive Christians of Macedonia were charitable beyond their Power, 2
Cor. 8 3. We can only gather this, that in a v^ry great and urgent necessity we
may do that which at other times is not fitting for us to do. We may strain our
Charity upon an Extraordinary Account. But the usual and ordinary standard of
it is that of our Lord, Luke 21.41. Give Alms of such things as ye have, or, as
ye are able, for so it is rendered in the Margin: relieve the needs of the poor
according to the proportion of that Estate or those Incomes which God has
Blessed you with, for Religion does not Teach men to be Ill managers and Bad
Husbands of what they have: it directs them to provide for themselves and their
own Families, and then to take notice of the condition of others, and to help
and support them according to their power: for though Christianity bids us be
Charitable, yet it forbids us to be Profuse and Lavish. The Apostle has left
us an Excellent Rule to go by in this matter, 2 Cor. 8.13. So to give as others
be not Eased, and we Burdened, that is, we are to be Bountiful in supplying the
wants of others, but not so as to streighten our selves; especially we are not
to nourish Idleness in others, and bring want upon our selves. This is a Right
measure of Giving.

. 15. Again, this is another Rule to be observed, Learn to Judge concerning
Persons. For this is certain that all are not the Equal Objects of our Charity,
though they be Poor and Indigent. It is so far from Charity, that it is a Fault
to Relieve Common and Lewd Beggars, because thereby we Encourage and Uphold
them in their wicked ways of Living, and because we throw away that upon them
which should be given to others, who really deserve it. Here we are to Remember
not to Judge always of men's Necessities and Wants by their Lowed and Clamarous
Complaints, for there is Poverty that is silent, and it is the part of our
Christian Discretion to make search after this, and to relieve those who are
ashamed to Beg. And when we have found out the Right Objects of our Charity, we
must then make use of our Christian Prudence in distributing our Alms according
to the wants of the Persons, and not to all alike, for this was the Rule
observed by the Primitive Christians, Acts 2.45. They parted their Goods to all
men, as every one had need they proportioned their Charity to the Needs and
Exigencies of those that wanted it.

16. Furthermore, when you have found who are to be Relieved, then enquire who
of those are in the greatest want, for these are to be preferred in your
Charity before the rest. Here your Prudence will direct you to choose out among
the Maimed and the Cripples, the Aged and Decrepid (now past working, but not
past Eating, no not by the known Rule of the Apostle) the Sick and Diseased,
the Oppressed and Persecuted, etc. To choose our, I say, among all these sorts
of Necessitous Persons such whose wants and grievances are most Urgent and
Pressing. And then Prudence will also advise you to a seasonable Relieving of
them, it will prompt you to make your Benevolence the more Welcome and Grateful
by your Right Timing of it: and that generally is by not delaying it. And thus
you have a particular, but brief Account of the Manner how you ought to exert
this Noble Grace, how you are to discharge this Excellent Duty of Charity as it
denotes Alms-deeds. But besides these Acts of Christian Charity, at it has
Relation to the wants and necessities of our Neighbors, there are yet other
Instances of this Virtue, which I will Reduce to these Following Heads.

. 17. I. Charity makes Peace.
Charity is a Peace maker. It suffers us not to provoke and Exasperate any, but
helps to Reconcile differing parties, and to promote Unity and Concord, and as
much as in us lies, to Live Peaceably with all Men. Romans 12.18 And to that end
not only to seek peace, but ensue it, 1 Pet. 3.1^. And though we cannot in all
points come up to an agreement with one another, yet let us agree in the main,
and be perfectly united in Brotherly Affection. Let all Names and Titles of
Reproach be ^id aside, and let us Embrace one another as Christians and
Brethren, and as Members of the same Mystical Body whereof Christ is the Head.
Is it not sad and Deplorable that some who call themselves Christians, and
would be Accounted such, have a greater Antipat^y to one another than they have
to Jews or Turks, or mere Infidels? So it is, all but those of their own
particular persuasion and humor are Barbarians in their esteem. But let us
consider how shameful and scandalous this practice is: and let us attend to St.
John's reasoning, 1 John 4.11. If God so Loved us (so signally as to send us his
Son, which he mentioned in the foregoing verse) we ought also to love another.
If our Blessed Lord came into the World with a message of Peace and Love to
mankind, we are necessarily obliged to show an universal Love and good will to
one another, and to lay aside all Hatred and Discord. Let it then be known
whose Disciples we are by our strong Inclinations to Peace and Amity, and by
our zealous endeavors after them. And to Encourage us to this, let us be
sensible that Envying and Strife and Divisions are a sign of men's being Carnal,
1 Cor. 3 3. But Entire Love and Peace are marks of a Spiritual, Divine and
Heavenly temper.

18. Under this head of Peaceable Charity I will add a few words concerning
going to Law. Of Law Suits.
This without doubt is not Sinful and Unlawful in it self, which is evident
from this one Consideration, that the Office of Judges and Magistrates is
allowed of by God in the Holy Scriptures. Wherefore when we are wronged and
Injured, we may Justly and according to the Rules or Christianity secure our
Rights and Properties by Appealing to the Law, and by having our Case tr^ in
some Court of Judicature. But then, we must Remember to follow these
Directions, we must observe the Wise man's advice, Prove. 3 30. Strive not with a
man without cause, that is, without a just and Lawful cause, and such as is
necessary and urgent. Therefore those are to be blamed who contend with their
Neighbors for every little trifling matter. Or, if the quarrel be about
something of Weight and Importance, yet we must take care that we first Debate
the Cause between our selves and endeavor with the Assistance of our Friends
to put an end to the Controversy. But if at last we are forced to Repair to a
Public Court of Justice, let us lay aside all Hatred, Spite and Malice, and
let us not design and purpose the Ruin of our Adversary as some are wont to
threaten. We must not do any thing out of a Principle of Revenge, or with a
Love of Contention, merely to vex and Trouble others with Law suits; as is the
practice of too many, who delight to grieve. Disturb and molest their
Neighbors, and to make their Lives unquiet and uncomfortable. Whosoever thus
goes to Law, offends in a high manner against the Rules of Charity and
Christian Peaceableness.

. 19. II. As Charity is Peaceable, so it is Humble. And our Humility toward
our Brethren will cause us to comply with such Apostolical Injunctions as
these, Charity begets Humility.
Submit your selves one to another in the fear of God, Ephesians. 5.21. that is,
cheerfully and humbly perform those mutual Duties one to another, which belong
to you according to your different Places and Stations. Honor all Men, 1 Pet
2.17. that is, give that respect which is due to them according to their
Condition; but despise not any one because he is inferior to you Vilify and
scornment, though they be of never so mean quality. Listen to the Judgment and
and Advice of others, acknowledge what is worthy in them; own and esteem the
Worth and Gifts the Graces and spiritual Seize of your Brethren, Mind not
high things, but condescend to men of low estate, Romans 12.16. that is, be
willing to stoop to the meanest Offices and Employments, to do them good In
honor prefer one another, Romans 12.10. that is, strive who shall show most
Christian respect and kindness to each other. And St. Peter has summed up all
in that comprehensive Exhortation, All of you be subject one to another, and be
clothed with Humility, 1 Pet. 5.5. And that you may be so, set the Example of
Christ Jesus before your Eyes, for he came to teach us this Grace especially;
and he taught it effectually by his own Practice; for never was there such
Humility as his. Therefore let us endeavor to tread in the steps of our
Blessed Lord and Master, who was the great Pattern of Condescension, and had us
learn of him, for he was meek and lowly in heart. If you have a true Christian
Love to your Brethren, this lowly Spirit will show it self in a humble
Behavior toward them: For that Humility toward them, which is required of
you, is founded in Brotherly Love and Charity.

. 20. III. Charity is careful not to give Offense to others. It avoids giving
Offense.
If we be inspired with this noble Principle, we shall be sollicitous not to
offend one of the little ones, that is, those of our Brethren that seem most
mean and inconsiderable, Luke 17.2. We shall according to the Apostle's
Direction, not do any thing whereby our Brother may bave occasion to stumble,
or to be offended, or to be made weak, Romans 14.21. The meaning of which is,
that we are to have regard to other Men's Consciences as well as our own; we
must not be any ways instrumental toward others into falling into Sin, no not
by Matters indifferent in themselves. Out of a charitable co^descention to our
scrupulous and weak Brother, we must not use the Liberty which otherwise we
might. This is the Sense of the Apostle in 1 Cor. 10, 23. All things are lawful
for me, but all things edify not. There are some things that a Men may
lawfully do as to himself, but he cannot with a good Conscience do them in
respect of others, because they will be scandalized at it. In a case where I am
at Liberty to do or not to do a thing, if I see that by doing it I shall offend
my Brother, I am to restrain my Liberty: For I must consult the good and
edification of others as well as my own satisfaction; and consequently in
things of an indifferent nature, I ought not to indulge too great a freedom and
latitude. I am to be so self-denying and circumspect in my Life, as not to
administer any ground of Scandal, or to countenance or strengthen any Persons
in that which has the least appearance of Evil. This is the work of true
Evangelical Charity.

. 21. IV. It conceals the Faults of others.
It conceals the Faults of others. Which is the meaning of St. Peter, Epist. 1.
chapter 4 ver 8. Charity shall cover the multitude of Sins. It will be so far from
laying open the Fallings and Infirmities of others (which is the common
practice of the busy and prying World) that it rather hides them. If brotherly
Love Reigns in Men's Breasts, they are most willing and forward to put the best
construct (...) upon others Actions, to interpret them i^ the most favorable
Sense, to mitigate rather than a^ ^avate their Follies, to cast a Veil over
their Na^ness rather than ^ver it, as Constantine the Great was wont to say, If
he saw an Ecclesiastical Person offending, he would throw his Robes over him,
and conceal his Faults.

. 22. V. Another act of Charity is forgiving our Brethren, It forgives Offenses.
passing by their Offenses against us, upon their Acknowledgment and Sorrow for
them. Be ye kind one to another, tender hearted, forgiving one another, Ephesians.
4.32 Where there is Brotherly kindness and tender heartedness, there will be a
forgiving of the Failings of others; especially seeing it is a sign of our Love
to God, and of our sense of his Love to us, for we are enjoined to forgive one
another, as God for Christ's sake has forgiven us, Ephesians. 4.30. And the
forgiving of those that Trespass against us is made the condition of our being
forgiven by God, in the last Petition but one in the Lord's Prayer. There is no
Man then can pretend to that Brotherly Love and Charity which the Gospel
requires, if he be failing in this particular.

. 23. VI. Charity proceeds yet further, It teaches us to return good for evil.
and teaches us to return Good for Evil. Bless them that curse you, do good to
them that hate you, pray for them who despitefully use you and persecute you,
Mat. 5.44. And St. Paul enlarges upon this Doctrine of our Savior, Romans 12.19,
20, 21. Avenge not your selves, but rather give place unto wrath; submit to the
bearing of more Abuses and greater Injuries, rather than attempt to right our
selves on an unlawful manner. If thine enemy hunger, feed him; if he thirst,
give him drink: he not overcome of evil, but overcome evil with good. Requite
good for evil, and conquer your Enemies by Kindness and Patience. And it is
observable, that when St. Peter exhorts us to have compassion one of another,
and to love as Brethren, he immediately adds this, as the natural result of it.
Render not evil for evil, or railing for railing, but contrariwise, blessing, 1
Pet. 3.8, 9. Show that you are real Masters of Christian Love and Charity by
complying with this great Precept of the Gospel, viz. of loving all Men, even
our Enemies and returning to them Kindness for their ill Will.

. 24. Lastly, It excites to universal Benevolence and Kindness.
To comprehend all in few words, Charity bids us undertake and perform what we
can for the Benefit of Mankind. As Love works no ill to its Neighbor, Romans
13.10. so it does all the good it can to him. In our whole converse in the
World, in every Capacity and Station we are placed in, we must be mindful of
that excellent Advice, By Love serve one another, Gal. 5.13. Let your Love be
seen to be an effectual and powerful Principle, by making you actually
serviceable for the good and advantage of your Brethren.

. 25. And this concerns you the rather, because of the deplorable Practice of
Men in this Age we live in. An inhumane Self-Love has invaded their Minds, and
influences all their Actions. They are not in the least concerned for others,
they live as if they had no duty to perform toward their Brethren. Nay, which
is much worse, their Lives tell the World that they think they may deal as
injuriously with their Neighbors as they please. It is high time therefore for
you to give good Example to an evil World, and to be useful in checking the
growing Evils that attend the almost universal Deficiency of Charity. Our
Savior's Prediction being now fulfilled, That the Love of many shall wax cold,
you must besti^ your selves, and endeavor to bring Heat and Life into them
again by your exemplary Love and Charity. Your nobler Fire may warm others, and
kindle those Flames in their Breasts which are so much wanting there. It is to
be hoped that others will fall in Love with Charity, by seeing it shine so
beautifully in you. At least you may upbraid their hard-heartedness by your
Compassion and Christian Commiseration. You may expose unmerciful Men to Shame
by your readiness to do all Offices of Love to your Brethren: You will condemn
their cursed Baseness by your Swe^ness and Generosity.

. 26. You may more particularly be excited to the Love of your Neighbors, and
to works of Charity toward them, from the consideration of the Worth and
Excellency of this performance There is nothing so amiable and graceful in the
Life of Man, as the prudent exercise of this Virtue, nothing renders him so
useful and beneficial, especially if you take it in its full extent. This
conciliates him Respects, and causes him to be beloved; but without this a Man
is a mischievous Creature, a kind of noxious Vermin, and deserves to be
loathed and abhorred. Let then the Beauty and Excellency of this Grace prevail
with you, and move you to listen to those Exhortations, Above all things have
fervent Charity among your selves, 1 Pet. 4.8. Above all things put on Charity,
Col. 3.14. Which seems to be a manner of Expression taken from Clothes and
Apparel, no unusual Metaphor with the Sacred Writers. Charity is that excellent
rich Upper-Garment, which is to be worn over or above all the rest, that is,
all other Virtues and Graces. It is (as this sort of Garments is) the biggest
and widest, it is a Grace of a large extent, and encompasses all the others. My
Faith and Hope do my self good, but my Charity does good to others, Thus the
transcendent Worth of this Grace may commend it to us.

. 27. If you want any farther Incitement to this Duty, consider not only the
great Excellency but Necessity of it. It is no arbitrary Thing, and left to our
determination whether we will observe it or no, but it is absolutely requisite,
and is indeed one of the greatest Acts of Justice that we can perform. Toward
the proving of which it is remarkable that Mercy or Beneficence to the Poor is
usually called by the Hebrew Writers, Justice or Righteousness: and accordingly
in the Style of Scripture it is to be observed, that Righteousness and
Mercifulness are words sometimes of the same signification. Thus of the Godly
man, David says, He has dispersed, he has given to the poor, his
Righteousness endures for ever. Psalm. 112.9. The Connection of which Clauses
shows that Charity is meant by Righteousness. And so the word is taken in Prove.
11.18, To him that sows Righteousness (that is, to him that is Merciful, and
dispenses, is Alms to the needy) shall be a sure Reward. And the same Judgment
you may make of those words, Dan. 4.27. Break off thy sins by Righteousness,
and thine iniquities by showing Mercy to the Poor: Where the latter Clause
explains the meaning of the former. So Joseph, the Virgin Mary's supposed
Husband, is called a Just Man, Mat. 1.19. that is, a good, kind and charitable
Man, as appears from the subject Matter in that place. And in Mat. 6.1.
according to some Copies, Righteousness is put for Alms deeds, after the usual
manner and style of the Jews.

. 28. And this interchanging of the Words is founded on the thing it self, for
Justice or Righteousness is a part of Charity, as appears from this, that if we
act injuriously toward others, we are uncharitable to them: If we grind the
Faces of the Poor, and wrong the Fatherless and Widows, nay, if we deny them
convenient Relief, no Man will say we are Charitable, for Injustice is a
notorious Breach of Charity; and therefore it follows on the contrary, that we
show our selves Charitable in doing the Poor Right, and in being Just to them.

. 29. And further, it is manifest also, that Charity is built upon Justice,
because whilst we show our selves Charitable and Merciful to our Brethren, we
do but give them what is their due, and what is indeed their own. This Solomon
was fully persuaded of when he gave us that Lesson, Prove. 3 27. (with reference
to the Poor and Needy, as the next Verse makes it evident) Withhold not good
(that is, Relief or Charity) from them to whom it is due, The Poor are those to
whom our Alms are due: Charity to them is a Debt, and when we supply their
Necessities, we may truly be said to pay our Debts. But there is yet a higher
sense of this Passage of the Wise Man, as we render it strictly according to
the Original, which must be thus, Withhold not good from the Owners or Masters
thereof, as if he had said, Keep not back your Alms from those who have so just
a Right and Title to them, that they may be said to be Masters and Lords of
them, whereas you that are Rich are only Dispensers of them. Which is agreeable
to the Language of St. Peter, who lets us know that we are but Stewards of
those Gifts and good Things which we have received from God, 1 Pet. 4.10. and
consequently we are obliged to distribute them according to our Master's
direction. We are but Receivers and Trustees for the Poor, and therefore we
must dispose of those Portions of our Riches to them which were designed for
their use, and of which they may be said to be Owners and Proprietors. If we
fail here, we are unjust Stewards, and we detain that which is another due.

30. That is a remarkable Injunction of St. Paul, Rom 13.8. Owe no Man any
thing, says he, but to love one another: Intimating to us that Brotherly Love
and Charity is a just Debt which we must ever be paying, and yet always owing.
For we have every day fresh obligations on us to discharge this Duty. Our
Nature and our Religion, and our Brother's Wants have laid it upon us, and so
it becomes necessary and indispensable. Let this consideration then stir us up
to do good to our distressed Brethren: Let us remember that they ought to have
a share in our Goods; and that to deny them is defrauding them of their Right;
it is downright Theft and Robbery. For Justice and Charity are nearly allied,
and partake of one another: and both of them together express to us all our
Duty that is required of us toward others.

So much for the Second Grand Part of Practical Religion.
CHAP. XIV.
The Third Branch of Christian Religion, respecting our Duty toward God, which
is called Godliness. Acknowledgment of God and Providence. Right Apprehensions
of the Divine Nature and Government. Express Reverence to his Name, and
Ordinances. Of Profane Swearing, Cursing. Of Perjury. Remedies to prevent or
cure the Custom of Profane Swearing. Of Oaths and Vows. Of Faith, Hope,
Presumption, Despair, Humility, Patience, Helps to promote this last.

. 1. THE Third and Last Branch of the Christian Religion, as it respects our
Practice, is our more especial Duty toward God. For though all those Duties of
Christianity before-named have relation unto Him (it being impossible there
should be any acts of Religion without it) yet this which I am now to speak of
has a more immediate and direct regard to Him, and therefore from the
speciality of its Object it is called Godliness, to distinguish it from the
other two Branches of Practical Religion already treated of. And truly This is
the noblest and most exalted part of Religion, because thereby we so nearly and
intimately converse with God. Whereas, on the contrary, Ungodliness and
Profaneness are the most elevated Crimes, and the blackest Imputation that any
Man can be charged with, because hereby we wilfully alienate our selves from
God, and are Strangers to all Communion with him. What the nature of this part
of Religion is, and wherein it consists, I will distinctly show you in these
following Particulars.

. 2. I. It requires of us to acknowledge God and his Providence in the
Universe, Of Godliness, and wherein it consists.
and to live in a constant sense of them. If you be truly Godly, you will every
where observe the Footsteps of the Divine Being and his Conduct,
Acknowledgement of God and his Prodence.
the traces of which are all the World over. These you will plainly discern in
all the public Transactions of Kingdoms, and Nations, and Churches, in the
(...) and Occurrences that Families are subject to, and in all your personal
Concerns: Through the World has very great numbers of Men at this day who in
this respect may be said to (...) without God in the World, a cursed Race of
Man, whose converse you must abhor and detest. But it is not enough that you
entertain in your Minds the Doctrine of a Divine Being and (...), as it is
barely a Principle (under w^ N^ I spoke of it before) but your whole (...) be
spent in a deep and sensible Admiraties of this Sovereign and Divine
Administration which you are convinced of. You must own it to be a great ease
and satisfaction to your Minds, to consider that the All-wise Creator concerns
himself with the World, that it is filled with his Presence, and governed by
his Care, and that nothing comes to pass without his disposal. This is the
first part of our immediate Duty toward the most High, and it is the
Foundation of all the rest that I shall name.

. 3. II. Just thoughts concerning God.
It is contained in our immediate Duty toward God, that our Thoughts be
employed in the Contemplation of him. We must frequently represent his
Excellencies to our Minds, and possess our Hearts with such high and worthy
Conceptions of him as these, namely, that he is infinitely Powerful, Just, Wise
and Good, that all his ways are holy, and that he can do nothing amiss, and
that we ought to acquiesce in his Word and Works as most Reasonable and
Righteous. But because his ways are not like Man's ways, but are in many things
unsearchable and past finding out, therefore we must not too boldly pry into
them, and call them into question. When we think of God, we must lay aside all
audacious Curiosity, as becomes poor weak Creatures who are not able to
comprehend an Infinite Being. Such Thoughts and Resolves are necessary in order
to the right discharging of our Duty toward God. We must not only acquaint our
selves with his manifold Perfections, which was the Subject of the First Part
of this Treatise, but (which is the thing that I now urge) we ought to call
them to mind frequently, to revolve them in our Thoughts, constantly to
meditate upon them, and regulate our Lives by them. This is matter of Practice.

. 4. III. Godliness requires that we show a Reverence to the Supreme Being in
our Words and Speeches. Express Reverence to his Name and Being.
As the Mind and Thoughts, so the Tongue must be concerned in our Duty toward
God. There must be no irreverend and undecent mentioning of his Name, no
Presumptuous and rude Language concerning spiritual Mysteries; no vain, light
and foolish Words concerning Things that have relation to Religion; no treating
the Holy Scriptures with Disrespect and Irreverenec; no wresting and distorting
of them; no speaking Irreligiously concerning any of God's Works; no profane
and blasphemous Expressions; nor any Words that are derogatory to God's Honor:
for all this is taking the Name of the Lord God in vain, which is absolutely
forbidden.

. 5. Again, all unlawful and profane Swearing, and even the use of vain and
sight Oaths are to be detested and shunned as another Instance of Ungodliness in
Words. A Modern Author tells us, That this wicked Interjection of Speech is so
much practiced and approved of, that some Masters of Language in France make it
their Third Lesson to their Scholars, to get by heart so many Oaths, old and
new. One would think that England (as well as our Neighboring Country) had
some of these Tutours, were it not that we find many so ready to Swear, that
they need not be taught. The Streets and Markets, and public Houses, and
Places of Converse, Ungodliness of Profane Swearing.
and even private Dwellings, and Apartments testify the Truth of this, and
bear witness to the common Guilt which is now grown so crying, and, if not
speedily suppressed, will bring down Judgments on this Nation of a very high
quality. For certainly it is the most unreasonable thing imaginable that poor
dependent Creatures, who cannnot subsist one moment without the special support
and immediate influence of the Almighty, should dare to profane his Holy Name
by rash and impious Oaths: This is one of the most unaccountable and strange
Enormities that the Inhabitants of a Land can be guilty of, and therefore, if
it be persisted in, it will meet with some strange and unusual Punishment.

Perjury.
. 6. With this may be joined all False and Deceitful Swearing, which is
generally known by the Name of Perjury, and is too frequent a practice in these
days. But it is a direct Violation of that Divine Law, Thou shall not for swear
thy self, Mat. 5 33. and is the Root of infinite Mischief in the World. And
here I will also mention that Hellish Practice which so much prevails amonst
us, namely, the using of God's Name in Cursing and Execrations. Cursing.
We daily hear Men crying out to Heaven to inflict the greatest of Plagues and
Judgments not only on others, but upon themselves. Is it not most amazing and
prodigious that in a Civilized Nation, professing Religion, there should be
Persons who every Minute call on God to Damn them? All these Acts of
Ungodliness we are perfectly to abhor and avoid, and to do what we can to
prevent the spreading of them.

. 7. More especially as to the Sin of Common and Profane Swearing (which
prevails so much every where at this day) Remedies against profane Swearing.
be careful to secure your selves from the Commission of it by such helps and
means as these, First, Check your selves at the first Tendencies to this Sin.
The neglecting of this has proved very pernicious to many Persons: they
instead of stifling and suppressing their Inclinations to this vice, give way
to it, and so it grows up into a Habit and Custom, which they can never
afterward master. And they generally are so free as to own this, that by a
Continued Practice they have so fixed themselves in this way, that they cannot
rid themselves of it: though they are not so Ingenuous as to confess that this
Excuse adds to their fault. Wherefore be careful to use an early Discipline
upon your selves; resist this sin betimes, and you will get the conquest of it.

. 8. Secondly, Avoid all the Occasions of Swearing. Among which Anger and
Passion may be mentioned in the first place, for it is evident that those who
are of a Wrathful temper are most inclinable to Rash and Profane Swearing.
Their Choler supplies them with this Hellish Rhetoric, and they never more
abound with it than when they are Incensed and enraged. Therefore it is your
concern to nourish Meekness and Patience, and to promote in your selves a quiet
and placid temper, and to banish from your breasts all undue Anger, that it may
not become the fuel of this Vice.

. 9. Again, Drunkenness is another Occasion of this wicked Practice, as is too
frequently observed. The Clubs of the Debauched and Intemperate ring aloud with
this Cursed Noise. It is as 'twere natural to those who constantly inflame
themselves with Wine to be guilty of this disorder, because then they have no
guard upon their lips, and their Tongues usually are as distempered as their
Brains. So that it will be absolutely requisite, in order to your not being
liable to this fault, to abhor all Excess in Drinking, and to addict your
selves to Moderation and Temperance, and to keep your selves always Cool and
Sober. Gaming is another Incentive to this Sin, according to that old saying, a
Gamester is presumed to Curse and Blaspheme. It is an Essential part of the
Character of such a man, that he is given not only to Lying, but Swearing and
For-swearing. Wherefore let no Temptation prevail with you at any time to
comply with this Unlawful and Scandalous practice.

. 10. Moreover, that you may not be infected with this deadly Poison, carefully
avoid the Company of those that are. For the Society of Swearers is Contagious,
and will certainly have a Fatal influence upon you if you join your selves to
them. Therefore firmly resolve to keep always at a distance from them, and
never to have Communion with any that are addicted to this Profaneness. Lastly,
let me add this, be careful that you rehearse not other men's Oaths. This is a
fault in many, who though they will seldom or never swear themselves, yet they
will not refuse to repeat other men's Swearing. But this may in time prove an
Occasion of Greater Evil: by expressing the impious words of others, they may
come at last to imitate them. Be very cautious then in this particular: be not
easily induced to pronounce expressions that were evil in the first uttering;
especially if they be Oaths, take them not into your mouths: for whilst you
Repeat and Recite others unnecessary and profane Swearing, you make it your
own, and will in time learn to do the same.

. 11. Thus you see what Ungodliness is as it has reference to our words and
Speeches: and I need not add that it is our Indispensable Duty to Hate and Shun
every part of it. Nor is this enough, for we are to promote the opposite
practices both in our selves and others. We must not only never venture to be
so impious as to invoke the Sacred Name of the most High in profane Wishes and
Execrations, but we are to observe that injunction of the Apostle, Bless and
Curse not, Romans 12.14. We must not only hate all Rash and vain Swearing in
common discourse and ordinary Communication, which is the fashionable vice of
this profane Age; but whenever we have a lawful call to swear before a
Magistrate, we must be very careful to swear in Truth, in Judgment, and in
Righteousness, Jer. 4.2. Of taking a solemn Oath.
The taking of an Oath ought to be a matter of Conscience with us, and not to
be done out of Custom or ill Design.

. 12. Also, Keeping of Vows and Oaths.
we must be conscientious in keeping our Oaths which we Lawfully make with
Relation to others, and likewise those Solemn Vows which we at any time make to
God of a Religious and Holy Life, whereby we oblige our selves in a most Sacred
manner to adhere to God and our Duty, and especially to some particular part of
it. As the making of these Vows to God is a great help to Godliness, so it is a
part of it, and is due from us to God, when there is occasion for it. When we
find our selves very much inclined to shrink from our duty, we are to make use
of this as a Remedy against our Inconstancy; we are by this means to settle and
establish our selves in the practice of Holiness, for it will be of great
advantage to us to tie our selves by a Sacred promise in the presence of God to
undertake and perform this or that particular Duty, or to forsake this or that
vice. For this we have the Example of the holiest men: thus Job made a Covenant
with his Eyes, Job. 31.1. That is, he bound himself by a Solemn Engagement and
Vow before God not to offend with his Bodily sight. I have sworn, says the
pious Psalmist, that I will keep thy Righteous Judgments, Ps. 119.106. He calls
it Swearing because there is a Solemn calling of God to witness in this Act of
Religion, and therefore so far it is of the nature of an Oath. We must be
exceeding careful that we Live and Act according to the tenor of these Solemn
Protestations and Vows; or else we Increase our guilt by the breach of them
Wherefore let us take up that resolution in Psalm 66.14 I will pay thee my vows
which my lips have uttered. And so as to all other Sacred Engagements and Oaths
we must Remember to keep them as Religiously as we made them. Thou shall
perform unto the Lord thy Oaths, Mat. 5.33 And if we observe not this, we
Dishonor and Profane God's name and wound our Consciences by our Oaths and
Vows. The short is, we are bound to make use of God's Name, and to mention his
word and works, and all that belongs to him with Holy Fear and Reverence:
Religion must sanctify and govern our Tongues: and all our Words should savor
of Piety and Godliness. I proceed to other Acts of Godliness, and those that
are more Spiritual and sublime, as

. 13. IV. Faith, Of Faith its nature and Acts.
which is indeed the Root of all Godliness, and without which no man can please
God. By this we firmly assent to all the Truths that appertain to our Religion,
and especially all the Doctrines of the Gospel, be they never so difficult, and
to humane reason impossible. For Faith does not enquire whether they be hard to
be assented to, but whether they be Asserted and delivered by God himself; and
being persuaded of this, it readily believes them to be true; because the
Testimony of God is Infallible, and therefore commands our Assent. An other act
of Gospel Faith is an hearty Approving of the Truths of the Gospel, for it is
an Act of the Will, as well as of the Understanding. Faith is therefore a
sincere Accepting of Christ in that manner as he offered in the Gospel, and as
he has showed himself in his distinct Offices of King, Priest, and Prophet. In
true and saving Faith is included a voluntary submitting to all the Laws and
Precepts of Christianity, and showing our readiness to practice them. Thus
Evangelical Faith does not only denote our Assenting to the Doctrines of the
Gospel, but our hearty Allowing and Approving of them. We not only believe them
as True, but embrace them as Good, and worthy to be received by us.

. 14. Both these are comprehended in that excellent definition of Faith which
the Apostle gives us in Heb 11.1. Faith is the substance of things hoped for
the evidence of things not seen. Where by the things not seen are meant all
those Spiritual and Divine things which are Revealed and Discovered to us by
God, and which the Sacred Writings treat of. These are invisible, and fall not
under the Cognizance of Sense, but they are the greatest Realities that can be,
and it is by Faith that they are made so to us: for though these Heavenly
things are at a distance from us whilst we are here below, yet Faith brings
them near to us: and as ^or the more perfect fruition of them hereafter, this
makes us as sure of it as if we Actually enjoyed them. Thus it is the evidence
of things not seen. And by m^a^s of this Grace we have an inward Taste and
Conviction of the real worth, Goodness and Excellency that are in these things,
so that whilst to others they are but mere Notions and Words, and afford them
only matter o^ Speculation, or serve them to talk of, we have by Faith a sense
and seeing of these things, for which reason this Grace is called the substance
of them.

. 15 Another Act of saving Faith is Trusting in God, and (...) may relying on
him for the good things of his world, and of another. Trust in God at all times
Psalm. 62.8. Cast thy burden on the Lord, and he shall sustain thee, Psalm. 55.22
If thy burden be to be (...) can not bear it, thou art hid to throw it of
upon the Almighty, viz. by Faith and Trust in him. Cast all your care upon him,
for he cares for you, 1 Pet. 5.7. It is the proper Office of this Divine
Virtue to ease us of all our immoderate and unnecessary Care about the things
of this World, to cure us of all anxious and sollicitous Thoughts, which prove
so uneasy to the Mind. That advice of our Blessed Savior, Let not your hearts
be troubled: ye believe in God, believe also in me, John 14 1. shows plainly
that it is the work of Faith to remove the Troubles and Cares that lie heavy on
our Hearts: which it does by letting us see that these are unworthy of a
Christian, who lives every moment on the allowance of Heaven, and owes his
subsistence to him who has promised to withheld no good thing from those that
walk uprightly and w^o ^ath assured them that if they seek first the Kingdom of
God and his Righteousness, all N^cessaries and Conveniences shall be added
unto them. So that it must needs be very unreasonable, as well as unchristian,
to distrust God, and to disturb our selves about the Affairs of the World.

. 16. But the Faith of a Christian is most eminently discovered in his trusting
and relying on God for Salvation and Eternal Happiness. And because these are
wrought for us by the merciful Undertakings of Je^us Christ, the only begotten
Son of God, therefore He is the most proper and peculiar O^^ect of our Faith.
And that is the reason why it (...) Faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ (...)
namely, because a firm Trusting o^ (...) for Redemption and Salvation is
absolutely and (...) re^uired of all true B^liever (...), and con^ in this
(...) your, (...) a shameful and an accursed Death to save us from eternal
Death and Destruction. Though we were born Children of Wrath and Enemies of
God, yet by Him we are reconciled, and made the Sons of God, and Heirs of
everlasting Glory. Here, here is the stable Basis, and the immovable
Foundation of our Blessedness, and therefore on this we must rest and rely,
otherwise we cannot be reckoned in the number of the Faithful. Here we must fix
and place our Trust, viz. in Christ Jesus, the only Author of our Salvation and
Happiness. Seeing we can do nothing that will be acceptable without the Merits
of this our Blessed Surety and Undertaker, let us not rest on any of our most
religious Performances, but have recourse to his All-sufficient Righteousness,
and his meritorious Death and Sufferings. For the sake of these alone we can
find acceptance with the Father, and obtain the Pardon of our Sins: and it is
by Faith alone that the virtue of these is applied to us. Wherefore let us
exert this Grace with great Vigor, and lay hold with this Hand on our Blessed
Lord; that so (as the Apostle speaks) Christ may dwell in our Hearts (that is,
live and operate in us) by Faith. Ephesians. 3 17. by our continual exercising it
upon him, he being the most immediate and special Object of this Grace.

Hope.
. 17. V. Another immediate Duty owing unto God is Hope, which is therefore
styled hope toward God, Act. 24.15. By virtue of this Endowment a Godly Man is
filled with comfortable expectations of Good even in the midst of those Evils
which surround him: he desponds not of God's favor to him though he feels the
smart of his severest Rod. Yea, the more he find himself destitute of worldly
helps, with the stronger confidence does he wait upon the Great Jehovah. In his
most pressing Streights and Difficulties he can in the Holy Psalmists Language
expostulate thus with himself, Why art thou cast down, O my Soul, and why art
thou so disquieted within me? Hope thou in God, for I shall yet praise him, who
is the health of my Countenance and my God. But the more especial Object of our
Hope, as we are Christians, is the Lord Jesus, who for that reason is called
our Hope, 1 Timothy 1. for his Merits are the only ground we have to expect
Salvation. Because of the infinite value and worth of his Righteousness we may
entertain sure hopes of Mercy and Favor with God. And all the precious
Promises of the Gospel were made to this very end, namely, to get and
strengthen this comfortable Grace in us. These are that strong Consolation the
Apostle speaks of, which he calls the Hope set before us, Heb. 6.18. Which
Hope, he says, we have as an Anchor of the Soul both sure and steadfast, v.19.
This is that Anchor which will never fail us, but hold us steady, and keep us
safe, against all the Storms of Temptations. Wherefore having such a strong
support for our Hope, let us rely upon the Mercy of God through Jesus Christ,
and let us look and wait for the Eternal Recompenses and Rewards of another
World; for if we be genuine Christians, we are begotten again unto a lively
Hope, 1 Pet 1 3. that is (as the Apostle explains it in the next Verse) to the
hope of an Inheritance incorruptible and undefiled, and that fades not away,
reserved in Heaven for us.

. 18. The two Oposites or Extremes of Hope are Presumption on the one Hand, and
Despair on the other: Presumption.
and we must carefully aaoid them both. The former of these is exercising of
Hope where there is no ground for it: As when Men hope for God's Blessing in
this World, and Life and Salvation in the other, and yet continue in their Sins
and never think of obeying the Laws and Precepts which Christ has enjoined.
They sooth and flatter themselves with the Thoughts of God's Mercy; but never
consider that he is Just as well as Merciful. This is no other than an abusing
of the Divine Goodness and Mercy, and making it administer to Security and
Licentiousness. But we must not forget this, That the Hope I Am speaking of is a
purifying Hope, 1 John 3.3. The Apostle tells the Hebrews that they must show
diligence to the full assurance of Hope unto the end, Heb. 6.11. That is, they
must persevere in a diligent discharge of their Duty, if they desire to be
fully. confirmed in their Hope of future Blessedness. If we cleave with full
purpose of Heart unto God, and dedicate our Souls and Bodies, and all the
Faculties and Powers of them, to his Glory, and if in the whole course of our
Lives we conform our selves to the Life of our Blessed Master, then, and not
otherwise, we have comfortable ground for our Hope, and we may exert this Grace
with great cheerfulness and boldness.

Despair.
. 19. Another Extreme is Despair, which is a refusing to lay hold on the Mercy
of God, and a neglecting of those Things that may make us capable, on our part,
of the Favor of God. So that it appears to be a very great Sin, in as much as
it is a wronging of God's Mercy, and a w^ neglect of our Duty. Wherefore, to
prevent or cure this black and horrid Sin, we must faithfully and impartially
represent to our selves the merciful and loving Nature of God, and the
matchless Love and Compassion of Christ Jesus who came down from Heaven on
purpose to save and redeem Mankind. And hence we must ascertain our selves,
That Mercy is intended for us, and that we shall be partakers of it, if it be
not our own Fault. There is help laid upon one that is Mighty, one that is able
to save to the uttermost all that come unto God by him. And this compassionate
Savior invites all to come unto him that labor and are heavy laden: and he
further assures us, That those that come unto him, he will in no wise cast out.
Wherefore we have all the Reason and Ground imaginable to lay hold on this
Merciful Jesus, and to hope in his free and infinite Goodness to lost Sinners.
We must not be too severe to our selves, when we have so Kind and Indulgent a
Savior: but we are to support our desponding Minds with this, that though we
have a long time been in Rebellion against Heaven, yet, if we return by sincere
Repentance, we shall be pardoned and accepted. And that we may not in the least
doubt of this, it is confirmed to us by an Oath, As I live, says the Lord, I
have no pleasure in the Death of the Wicked, but that the wicked turn from his
way, and live, Ezekiel. 33.11. Wherefore let us comfort our selves with these
words, which are the Foundation of a strong and lively Hope.

. 20. VI. Humility.
Another Duty toward God is Humility. For (as I suggested before) there are
some Graces and Duties that have different Aspects and Relations; they refer
not only to our selves, or our Neighbors, but to God. The Grace I am now to
speak of is of that sort, it is not only a part of our Duty to our selves and
our Brethren (as I have showed already) but it is that disposition of Soul, and
that composure of Manners which we owe to the Divine Being. Thus to be Humble
is to act according to the true nature of the State and Condition He has
placed us in, it is to live according to that dependence which we have upon
him, and that absolute Authority and Dominion which he has over us. Humility
teaches us to assent most readily to all that God says, to acquiesce in all
that he does, and to behave our selves submissively under the Afflictions and
Calamities which he thinks fit to exercise us with. All this is couched in
those short Admonitions of St. James, Submit your selves to God, James 4.7.
Humble your selves in the sight of the Lord, ver. 10. and of St. Peter, Humble
your selves under the mighty hand of God, 1 Pet. 5.6. By Humility we are taught
how great, how powerful, how dreadful the Divine Majesty is. All nations before
him are as nothing: and they are counted to him less than nothing, and vanity,
Isai. 40.17. And we are taught how vile, how poor, how inconsiderable we are,
He has made our Days as an hand breadth, and our Age is nothing before him:
verily every Man at his best state is altogether vanity, Psalm. 39.5. Nay,
Humility gives us a sense of our Vileness, not only as we are Creatures, but as
we are Sinners and Transgressors: It puts us upon a constant reflecting on our
past Miscarriages in the several Stages of our Lives, and by such a sad Review
of our selves we are humbled in the Dust.

. 21. There is Humility likewise in respect of the Mercies and Blessings, the
Gifts and Graces bestowed upon us by God: we are to acknowledge that we are
beholding to Heaven for whatever good thing we have, that we owe all to the
Divine Riches and Bounty; and therefore we are to cast away all fond conceits
of deserving any thing at God's hands. It becomes us humbly to confess our
utter inability to merit in the least of the Almighty. Such language as that of
the Psalmist will fit our mouths, Not unto us, O Lord, not unto us, but unto
thy name be the praise. Whatever we have or hope for is not the Fruit of our
deservings, but of God's free Bounty. Our present measures of Grace and our
expectation of a future felicity must be reckoned as the product of the
unmerited favor of our Merciful God, who out of mere compassion to mankind
gave his Son to redeem them and make them happy. Hence it follows that we ought
to bear down all Pride and Arrogance, and to be thoroughly sensible of our
weakness and it sufficiency, and always to distrust our selves. This is to walk
humbly with God.

. 22. VII. Patience.
Patience has Respect to God (as well as to men and to our selves) and
consequently is a part of Godliness. It is the peculiar Office of this
Christian virtue to show it self under Afflictions and Sufferings, which it
looks upon as the hand of God, and the dispensation of Heaven and therefor
bears them with a contented and quiet mind. On this Consideration, Aaron held
his peace, when the Fiery Judgment befell his Sons; Lev. 10.3. Eli could suffer
a Child to tell him his doom, and he patiently underwent it, because it was a
message from Above. It is the Lord says he, therefore let him do what seems
him good. 1 Samuel 3.18. This made David moderate and quiet when Shimei raved at
him, the Lord has said unto him, Curse David, 2 Samuel 16.10. And at other times
he made use of this Argument under his pressing troubles and grievances. I was
dumb, says he, I opened not my mouth, because thou did it. Psalm 39.9. And
even this comforted our Dear Master when he was a sufferer under Pilate, thou
could have no power at all against me, except it were given thee from above.
John 19.11. Learn hence how to deport your selves when the Afflicting hand of
the Almighty is upon you: be not mutinous and clamorous, be not disturbed with
angry or distrustful apprehensions of Providence, but be willing to submit your
selves and all your concerns to the will and disposal of that Omnipotent and
Wise Being that governs the World. Learn that excellent Lesson of turning unto
him that smites you, Isa. 9.13. address your selves unto him with free
acknowledgments of your own Guilt; and of his Justice in your Punishment.

. 23. To further and promote your Patience under the Crosses and Troubles that
befall you, it is necessary that you reflect seriously on the End and Design of
God's chastising you, which is no other than to do you good, upon your
improving of it. It is no small kindness that God is thus mindful of you, and
vouchsafes to visit and try you, Job 7.18. Psalm 8.4. that he suffers you not
to go on in the full career of your Sins without check and control, that he is
pleased to curb you for your licentious Actions. This is a signal Token of
God's Goodness, and you ought to entertain it with a becoming Gratitude. You
let the Physician and Surgeon, when there is occasion, deal roughly and
severely with you, and you think you have no reason to complain of them,
because they intend your Health and Recovery. And is it not as reasonable to
undergo with Patience what the Divine Hand lays upon you when you consider that
it is for the good and welfare of your Souls? You are sick, you ^re out of
order, you are distempered and maimed by your Vices: and therefore that you may
be healed and restored, that you may be set right, and be made sound again, it
is requisite that you undergo some Pain and Torment, for these are to make way
for the other. Be persuaded therefore quietly to submit to the harsher
Providence of God, as knowing that he would not deal thus with you, unless it
were conducing to your Souls Health. He designs to amend and reform you, that
you may be partakers of his Holiness, that your Afflictions may yield the
peaceable fruit of Righteousness, Heb. 12.10, 11. Despise not then the
chastning of the Lord, nor faint when you are rebuked of him, Prove. 3.1^. Heb.
12.5. Cheer your selves on this account, that these Chastnings and Rebukes are
for your real Advantage and Benefit. On this Consideration be prevailed with
not to Murmur and Repine at Providence, but to sit down with a patient and
contented Spirit, and willingly submit to the pleasure of the Almighty
Governor of the World.

. 24. Again, remember this, to support and fortify your Patience, that these
Corrections are the lot of the most Holy persons, the very Favorites of God.
The Sacred Records acquaint us that the most Religious Men have been the
greatest Sufferers, and the History of all Ages bears testimony to this. Yea,
Christ Jesus himself, the unspotted Lamb of God, was a Man of Sorrows, and
acquainted with Grief, he underwent all the Miseries of a poor and persecuted
State, and even a violent and painful Death it self, and that with a Submission
which was as great as his Sufferings. He was oppressed, and he was afflicted,
yet he opened not his mouth: he was brought as a Lamb to the Slaughter, and as
a Sheep before her Shearers is dumb, so he opened not his mouth, Isai. 53.7.
And shall not we then be silent and subm^ssive, we for whom Christ suffered all
those things? Shall we not, like good Soldiers of Jesus Christ, follow our
Captain and Commander? Yea, shall we not count it our Honor to be made
comfortable to him in his Sufferings? Let us then be ambitious to be like our
Head, our Master and Savior, and cheerfully endure that which he has
sanctified by undergoing it. Moreover, to strengthen our Patience, we ought to
bear this in our Minds, that fretting and impatience render our Burden the more
intolerable: But on the contrary, by Submission and Patience we make our Burden
light. Further, that Patience may have its perfect work, let us remember that
we deserve what we suffer, because by our manifold Sins we have provoked God to
afflict us. Nay, let us consider that our Crosses and Punishments are less than
our Iniquities deserve. On these several Considerations let us be well pleased
with Providence under all the cross Circumstances of our Lives, and be
satisfied with the good Will and Pleasure of the Supreme Lord and Disposer of
all Things. Let us with meek and submissive Minds entertain the sorrowful
Accidents which we are liable to in this World; let us with a quiet and sedate
Spirit conform our Wills to the Will of Heaven, and wait with Christian
Patience for a redress of our Evils.

CHAP. XV.
The Fear of God; Love; Joy; Repentance, the Nature and Means of obtaining it.
Of Piety as to outward Worship, Prayer, Confession, Petition, Intercession,
Thanksgiving, Reading, Catechizing, Hearing.

. 1. VIII. Fear of God.
FEAR is also due to God. Which we learn both from the Old Testament, Deuteronomy.
6.13. Thou shall fear the Lord thy God? and from the New, where we are exhorted
to serve God with Reverence and Godly fear, Heb. 12. last ver. And this we must
do as he is our Lord and Sovereign, and has an absolute command over us, There
is none lik^ unto Th^e, O Lord: Thou are great, and thy Name is great in might.
Who would not fear thee, O King of Nations? Jer. 10.6, 7. His Glorious and
Divine Majesty should create in us an unspeakable awe and Reverence. Again, God
is to be feared as he is Just, as he is inclined by his holy and pure Nature to
punish evil Doers. Thence we hear such Language as that of the Psalmist, My
flesh trembles for fear of thee, and I am afraid of thy Judgmenns Psalm.
119.120. And even now under the Gospel, since there have been made by it
plainer Discoveries of God's everlasting Vengeance which he will show toward
the Damned in Hell, we are to fear God as a Judge, and (as he is called by the
Apostle) A consuming Fire. Our Savior himself commands us to fear him who is
able to destroy both Soul and Body in Hell, Mat. 10 28. And it is certain, that
this dread and awe of the Almighty is an excellent Preservative against all Sin.

Further, his Omniscience may justly create in us a holy Fear of him: He is of
infinite Knowledge, and all Things are naked and open to him, and therefore
when we consider this, we cannot but live under an awe of his All searching Eye,
we are obliged to the practice of Holiness even in secret, and we are concerned
to take care of our Thoughts and inward inclinations; for God, who sees all
Things, se^s and knows these, as well as what is done publicly, and acted in
the Face of the World. So that this holy Fear being founded on God's Univers^l
Knowledge, cannot but administer to Religion, and be subservient to Piety and
Holiness: It cannot but be a great excitement to an entire and sincere
Obedience, and it will never suffer us to do any thing unseemly and unworthy
before him who is no Stranger to the most retired Thoughts of Men's Hearts.

Furthermore, God is to be feared as he is Good and Merciful. Which may partly
be the meaning of the Psalmist's words, There is forgiveness with thee, that
thou may be feared, Psalm. 130.4 God's Goodness and Clemency toward Sinners
call for Reverence. Seeing he is so kind and indulgent as to pardon Men's Sins,
they should be under a great dread of committing them; they should be afraid of
provoking their gracious Benefactor, and losing thereby the Benefits that
accrue to them by his Favor. We are obliged to fear God as he is our Father,
as well as our Judge. This Passion in us is to spring from Love; that is, we
are to make it appear in the whole course of our Lives, that we are afraid of
displeasing and offending him who has been and continues to be so loving and
gracious to us. This is walking in the fear of the Lord, Acts 9 31.

. 2 IX. Our Love of God is next to be discoursed of, Love of God.
for that is one of the most eminent Parts of Godliness. It is that ravishing
Complacency and Satisfaction which we take in the Divine Being, whether we
contemplate his Nature or his Works. The excellency of his Nature, which is
displayed in his Attributes and all the Perfections which belong to him, is
sufficient to raise our Affections, and engage our Hearts, and k^ndle them into
a flame of Love: For every thing in God is beautiful and Lovely, and cannot be
satisfy and delight us. And he is not only Lov^ly in himself, but he has
given all possible demonstrations of his Love to us, which makes him yet more
amini^^e. It was the over flowing redundancy of his Love which brought us into
being: Our first rise and existence were from the mere Goodness of God. This
World was made, this mighty Fabric was erected, and Angels and Men created,
that thereby the infinite Love of the Deity might be discovered to his
Creatures, and that the free and unforced streams of his eternal good Will
might be derived to them. And we daily and hourly find that they are really
derived and conveyed to us, we have constant experience of the Divine Favor
toward us. Every where there are Marks and Testimonies of God's Kindness to
us. He has done abundantly more for us than all our Friends and Benefactors;
nay, what they have done is from Him; and by all the Indearments imaginable he
has invited us to love him. And shall we not love him who is the Author of our
Beings, the Father of our Mercies, and the God of all our Blessings?

. 3. But more especially he has showed his superlative Love and Goodness to us
in the Restoration of Mankind, when they had plunged themselves into Ruin by
their Disobedience. That the incensed Majesty of H^aven should vouchsafe to
cast a gracious Eye upon Apostates and Rebels, Redemption by Christ the
greatest instance of God's Love.
this infinitely transcends all the other Acts of Goodness and must needs
inflame our hearts with Love, and call forth our warmest P^ssions, God so loved
(so vehemently, so immensely loved) the World, that he gave his only begotten
S^n, that whosoever believes in him should not perish, but have everlasting
Life, Jo^ 3 16. Lo! the mysterious Riches of Grace, and the unmeasurable depth
of Mercy in the Redemption purchased by the Son of God! He that is the Mighty
God takes our Weaknesses and Infirmities upon him: He that is the Brightness of
his Father's Glory, and the express image of his Person darkens and obscures
himself, and becomes of no Reputation; he that is Rich, for our sake^ becomes
Poor, he that is Lord of all, takes upon him the form of a Servant, and is
content to be Persecuted, Reviled, Buffered, Spit upon, Scourged, Crucified.
Verily, there is no Love like unto this, and therefore let us return a Love
that is according to our measure as matchless: Let us never think that we can
show too great and ardent an Affection to God the Father and his Eternal Son,
for the Tokens of their infinite Goodness to us. Let this win our hearts, that
we have been so unspeakably beloved by them; for certainly the most powerful
Motive of Love is Love.

And that we may give an evidence to our selves, and others of Truth and
Reality of our Love to God, let us show it by such undoubted Marks as these,
namely, by our hearty desiring and endeavoring to please God in all things, by
our earnest striving to be like him, by our longing for the full Enjoyment of
him, by our delight in Converse and Communion with him, by our constant
thinking and speaking of him, and lastly by our obeying of his holy Laws, for
this is our Savior's Rule, If ye love me keep my Commandments, John 14.15.

. 4. I might add under this Head, Rejoicing in God.
that Love is always attended with Joy: Wherefore if you love God, let not
Sorrow and Pensiveness sit on your Brows; put on a joyful Look; Let the Light
of God's Countenance add a brightness and Luster to yours. If you are blessed
with God's Favor, you have no reason to Repine and live Discontentedly. If the
Lord be your Shepherd, you cannot want. Though your measure of worldly
Enjoyments be but small, yet there may be a compensation for that by larger
communications of inward comfort. A little of the World will content him, who
has God for his Portion. Satisfy your selves then in the Enjoyment of the
Chief Good, rejoice in the Lord, and Joy in the God of your Salvation. Hab.
3.18. This is no mean part of that Godly Disposition and Affection which are
required of us.

. 5. X. Repentance is the next Duty, Repentance.
for it is called Repentance toward God, Acts 20.21. And therefore it is
necessary that we exercise it toward him, by an unfeigned Grief and Remorse for
the manifold Sins committed against him, by a reflecting on our past and
present Actions with Shame and Blushes, by a serious lamenting of our former
Follies, by a deep mourning for that Dishonor which is done to God by them.
For this is necessary unto Godly Sorrow that we grieve for Sin as it is a
Dishonouring of the most High, as it is an opposing of Divine Sovereignty,
Wisdom, and Holiness. Yea, we must weep bitterly that we have more particularly
dishonored, abused and injured our Lord Jesus Christ, that we have by our
persisting in our Sins crucified the Son of God afresh, and trampled his Blood
under our Feet. Nor is this enough, all our Sorrow and Compunction, all our
Grief and Anguish of Spirit must spring from a hatred of Sin, and a love of
Goodness; else it is not Evangelical Repentance. Nor do I mean here by
Repentance only a true Mourning for our former evil Ways and our present
Miscarriages, but a betaking our selves to the Practice of the contrary Duties:
For complete Repentance is a turning from Sin and Vice to all that is holy and
good, Its Nature.
or, as the Apostle expresses it, a turning from the power of Satan unto God,
Mat. 26.18. It is a change of the Heart and of the whole Life, it is an
universal Renovation of the inward and outward Man.

. 6, Means of obtaining true Repentance.
In order to the begetting of this Repentance (both as it denotes a Sorrow for
Sin, and a Forsaking of it) you must in the first place call your selves to an
account, and take an impartial view of your Lives and Actions: and to that
purpose draw up in Writing a Catalogue of all our particular Sins and Offenses,
and set it before you, and ponder it with great seriousness. And that you may
be thoroughly sensible of the Evil and Misery which are the Fruit of your
Miscarriages, and that you may abhor your selves for them, meditate on the
Sufferings of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, for in them you may see the
horrid Nature of all Sin, which cost him so dear to atone and expiate. If the
Blood of Jesus will not fetch Tears from thine Eyes, nothing will. Here then
let us fix our Thoughts, and look upon our Savior on the Cross, and thence
learn to crucify our Sins. Let his Passion invite us to deal severely with
them, let his Death prevail with us to mortify our Lusts effectually, and to
serve and obey him who has bought us with his own Blood. What can be more
prevalent with us than the Agonies and Suffering of our Lord? Of all the
Motives and Arguments to induce us to Obedience, this is the most powerful,
namely that the Son of God shed his blood for us: for now, as the Apostle
argues, we are not our own, because we are bought with a price. 1 Cor. 6.19,
20. Therefore, as he adds, we must glorify God in our Bodies and in our
Spirits, which are Gods. They being his, and Dedicated to his Use and Service,
we must not presume to alienate them, for that is no less than Sacrilege, and
a bold Robbing of God, who is their right Owner.

. 7. And let us be further encouraged to repent of our sins from the
consideration of the greatness of this Mercy vouchsafed to us: for under the
First Covenant which was made with mankind there was no such thing as
Repentance allowed. If Man fell, he was to perish and there was no provision
for after-thoughts. But now under the Second Covenant, God has declared his
willingness to receive to mercy all penitent returning Sinners, through the
Lord Jesus our Mediator, in whom he is R^conciling the World unto himself. Now
he commands all men every where to repent, Acts 17 30. He is not willing that
any should perish, but that all should come to repentance, 2 Pet. 3.9 And to
this end the Gospel is full of comfortable and gracious promises of Pardon and
Forgiveness of sins through the Blood of Jesus Let it be our great care to
embrace these offers of Mercy, these tenders of Life and Salvation, for this is
the true Foundation of Gospel-Repentance.

Moreover, to advance and set forward our Repentance, let us sincerely attend
to and improve the several Invitations and calls to it. God calls us by his
Judgments, by every sad and afflictive circumstance of our Lives. The Rod has
a voice, every punishment cries aloud to repent: wherefore let us hear the Rod,
and who has appointed it. God calls likewise by his Mercies: those are a
softer and gentler voice: let us attentively listen to it, and be reformed by
it. He calls to us by the Ministers of the Gospel, whom he has sent to Preach
Repentance in Christ's name Luke 24 47. And therefore we are diligently to
hearken to their earnest Admonitions and Exhortations. He calls by the various
dispensations of his Providence in the world, and by all occurrences wh^^oever,
by every bill of Mortality, by every clap of Thunder, by every Tole of a
Funeral Bell, by every Sad story that we hear related, by every thing that
befalls us in our Lives, by every thing that happens to our selves or others.
Let it be our care to make all these serviceable to our Conversion and
Repentance. God calls upon us by those natural faculties which he has endued
our Souls with, Various calls to Repentance.
and by that dominion which he has given us over our outward man: both which
kinds of powers are implanted in us on purpose that they may be made use of to
the curbing of our Lusts and reforming of our Lives. For though we cannot
infuse virtue into our Souls, yet we can restrain them in some degree from
vice: though we cannot change our hearts, yet we have power to regulate our
Bodies, and to order our outward Conversation and manners. Though we cannot
render our selves inwardly holy, yet we can in some measure do the outward Acts
of Religion, and shun the Occasions of Sin. We cannot make out selves good, but
we can hinder our being extremely bad, if we employ and improve the powers that
God has given us: which is therefore our indispensable Duty and highest
Interest.

But chiefly God calls us to Repentance by his Spirit, by the seasonable
Admonitions and checks of that Holy Instructor and Monitor: wherefore let us be
careful not to withstand his motions and suggestions, but most willingly to
comply with them, and to embrace all his tenders of grace. If we wilfully give
a repulse to him, he may justly refuse to visit us again, and then our case is
unspeakably miserable. Let us then kindly entertain and make much of this Holy
Spirit: when he stirs us up to Prayer, let us cherish that good motion; when he
invites us to read the word of God, let us comply with that seasonable
invitation; when he calls upon us to Meditate, let us betake our selves to that
employment; when he solicits us to do any other Religious action, let us be
glad that we are thus moved by the Spirit of grace, who is so desirous of our
Repentance and Sanctification, and conformity to the Divine will, for these are
the designs of his visiting us, if we belong to the Election of Grace. And
truly there cannot be a nobler one, nor can we desire any thing greater, for
Holiness is the highest Exaltation of man's nature, this is the choicest
Accomplishment we are capable of, because this renders us like unto God, and
makes us partakers of the Divine nature.

. 8. XI thly, and lastly, Of outward honor and worship.
Piety toward God consists in paying him that Outward Honor and Worship which
are due to him, and in a conscientious use of all the Sacred Ordinances
prescribed by him. As first, Devout Prayer, wherein we have the happy freedom
of laying open our Sins by humble Confession. Of Prayer.
We must acknowledge all our offenses without the least Extenuating and
Excusing of them, if we hope for Pardon and Forgiveness. Confession.
We must own our Debts, if we will have them Cancelled: we must discover our
Diseases and maladies if we expect to have them cured. This is the Law of the
Old and New Testament: he that covers his sins shall not prosper, but whosoever
confesses and forsakes them shall have mercy. Prove. 28 13. If we confess our
sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from
all unrighteousness. 1 John 1.9. And besides that this is a condition of
Pardon, it is also a great Preservative against sin for the future, for by
Confessing our Transgressions and Lamenting them before God, we possess our
minds with an aversion to them, and declare our resolves and purposes never to
commit the like again. On which account this part of Prayer cannot but be very
useful and advantageous to us.

. 9. Petition and Intercession.
Next follows Petition or Supplication, which is a begging of God those Mercies
and Blessings which we stand in need of. With which may be joined Intercession,
which is requesting the like favors for others, according as their wants and
occasions are. The greatest and choicest of all Blessings are those that relate
to our souls, and therefore we are to beseech the Divine goodness to bestow
these upon us in the first place. If any of us lack wisdom, or any other
Spiritual good thing, let us ask it of God, James 1.5. for that is the only way
to obtain it. Since the universal corruption of mankind, whereby we are all by
nature in a state of sin, we cannot get out of this misery of our selves: there
is an utter inability to be freed from it without Divine help. Regeneration and
the Divine Life are the immediate work of a Supernatural power. No man was ever
called off from his depraved and corrupt temper, and from his former wicked
life but by (...) Heavenly voice. No man was ever converted by his own
strength, no man can walk acceptably before God, and discharge the Duties (...)
Religion in a right manner by his natural power. This must be effected entirely
by the operation of the Holy Ghost. We must be strong in the Lord, and in the
power of his might, Deuteronomy. 33.27. Which shows how necessary a duty it is to pray
and beg with all earnestness for the divine strength and assistance. We must
implore the Holy Spirit, the Author of all grace, to enlighten our dark minds,
to rectify our stubborn wills, and to order our Affections and actions aright
toward God. We must be continually supplicating the Almighty to prevent and
follow us with his omnipotent grace, and to enable us to yield entire obedience
to him, and to persevere in holiness to the end of our lives.

And as we must thus petition for Spiritual mercies, it is sitting we should not
forget to ask bodily and outward ones of the same bountiful Father. From him
are Life and Health, from him is peace, from him is plenty, and from him all
other necessaries and conveniences of this life, which are summed up in the
Fourth Petition of that Prayer which our Lord has taught us, Give us this day
our daily Bread. Whence we learn that all Temporal and Bodily blessings are to
be sought for by devout and earnest prayer.

. 10. Thanksgiving.
And when we have obtained them, we are to return Thanks for them, for we find
that is to be added to Supplication, Phil. 4.6. As we are daily receiving
outward and Temporal good things from our gracious Benefactor so we must extol
his bounty and munificence toward us, we must Thankfully acknowledge with the
Psalmist that he has prepared a Table before us, that he has anointed our
heads with oil, and that our cup runs over, Psalm 23.5. Yea, if we have but
a competent and moderate allowance of Earthly conveniences, we are to praise
God for them, for it is the result of his Infinite Goodness that we have any of
the least portions of these Accommodations, seeing we have so often forfeited
them by our unworthy behavior: and if he shall be pleased to deprive us of
these, and to exercise us with his severest Corrections and Chastisements, we
are then to Praise and Bless his holy name, for (as I have showed before) there
is a design of Mercy even in these.

But our greatest Thanks and Praises are due for the Spiritual Favors and
Blessings we are sharers in; we are to Laud and Magnify the Eternal Father that
he was pleased to send his Son for the Redemption and Salvation of lost
Sinners, that he so graciously showed kindness unto fallen Man, whereas the
Apostate Angels (whose number perhaps is not fewer than that of Men) were
irrecoverably lost. Christ Jesus took not on him the nature of Angels, Heb.
2.16. He came not to save them, but he let them sink into Eternal ruin and
perdition. He dealt not so with lost Men, but condescended to take on him the
seed of Abraham, as the same Inspired Author speaks, he mercifully restored his
Chosen to their former happiness, yea to a much greater then they had before.
Our Merciful God has not only forgiven us our old debts which we contracted
when we were all bankrupts in Adam, but he has set us up again with a better
stock, and bestowed new favors upon us. Wherefore in our daily addresses to
him let us let forth his praises, and Commemorate the Blessings which his Son
has purchased for us, and let us heartily Extol and Magnify the whole Glorious
Trinity, Father, Son and Holy Ghost, Three distinct Persons, but one ever
glorious Lord God, for the gracious discoveries of their good will to mankind,
for all the several ways and methods of procuring our happiness, and of
assuring a lasting kindness to us. Thus we are to be concerned in the different
parts and branches of Prayer, viz. Confession, Petition, and Thanksgiving.

11. And further we must be reminded of this, that the Duty of Prayer ought not
only to be performed in secret, when according to our Saviors command we enter
into our Closets and Retirements, Mat.6 6. But we are to pray in our Families,
for which there is a particular direction given to Masters of Families* Col. 4
^ Continue in Prayer. And we are likewise obliged to join with the Public
Devotions of the Church, to pray together in the Solemn Assemblies, of which
there are several instances and patterns in the Acts of the Apostles. And it is
observable that our Savior himself is a Pattern of all those kinds of Prayers:
he prayed alone by himself, he prayed with his Apostles and Disciples, who were
as it were his Family; and he prayed on more public Occasions. Wherefore let
us be encouraged from so perfect an Example to perform this great and necessary
Office of our Religion, which is so considerable a part of Christian Godliness.
But especially let us labor for the true Spirit of Prayer, that is, to put up
our addresses with an inward and deep sense of our wants, with the utmost
Humility and Reverence, with all earnestness of mind, with Faith and Trust in
God, and with a Resignation of our selves to God's will, and renouncing our
own. And lastly our prayers must be all offered up in Christ's name, for we
cannot have access unto the Father but by his Son Jesus Christ, Ephesians. 2.18. And
our prayers will not be heard but through his prevailing Mediatio^ and
Intercession.

12. Reading the Word.
The next Duty to God is a frequent Reading of his Word. Seeing it was his
pleasure that the True Religion and the right way of Worship should be
delivered and preserved in the Holy Scriptures, and so transmitted in this sure
manner from one generation to another, seeing I say) he has been pleased thus
to provide for his Church, it is no less than a blaspheming of God's Goodness
and Wisdom to speak against the use of this Means of his own providing, and it
is a great Act of Ungodliness to neglect and disregard this way of God's own
appointment. But besides this, those who act thus, show themselves very sottish
and stupid in vilifying of that which would be of the greatest advantage to
them, and without which they cannot be happy. For even of the Scriptures of the
Old Testament it is said that they were able to make men wise unto Salvation, 2 Timothy 3.15. And therefore much more are the Writings of the New Testament able
to effect this, for these are a more perfect Transcript of the Divine Will, and
more fully acquaint us with the Nature of God and his Attributes, and his
gracious dealings with the Sons of men: these furnish us with the particular
manifestations of his Compassion and good will through Christ Jesus the Son of
his Love. Here we learn how to discover our sins, and to avoid them, how to
know our Duty and to practice it. Here we are thoroughly taught how to Serve and
Obey our Maker and Savior, and here we have a full insight into all those
things which belong to this particular part of Religion which I am now treating
of, and which is styled Godliness. This may excite us all to read the Sacred
Scriptures, to consult them often, to study them diligently, and to prize them
above all Books whatsoever. For these are the Infallible Guide and Conduct of
our Principles and Lives, these are the standing rules of our Belief and
Practice; and we are not to doubt but that he who reads and loves these Holy
Writings, will love Goodness and Holiness themselves, and do what this Inspired
Volume dictates to him.

. 13. And with Reading of God's Word I will join the use of Catechizing, and
the Hearing of the Word Preached. Catechizing, and Hearing the Word Preached.
The former of these is for the benefit of the younger sort, and is a plain and
brief instructing of them in the chief Heads of Religion. This was practiced in
the Apostles Times, as appears from Heb. 5.12.6.1, 2. Gal. 6.6. where we find
that young Beginners were taught the first Principles of the Oracles of God,
they were fed with Milk, they were instructed in the word of the beginni^^ of
Christ they had the Foundation laid them. Wherefore this being an Apostolical
Ordinance, we must by no means neglect it. The latter, namely Preaching, is a
more large and copious way of handling the Principles and Doctrines of
Christianity* and is chiefly, though not wholly, designed for those that are of
riper Years: And this is appointed as the ordinary means of Grace and
Salvation. The Apostle lets us know that it has pleased God by this way of
Teaching, to save them that believe, 1 Cor. 1.21. And thence we may gather that
those who neglect and despise this Ordinance can neither believe not be saved.
Wherefore it nearly concerns us to have a high esteem of the Word preached and
applied by the Ministers of the Gospel. Though our own Consciences direct and
inform us, yea though the Holy Spirit be our Instructor, yet we must make use
of this. This is not a matter of an indifferent Nature, and such as we may
choose whether we will observe or no, but it is of absolute necessity, because
Faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the Word of God, Romans 10.17. Yea not
only Faith, but all Grace is conveyed unto us in the Ministry of the Word.
Wherefore prize the public Instructers and Guides of Souls, and look upon them
as the Messengers and Ambassadors of Christ: Hear them with Attention and
Reverence as the Helpers of your Faith, as the Instruments of your Salvation,
as the Friends of your Souls, as the furtherers of your eternal Happiness. But
much more let us Reverence the Word itself, which is delivered by them; having
prepared ourselves for it by laying aside all Prejudice, let us receive it with
Understanding and Judgment, and a firm assent to it, with Humility and Godly
Fear, with Affection and Delight, with a good and (...). Heart, sincerely
disposed to retain the Truth, and to make use of it in our Lives and
Conversations. And let us not look upon it as an Ordinance of Man, but as a
Divine and Heavenly Institution, and therefore let us expect a Blessing to be
conveyed to us by it; and finally, let us always attend upon it as the Word by
which we must be judged at the last and terrible Day. And after we have heard
it, let us meditate upon it, and let us pray that we may have Grace to practice
it, that we may be doers of the Word, and not hearers only, deceiving out own
selves, James 1.22.

CHAP. XVI.
Of the Sacraments of Baptism. Of the Lord's Supper; the Duties and Obligations
Before, In, and After the receiving it. Public and Private Fasting and
Thanksgiving. Sanctifying the Sabbath. Public Worship to be attended by our
selves and Families. Decency of Worship, Zeal, Sincerity. Of Holy Dying; Rules
to obtain it, respecting our Preparations for it as to God, and as to Men.

. 1. Of Baptism.
I Pass next to the reverent use of the Sacraments, which is another famous
instance of Godliness. Baptism (which is the first Christian Sacrament) is the
Leading Ordinance of Christ's Church, it is the Door that opens to all the
rest, it is the Foundation of the whole Christian Building. This must be first
laid before you undertake any part of the Superstructure. For we read that our
Savior blessed the little Children that were brought to him, Mat. 10.16. and
showed thereby that it was his Intention that these should be admitted into the
Church by Baptism, which is a Sign and Seal of the greatest Spiritual Blessing,
viz. The inward washing of Regeneration, which accompanies that outward Rite or
Ceremony in those for whom it was designed. This we must grant; otherwise we
cannot think that our Savior, who did all things wisely and to some real
purpose, would have Instituted the External and Bodily Washing; for what does
this avail without the inward one? Seeing then that it was the will of Christ
that young ones should not be debarred from partaking of the Blessing which
attends this Sacrament, when it is rightly Administered; you that are Parents
ought to take care that your Children be admitted into the Church of Christ by
this Ordinance, that they may be entered into the New Covenant, and made
Disciples of Jesus.

2. And all o^ you that have been thus initiated into the said of Christ, ought
through your whole Lives to be mindful of that Sacred Vow and Covenant wherein
you stand bound to God by being Baptized, and to show your Faithfulness in
keeping your Solemn Promise. You have been Consecrated to God, therefore do not
profane your selves. You are washed, do not defile your selves. O be not of
the number of those vain people who boast of their being Baptized, and yet have
no other claim to Christianity but this, and they seem to desire no other. They
rest in the bare Element, they satisfy themselves with the external
Performance, and think that this will be a sufficient preservative against all
danger both here and hereafter. They are so fond as to imagine that the Cross
on their Fore^e^ds when they were Christened will fright away the D^vil for
ever, and that the Baptismal Water will quench the flames of Hell. But he not
deceived with vain Words and Imaginations, let it not suffice that you were
brought to the Font when you were Babes (which was an Action that you could
neither hinder nor promote) and there were partakers of the outward Washing or
Sprinkling, content not your selves with this bare Solemnity, but aspire
chiefly to the inward Graces which were to be conveyed by it. For what is the
Baptism of Water, without being Baptized with the Holy Ghost? Mark 1.8. To what
purpose is the visible Sign, if you want the invisible and spiritual Benefits
which are signified by it? These, these you ought to look after as the
principal Things, and your care must be to walk answerably to that singular
Mercy of being adopted into the Church by the Sacrament of Baptism. This is a
great Honor, and it engages you to walk worthy of it. Now God has set his own
Mark on you, now you have a distinct Badge and Cognizance, a peculiar ^ivery,
and therefore you must own and acknowledge God to be your sole Lord and Master,
as well as he has owned you to be his Servants. You must endeavor rightly to
understand and carefully to perform the Duties to which by Baptism you are
bound, namely in Heart and Life to renounce the Devil and all his Works, the
Lusts of the Flesh, and the Pomps and Vanities of the World, and to remain
Christ's faithful Servants unto your lives end.

. 3. The Lord's Supper.
The other Christian Sacrament is that of the Lord's Supper, which he himself
instituted a little before his Death, and commanded us to celebrate it in
remembrance of him, Luke 22.19. We must have a right apprehension concerning
the Nature of this Sacrament, which in short is this, that our Savior's
Intention was, that by the visible Elements of Bread and Wine, and the breaking
and pouring them forth, we should be put in mind of his Body broken for us, and
his Blood shed for us on the Cross. For this reason the Bread and Wine are
called the Body and Blood of Christ, namely, because they represent and
si^nifie these to (...). As often as we eat this Bread, and drink this Cup, we
do show the Lord's Death till he come, 1 Cor. 11.26. we declare our belief of
the efficacy of our Savior's meritorious Death, whereby our Redemptiom was
wrought, and whereby a New Covenant, namely, that of Grace and Mercy and Pardon
was established, and therefore the Cup in this Sacrament is called the New
Covenant in his Blood, Luke 22.20. as much as to say, it is a Confirmation of
all the Benefits and Advantages which are conveyed by the New Covenant, sealed
with the Blood of Christ. And consequently this Sacrament was appointed on
purpose to confirm our Faith, and to assure us of the reality of all the great
Things promised to us in the Gospel, and thereby to establish our Joy and
Comfort. Moreover, this Ordinance was instituted as a Bond of Love and Union
among Christians. Our Savior intended to unite us together in Communion and
Brotherly Affection, when we solemnly call to mind his Passion and Death, which
were such undeniable Demonstrations of his infinite Love to us. Yea, for the
right understanding of the nature and design of this Sacrament, we must know
that the due Celebration of it contains in it All Exercises of Piety and
Devotion, for here we have occasion to act all our Graces, to renew all our
Duties, and to exert all the Parts of Christianity, and here it is that we are
strengthened and confirmed in them all. This is the Nature and Excellency of
this Evangelical Sacrament.

. 4 And now we must have a great care that we avoid these two Extremes, The Sin
of omitting it.
the neglect and the Profanation of this Ordinance. First, we must by no means
neglect and omit it, for it is Christ's Institution, and therefore it becomes
our absolute Duty, and is continually to be practiced as long as all the other
Means of Grace are made use of, for we are bid to remember our Savior in this
Sacrament till he comes, at the end of the World. So that this is not only a
Christian Duty, but a durable one, it is to last in the Church of Christ till
the Consummation of all Things. If we think otherwise, we belly our Reasons and
Consciences, as well as the Holy Scriptures. Wherefore let not those who
pretend to be Christians stain themselves with so gross a Crime as the refusing
to comply with a plain and peremptory Command of Christ. Let them not pretend
to be his Followers, and yet despise that which he intended to be one great
Mark and Character of those of his Religion, for this (as well as the other
Sacrament) is to distinguish us from Pagans and Jews, and all others that
dissent from the Christian way of Worship.

. 5. And we are to consider that our refusing to come to the Lord's Table is
not only a despising of Christ's Institution and positive Command, but it is
also a swerving from the practice of the Apostles and the primitive Saints, it
is a disregarding and undervaluing of the Testimony of Christ's Love to us; it
is a forsaking of our own Mercies; it is a disowning the Communion of Saints;
it is a slighting of the Invitations of God's Messengers, who bid us to this
holy Feast; it is an affronting of his Church and Ministers; and in a word, it
is a rejecting of that Ordinance which is one of the appointed Means of
Salvation. I hope those who have been careless and negligent in this matter,
will from what I have thus briefly suggested, entertain better Thoughts of this
Sacrament than they have hitherto one: and I hope they will lament their former
^^^ligence, and ^ow at length betake themselv^^ (...) all seriousness to their
indispensible (...).

. 6. But as we must not be guilty of the Omission of this solemn Act of
Religion, The Sinfulness of Profaning the Lord's Supper.
so not of the Profanation of it. As we must not refuse to come to the Holy
Table, so we must not come unworthily, for we are assured that they who do so,
eat and drink Damnation to themselves, 1 Cor. 11.29. that is, they not only
provoke the Almighty to visit them with outward and bodily Judgments (as the
Apostle explains himself in the next Verse, For this cause many are weak and
sickly, and many sleep) but they may expect a severer Punishment hereafter,
with respect both to their Souls and Bodies. Which is a thing that ought to be
well weighed and considered by all these that approach to the Lord's Table,
l^st that coming with their Consciences defiled, and their Sins unpardoned,
they not only pull down Judgments upon themselves in this World, but make
themselves liable to everlasting Torments in the World to come. For this we
must know, that not only the wilful despisi^g and neglecting of this holy
Ordinance (which is the fault I took notice of before) will procure the Wrath
of God, and bring down Punishment upon us, but the Unworthy partaking of it
will prove as dangerous to us. We read in Mat. 22.7, 13. That he who came to
the Marriage Supper without his Wedding Garment, was punished as well as those
that refused altogether to come to the Supper. Thus our appearing is as
blameable as our absence: our coming Unworthily is as sinful, and in some
respect much more sinful than our not coming. For those holy Things are not for
profane Persons, those Pearls are not to be cast before Swine, those who
wallow in their soul and brutish Vices. Here is no place for the Debauched and
Dissolute. He that addicts himself to Gluttony and Drunkenness must not presume
to taste of this holy Repast, nor drink of this Sacred Cup. He that Swears and
Curses, and makes mention of the Blood of Christ to no other Purpose, must not
be admitted to partake of the Sacramental Blood. He that lives in Wantonness,
Lewdness and Uncleanness, must not dare to touch those pure and sacred
Mysteries. The uncharitable malicious and revengeful Person must not approach
This Feast of Love. In short, none must venture to come to the Lords Table with
impure Hearts and Lives.

Wherefore our great care and business must be to Prepare our selves for this
solemn Communion with God, before we enter upon it. Preparation for
We are enjoined to examine our selves before we eat of that Bread, and drink
of that Cup, 1 Cor. 11.28. that is, we must search into our Hearts and Lives,
and call all our Sins, whether secret or open, to remembrance: we must heartily
confess and bewail them before God with all their aggravating Circumstances, we
must importunately beg for sincere Contrition and Humiliation, Godly Sorrow and
Repentance, and ^ctually exercise these; together with a perfect Hatred and
Abhorrence of all our evil Ways, and firm Resolves of Obedience for the future.
We must fit our selves for that holy Undertaking by a sufficient Knowledge of
all the necessary Principles of our Religion, by a hungring and thirsting after
the Bread of Life, by a steadfast Faith in Jesus, by a Love to God as great and
extensive as our Hearts are capable of, by an universal Love and Affection to
our Brethren, by ardent Prayer for the Divine Help and Assistance, and by an
exciting and quickening of all our Graces.

. 7. After we have done what we can to fit our selves for partaking of this
Supper of the Lord to which we are invited, we ought to approach to it with
Reverence and Godly Fear, with a humble sense of our Infirmities and
Weaknesses, and with an unfeigned desire to be strengthened with might in our
inward Man. Behavior in
At the time of Receiving we ought more especially to stir up all our spiritual
strength, to recollect our Forces, and to renew with great vigor the Vow and
Covenant which we made with God at our Baptism, and all other Vows, Promises
and Resolutions which at any time we have made of holy Living. But the chief
work of all, and that which is most proper and peculiar to this Juncture is our
possessing our Thoughts with the bitter Sufferings and Death of our Blessed
Savior, and from warm Meditations concerning those to promote in us a deep
Sorrow for all our Sins, a hearty Love of Jesus Christ who did and suffered so
great Things for us, a lively Faith and Reliance on his Merits and
Satisfaction, a Thankfulness unto him for all his glorious Undertakings in our
behalf, and an entire Resigning of our selves to his Service and Glory. If we
thus come to the Lord's Table, we shall be welcome Guests, and return with a
Blessi^g.

. 8. It now remains that I speak ^our Duty After Receiving the Sacrament:
Duties After Receiving.
which may be comprised in these Particulars. First, Thank the Master of the
Feast, the merciful Jesus, who has entertained you at his Table, and refreshed
you with his own Body and B^ood. Bless God for the opportunity you have had of
sharing in so great a Benefit, so extraordinary a Favor. Secondly, look back
upon your Behavior at this spiritual Feast, and examine whether it was such as
became that solemn Exercise, whether you were filled with all those holy
Affections which are suitable to it. Thus take an account of your selves, that
you may lament what was amiss, and reform your selves for the future. Thirdly,
Live as those that have been entertained at the Table of the Lord, and have by
Faith been partakers of his Body and Blood. Your Conversations must not be
after the rate of other Men. It must be seen in your Countenances, in your
Speeches and Discourses* in your Callings, and Employments and Commerce amongst
Men, and in your whole Practice and Behavior, that you have been with Jesus,
that you have intimately conversed with him, and that now you have the greatest
Obligations on you of living to the Honor of your dear Master.

. 9 Another Godly Exercise is Fasting; Fasting.
which is either public or private. O^ the former sort is that which we read
in 2 Chronicles 2 1. Esther 4.16. and from other Instances in the Old Testament we
gather, that it was the Practice of the Church of God to betake themselves to
public Fasting and Humiliation when great Calamities threatened or fell upon
them. Of Anna, a Religious Prophetess, it is recorded, that she served God with
Fastings, Luk 2.37. namely, at the usual set Seasons for that Duty. We read in
Acts 31.1, etc. 14.23. that on some very solemn Occasions, when public Prayers
were to be put up by the Christian Church, they fasted. And our Savior
foretells that his Followers shall have occasion to perform this Exercise of
Religion in times of Distress and Trouble, then shall they fast in those days,
Mark 2.20. The latter sort of Abstinence namely, that which is more private, is
approved of by the Apostle in 1 Cor. 7.5. where also it appears that this
Exercise was used by pious Christians in their Families a^ set Times. And our
Lord himself directs us to this Practice when we would solicit God for some
very great and very desirable Blessing; for he tells us it cannot be obtained
but by Prayer and Fasting, Mat. 17.21. Wherefore we should not neglect to
observe solemn Times of Fasting and Humiliation, when the condition of the
Church or Nation, or of both requires it: and we should accustom our selves to
private Abstinence in a Religious manner, humbling our Souls (as well as our
outward Man) with secret Mournings and Lamentations before the Lord: For this
Duty must be directed to him, and it must be done to fit us for his Service,
because it is a proper act of Godliness.

. 10. On other Occasions of a different nature, Thanksgiving.
Public Thanksgiving, attended with Innocent Refreshments, is not ^u^^coming
Religious Men, and may justly be reckoned as another exertment of Piety. For
that virtuous and Religious Joy which has it Scene chiefly in the Heart, will
natur^lly discover it self in some outward and visible Exp^^ssions. This is
commended to us by the practice of Godly Persons in the Old Testament, Neh
8.10. Esth. 9.20. and so far as it is an Exercise of Religious Thankfulness to
God, it is allow^ble under Christianity, for this enjoins us to offer the
Sacrifice of Praise to God continu^lly, that is, the fruit of our Lips, giving
Thanks to his Name, Heb. 13.15. Singing of Psalms and Hymns is a part of the
public Worship under the Gospel, as we learn from the Examples of Christ and
his Apostles. Mat. 26 30. Thus singing of Psalms and Hymns, and spiritual Songs
is enjoined as a necess^^y Duty, Ephesians. 5^18.19. Col. 3.16. And it is also or
private use among Christians, by thems^^v^s, to which it is probable that
Injunction belo^^^, Is any Man merry, let him sing Psalms James 5.13 Only let
us not forget with our Ton^ues to off up our Hearts to God. To the outward
Singing add the inward one, which the Apostle calls making Melody in the Heart
to the Lord, Ephesians. 5.19. This Godly Exercise is certainly of very great use and
advantage in Religion, for i^ kindly m^v^s and warms our Aff^^ctions, it
quickers and ex^iterates our Spirits, it i^ fl^m^s and ^v^t^s our Devotion; it
renders Reli^ion chear^u^ and delightful; and in a word, by this we both stir
up our selves and others to Praise God.

. 11. In the next place, That you may have Time and Opportunity for the
exercising of all the Parts of Devotion, and that you may more solemnly addict
your selves to Religion, it is necessary that I add this, Remember the Sabbath
Day to keep it holy. Keeping the Sabbath.
Though all Days in themselves are alike, though there is no more intrinsic
Holiness in one than another, yet God can set apart and sanctify a Day if he
pleases: and we find that he has done so, by commending one day in Seven to
us, and by the Example of the Apostles and Primitive Christians, who kept one
day in seven(but with an alteration as to the particular Day which was observed
before) in commemoration of our Savior's Resurrection, and therefore that Day
is expressly called the Lord's Day, Rev. 1.10 to distinguish it from other Days
of the Week. Upon this day we are to do no manner of Work, we are prohibited
all secular Employment whatsoever, except Works of Mercy, or of Necessity, and
for the comfortable support of Life. And this is a day on which we must Rest
not only from all worldly Business but Pleasure also. This is not a time for
g^dding up and down, for needless V^s^^ and idle Cour^ships; this is not a Day
to be thrown away in superfluous Eating and Drinking; this is not a Season to
be spent in foolish Diversions, and idle Past times: nay, it is not a Season
for that Mirth which at other times is allowable, nay is needful and useful.
For God requires, that we do not our Pleasure on his Holy Day, Isai. 58.13. and
consequently no Recreations are lawful on that Day. And truly, if we consider
that we are forbid to Work, and to follow the Duties of our secular Callings on
this Day, we must needs grant that Recreations and Pleasures are forbid, for
these are a greater Impediment to the Service and Worship of God (which this
Day calls for) than Labor in our Callings. And we are to take this as a
general Rule, that all things which hinder us from the duty of the Day are
unlawful on that Day. We cannot then but acknowledge that the Christian Sabbath
is to be spent wholly in Religion, that i^ is to be sanctified by our attending
on the public Service of God, and all the Evangelical Ordinances which relate
to it, and moreover by performing all acts of private Worship and secret
Devotion. We are to be free this Day from all worldly Avocations, that we may
wholly employ our selves about the Things which are heavenly and spiritual,
which have respect to our Souls and to their e^ernal Welfare. Wherefore let us
be very conscientious in observing this Day, which is so solemnly set apart for
Religion.

12. Public Worship.
In order to the discharging of all the Duties toward God before mentioned,
which are of a public nature, we must not forget the assembling of our selves
together, as the Apostle advises, Heb. 10.25. We must solemnly and publicly
meet together to Pray, to hear the Word, to celebrate the Sacraments, to humble
our selves by Fasting, to praise God and sing Psalms, to celebrate the Lord's
Day, and to perform all the public Offices of Religion. For by virtue of the
forementioned Injunction of assembling our selves together, we are bound to
maintain a Fellowship and Communion in Divine Worship. We are to join with the
Assemblies of those that call upon God and his Son of Jesus Christ, we are to
unite with them in all parts of Religious Worship, so far as we are convinced
that they are according to the Will of God. Where, I say, there is this
Conviction and Persuasion, it is not sufficient for us to profess the Christian
Faith, but we must unite together in Worship, and in celebrating of the public
Ordinances; for to this end they and a public Ministry in the Church were
instituted. Where there is a Church, and this Ministry, there ought to be
Communion: otherwise Schism, which is an unwarrantable separating from the
Communion of the Church, would not be unlawful, and therefore condemned by the
Apostles, as we find it is, 1 Cor. 11.18. Jam. 4 1. Nor would Unity be so
earnestly p^^ss^d, as we see it is, 1 Cor. 1.10. Ephesians. 4.3. Phil. 1.27. and in
other places. Wherefore let us agree in the joynt-exercise of Religion, and in
frequenting the Public Congregations, and attending on the Ordinances of the
Gospel as they are administered in Public: for these are the usual Channels
wherein Grace is conveyed and derived to us. These are those Institutions of
Divine appointment in the due use whereof we may expect the influences of the
Heavenly Benediction Wherefore let every Christian be sensible that he is under
an obligation to join in Church, society with others, it being his Duty to
serve God in tha^ way which is most for his honor, and the setting forth of
his praise. Let us then thank God for the continuance of this inestimable
Privilege, and let us walk worthy of it; that after we have with one consent
Worshipped and Served him here on Earth, we may join with all the Blessed
Company of Heaven in Praising and Glorifying his holy came unto Eternal Ages.

13. And here let me add this to what I before ^uggested concerning the Duty of
Christian Parents and Governors of Families, namely that it is incumbent upon
them to take care that those who are of their household resort to the Public
Worship. It is not enough that they instruct their Children and Servants at
home, and bring them up to Prayer, and reading God's Word, and observing the
Lord's day in private, but it is further required of them that they call upon
their Families to resort to the Public Instructions of Christ's Ministers, and
to join with the solemn assemblies of God's people in Prayer and all other
Duties that are publicly performed by them. It is observable that at the
Reading of the Law the Israelites brought their Children and little ones with
them, Jos. 34. These were to be Auditors of it as well as themselves. And from
Joel 2 16. You may inform your selves that the Jewish Children were present at
their Solemn Congregations, and serving of God, as well as those of Riper
years. The reason holds as valid for the bringing of Christian Children to the
Public Congregations, to be present at the Prayers and Thanksgivings of the
Church, and to be partakers of the sincere milk of the Word. It is recorded of
Cornelius that when he was to hear St. Peter preach, he caused his whole
household to be present, Now therefore are we all here present before God to
hear all things that are commanded thee of God. Acts 10.53. That all refers to
his Friends and Kinsfolk spoken of in that chapter, and to all the members of
the Family whereof he was Master.

. 14. You see then what Authority you have to encourage you to give orders to
those that are under your charge, to repair to the Public Meetings of Devout
Christians. And truly without consulting your Bibles, you may find ground and
reason enough for this practice in the very nature of the thing it self, for it
is fitting and necessary that you should inure your Children and Servants
betimes to a reverence of the Public Ordinances, and that they should have an
early knowledge and sense of their Duty toward God, not only as it respects
their private but their Public Devotion; and that they should be taught that
this latter is as requisite as the former.

This then is the method and course which you ought to follow, first you must
worship God in secret, in your Chambers and Closets, where no Eye sees you:
then you must keep up Family* Religion and Worship: and then come forth
prepared to serve God in the Public Assemblies, and be sure to bring your
Family with you. To conclude, take this for a Rule, you must not stay at home,
when you should be at the house of God, though you are never so well employed
in your own houses.

. 15. Nor is it sufficient to perform and celebrate all these Religious Duties
which I have commended to you as puts of Godliness, unless you do them in a
right manner. Therefore you must be very careful as to this, and in all your
attendance on God in his holy Ordinances, especially in the Public Assemblies,
you ought first to show all lowliness both of Body and Soul. In solemn
exercises of a visible and audible Devotion we must use external significations
of Respect and Reverence, we must observe such humble gestures as denote our
inward submission and humility, and commend Religion unto others, and stir up
their Devotion. The Apostle thought fit to take notice of and to censure some
persons for their praying and prophesying with their heads covered, (1 Cor.
11.4) either as they were speakers or hearers, to let us know how cautious we
should be even as to our bolily behavior in that kind in the time of Public
Worship. So without doubt to talk or whisper one to another about worldly
matters, or to let the eyes wander and rove, and to feed our vain and rambling
thoughts by gazing and looking about, is a very irreverent behavior, and no
ways suitable to the service of our maker.

. 16. And for sleeping, it is yet more blameable and offensive, because it
argues a greater neglect and disregard of the Service of God, whether it be by
Praying or Preaching; and it hinders those who are addicted to it from reaping
benefit by either of them. Wherefore we must beware of this rule and careless
practice, and resolve when we come into the Congregation, not to be idle and
unconcerned, but to be attentive to the holy performances we are called to, and
are at present at. We must mind that sacred employment we are engaged in, we
must be intent upon, what we do, and depart our selves Decently and
Religiously, as those who are in the presence of the All-seeing God, and are
more immediately interested in his Service and Worship: remember this, that he
will be sanctified in all them that draw high unto him.

. 17. Zeal.
Another Qualification of all our Religious performances is Zeal. For unless
Religion be warm, we cannot know that it is alive: and besides, our Duties are
of that weighty and important nature that they require the greatest servency
and vigor. Therefore it is necessary to be Zealous, that we may act suitably
to that Religion which we make profession of. This also is to be considered,
that our Everlasting Concern and Happiness call for the most exalted heat and
earnestness of Spirit: and the God whom we serve deserves the utmost height of
our affections, and consequently whatever is saint and languid in Religion,
whatsoever is superficial and lukewarm, is unworthy of God. We must then banish
all careless Indifferency and Coldness in Religion; our acts of virtue and our
exercises of Devotion must be done with our might, Eccl. 9 10. We must be
fervent in Spirit, Romans 12.11. And this fervor will push us on to make
continual Advances in Religion, to cultivate and improve all our graces, and to
obtain a full and entire conquest over our sins. If we be truly ardent and
z^alous in Religion, we shall not rest in a low degree of grace, in moderate
seize of Holiness: we shall not be content to be dwarfs in Religion, we
shall not satisfy our selves with a low and mean stature in Grace, but we shall
earnestly endeavor to arrive to Christian Perfection, that is, the fullest
growth that we are capable of in this mortal state: and we shall strive to make
nearer approaches to those Divine Perfections which we see in God.

. 18. Lastly, Sincerity is requisite in all our Religious Exercises (for there
is a Sincerity toward God, Sincerity toward God.
as well as toward Men, of which latter I spoke before) we must not dissemble
with our Maker, and act a part before him who has a Casement into our hearts,
and sees whatever is transacted there. He takes notice of all that we do, yea
of all that we think or devise. Wherefore let us abhor all Pharisaical
formalities and shows in Religion; and in all our words, Intentions and Actions
be Upright. Let us not act out of undue principles, or for sinister ends, not
for custom or fashion sake, or merely to satis^y the clamours of Conscience or
because we shall otherwise be uneasy, but let us behave our selves Religiously
because we love God and his Service, and are convinced that it is most
reasonable to do so. Thus let us aim at real Goodness, and not the appearance
of it only. Especially our Sincerity must show it self in designing all for the
Glory of God. 1 Cor. 10.31. Ephesians. 1.12. 1 Pet. 4.11. This is to be made our
Chief and Ultimate End, or else all the Duties before spoken of are not acts of
true Piety, and though we have a form of Godliness, yet we deny the power
thereof.

Thus I have described Godliness in its several members and parts, or, which is
the same thing, I have set before you your Duty as it more immediately respects
God, and co^sists in those things which directly relate to him. And in this
part of my Discourse and what went before I have endeavored to ^ive the true
and plain Character of a Christian Man, in the several lines and strokes of an
Holy Life.

. 19. Of Dying well*
There is now only one thing remaining to comple^t the lineaments and
pourtraiture of the Wh^le Concer^s ^ of Man, namely, to discourse of Holy
Dying, and the right Methods of fitting our selves for it. It is true a
Religious Life is the best Preparative, and I have given you an account of
that: but there are some more Particular Rules and Directions that are
necessary for the perfecting of this work, Rules particular to that design.
and without which it is impossible we should accomplish it aright. These Rules
I proceed now to let down in the last place, and they have reference to the
three forementioned objects of our Duty, namely God, our Brethren, and our
selves.

20. I. The Preparation which we are to make for our leaving this World has
respect unto God, and so is an act of Piety. Thus it is necessary that we
earnestly beg of God so to teach us to number our days, To number our days.
that we may be enabled to apply our hearts unto wisdom. Psalm. 90.12. The
Divine and saving Wisdom, which is to work out our Salvation with fear and
trembling. It is from him alone that we can be taught that Divine Arithmetic,
and therefore let us make our humble and importunate address to him, that he
would vouchsafe us the Heavenly skill to compute our years, and so to cast up
the number of our short days, that we may be provided for Eternity, and be in
readiness to enter on another World, whose duration is endless and numberless.

. 21. Another act of this Preparation, as it has regard to God, is to be ready
to submit our selves to his disposal as to the manner and time and all other
circumstances of our Death. Who should determine these but the great Ar^iter of
Life and Death, To submit to Gods Disposal.
and in whose hand is the Soul of every living thing? Job 12.10. And therefore
whether we die in our younger years, or our life be prelonged till Old Age;
whether we be visited with tedious sickness, or be called away on a sudden;
whether a natural or a violent death be our portion, we ought to acquiesce in
the wise Providence of God, and not to murmur at the Divine dispensation.

. 22. Again, Repair to Christ the Conqueror of Death.
another effectual way of providing for our last end, is to repair unto Jesus
as the Sole Conqueror of Death, and by a steady and unshaken Faith make our
selves capable of sharing in the virtue of his Conquest. He by his meritorious
Passion and Death has reconciled all sufferings, and even Death it self to us.
When he expired on the Cross he disarmed this Serpent of his venomous and
deadly Sting, so that he is not able now to hurt us. He has consecrated the
Grave by lying in it, he has sweetened the stench and perfumed the rottenness
of our Sepulchers. Wherefore let us be encouraged to dye by our Saviors dying:
seeing he has laid down his Life for us, let us be willing to lay down ours to
go to him: yea let us by the Eye of Faith look up, and behold Christ reaching
forth his Arms to embrace us, and to take us to himself. Let us then, upon such
a view, cry out with holy Simeon Now let^est thou thy Servant depart in peace,
for mine Eyes have seen thy Salvation. Nothing is so comfortable and ravishing
at Death as the sight of Jesus, and the sense of his being that Savior who
^ame to dye for us, and thereby to purchase Everlasting Life and Glory for us.
There is no such effectual provision against the assaults of Death as this is;
and therefore let us firmly believe in this Blessed Savior: let us, when our
hour approaches, vigorously exert our Love and Repentance, and all our other
Grac^s, but especially our Faith, and lay hold on the all-sufficient
Righteousness and merits of our Lord for the pardon of our sins, and so resign
our Spirits into his hands, and peaceably expire in the favor of God.

. 23. II. To prepare and provide our selves for Death is our Duty as it has
reference to other Men. For, First, we cannot be fit our selves to leave this
World, unless we remind others of their latter end, and call upon them to
prepare for the same common Allotment of mortal Men. For this being a matter of
so great Concernment, if we truly love our Neighbors, and have a sense of
their future Welfare; we cannot but be Monitors to them of their Dissolution,
and be glad that they will hearken to our Admonitions. Especially, when we see
our Brethren wholly forgetful of their departure hence, and every day giving
too manifest proofs of that stupid forgetfulness, we are obliged to rouse and
awaken their Memories, and to represent to them the danger of their stupidity;
otherwise we cannot die our selves with peace of Conscience.

To set our House and Estate in Order.
. 24. Secondly, There is a Preparation due in respect of others upon this
account, that we are obliged to take care about our Estate and secular Affairs
before we die. When the Summons of Death were sent to good King Hezekiah, he
was bid at the same time to set his House in order, 2 Kings 20.1. And this is
incumbent on all others whom God has Blessed with a competent Portion of the
good Things of this World: Or else it is probable they will by their Negligence
be injurious to others, even to those that are nearly allied to them, and most
concerned in them. Their Families and Relations, and those they designed their
Benevolence for, may thereby be defrauded, and their Revenues may be thrown
away upon unfit Persons, yea, a great part may be spent in Contention and Law
Suits. Wherefore it is both Justice and Charity to settle and dispose of their
Estates, whilst they are Masters of Health and reason, that there may be no
Controversy about this matter after their Decease. This is to be done by a
formal Will and Testament: and if they make the Will of God the Rule of their
Last Will (as Mr. P^rkins advises in his Sermon of Dying well) they may with
the more comfort and satisfaction bid adieu to the World.

. 25. Thirdly, To behave our selves decently under Sickness.
It is another part o^ our Preparatory Work to behave our selves toward others
with Decency and Religion in the time of our Sickness and Languishment, or
whenever we are under the expectation of Death. Those that wait and attend upon
us, and administer to our needs, those that are our Relations and Acquaintance,
and all that come to visit us at such a Season are to be treated with becoming
Language and Christian Behavior; and we are to refrain (as much as in us lies)
from all Anger and wilful Peevishness, from all Murmuring and Impatience, and
to resign our selves to the Will of Heaven, and to take our leave of our
Friends with a quiet and sedate Spirit, exhorting them to live so Religiously
and Piously, that we may see them again in a better World. But our Preparation
for Death has a more immediate respect to our selves, and of that I will speak
in the next Chapter.

CHAP. XVII.
Of preparing for Dying well as to our Selves: To consider the Brevity of Life;
To Understand the Nature of Death. Mistakes about safe Dying. The Comforts in a
Christian's Death. Keeping a pure Conscience. The Improvement of the whole
Treatise. The Sin and Danger of being Partial in Religion. The Union of
Godliness, Righteousness, and Sobriety, the standing Test of true Practical
Christianity. Exhortation to universal Piety, in joining Knowledge and Practice.

. 1. III. OUR Spiritu^l Provision agai^^t Death has more immediate respect to
our selves, Sense of the brevity of Life.
and i^ consists chi^f^y in these two Things, 1. A continual Sense of the
Brevity of our Lives. 2. A right Apprehension of the Nature of Death; with a
Behavior agreeable to that Sense and Apprehension. First, There must be a
constant Sense of the Shortness and Uncertainty of our Lives. That of the
Apostle, 1 Cor. 7.29. The time is short, ought to be fixed on our Minds, and to
have influence on all our Actions. The words in the largest Sense, may be meant
of the whole extent and compass of Man's Life, and his duration here in this
World. In this most comprehensive acceptance, The Time is short; For what is
our Life? It is even a Vapor that appears for a little time, and then
vanishes away, James 4 14. Or it may be meant of the particular and peculiar
Seasons of Man's Life, and of the time of his Using and Enjoying those Things
which are vouchsafed to him in this World, which is far shorter than Time in
the Gross and Bulk, because that other is but a parcel of this. Thus if we take
a view of the particular Portions and Seasons of Time which are granted to us,
we shall fi^d that they are very fading and transitory. Such is the time of
Youth and Vigor, and such is that of Health and Strength: And so the days of
Prosperity and outward Abundance prove very short to many: and perhaps the
Opportunities of Grace and spiritual Good are shortest of all to some Persons.
These fair and hopeful Seasons do soon expi^e and come to an end: and he is a
fond Person ^h^t of himself undertakes to ascertain the uninterrupted Enjoyment
of them.

Wherefore let us understand our selves aright, and seeing our whole Life, and
Abode here on Earth, as well as the more particular Portions of it, are so
short and uncertain, let us husband all our Time to the best Advantage, and
prosecute the Concerns of a future and never-failing Life. And this we must do
with all speed and expedition, because we cannot promise our selves a
continuance here, we have not so much as the command of the next moment. And
therefore we ought to make use of this, and not to follow the example of those
men who adjourn all their good deeds to the day of their death. When they are
putting off their Bodies, then they begin to think of their Souls. They imagine
that that Repentance is good enough which bears date with their Last Will and
Testament. But be not deceived with such imaginations and practices, for God
expects you should turn unto him forthwith, and speedily betake your selves to
your duty, and not put him off at last with the weak and sickly efforts of a
Deathbed Repentance. This is a truth of the highest importance, and upon the
serious consideration of which depends your Happiness both here and hereafter.
Be prevailed upon then to seek the Lord whilst he may be found, to call upon
him whilst he is near, to accept of the tenders of grace and mercy whilst it is
called to day, to be serious about the salvation of your Immortal Souls, to be
chiefly sollicitous about the affairs of another world, to break off your sins
by hearty Repentance, and to improve all that happens to you to the great
purposes of a holy Life. Turn not the grace of God into wanton^ess, be careful
that you grieve not the Holy Spirit, or reject the counsel of God against your
own Souls. Live always in an awful sense of the Divine Majesty, be very mindful
of the great day of Accounts, and be preparing for it.

This do, but do it without any delay, that you may have time to unlive your
past life which has been spent to so ill purposes. Make haft lest the day of
Mercy expire by your continual abusing of it. Now is your Time, and if you
neglect it, God may justly reject you for ever. Now is the Season, but it is
passing, and you may suddenly be called to take your farewell of the World.
Therefore be very vigorous and active, fill up all the spaces of your Life, and
be ever doing or designing some good with your Heart, or Head, or Tongue, or
Hand. Labor to attain to that excellent Art of making one single day to be of
the same extent with your whole Life, namely, by living so exactly and
circumspectly to day as if you were sure to dye the next. This will be the
happy fruit of your serious and daily meditating on the shortness of your
Liv^s: which how useful it will be toward fitting you for Death, (which is the
thing I am speaking of) you cannot but be very sensible.

. 2. Secondly, Understand the nature of Death.
Understand aright the nature of Death. This is the other necessary Ingredient
in the Preparation which you are to make for your departure hence. Some have
^tran^^ notions of Dying; they persuade themselves (...) there is an end of
them when the Body beco^^ Lifeless: they shall perish as Beasts and the vile,
of Animals, and shall never live again. But the is a ve^^ ^alse and groundless
conceit, and arg^^ the (...) of it to be very brutish and stupi^ for if we
would but adhere to the light of Nature and the dictates of humane Reason, we
should be informed by these, that the Soul of man is of an Immortal nature: and
besides, the Holy Scriptures assure us of a Future state, and let us know that
there is a life to come, 1 Timothy 4.8. And that as it is appointed to all men
once to dye, so after that will be the Judgment. Wherefore we ought to look
beyond Death, and to think of what will follow after it, and to consider of the
sad and dismal period which must at last shut up all the immoderate and
extravagant pleasures of this World. The Close of them will be unspeakably
miserable. If you would then prepare your selves for your latter end, be often
meditating on the future State of things, of the Last Judgment, of Heaven, and
of Hell; and be stirred up thence to order your conversations aright, that you
may see the Salvation of God; and to mortify your sins, that you may prevent
the Endless Torments among the Damned

. 3. Others, though they believe there is a Life after this, yet are so
presumtuous as to fancy that a small matter will fit them for it, that their
bare wishes to dye the Death of the Righteous, or some saint desires to life
the Life of such persons will be acceptable to God, and effectually translate
them to Heaven and Happiness. But this is a wild and extravagant notion, and
contradicts the ^hole Go^pel, where we are informed that pray. (...) and
wishes, if they be not backed with some^^ing else, are insignificant; a mere
outward procession and some slight endeavors will avail us ^^thing. Not every
one that says unto me, Lord, lord, shall enter into the Kingdom of He^ven, ^ut
he that does the will of my Father which is in Heaven, says our Saviou^, Mat 7
21. And afterward he declares that the Kingdom of Heaven suffers violence, and
the violent take it by force, Matt. 11.12. We must seek after Salvation with
great earnestness, and be as vehement and concerned in obtaining Heaven as
Soldiers are in storming a Town, for unto that the words allude.

. 4. There are others who by virtue of that natural impression of Fear and
Dread which the thoughts of Death are wont to possess them with, entertain a
false opinion concerning it, as if it were the most Injurious thing that could
happen to them, for it deprives them of all the pleasures and enjoyments of
this Life, snatches them from their Friends and dearest Relatives, spoils them
of Life the greatest of Blessings, and therefore they pronounce it to be their
greatest Enemy, and most to be dreaded. But this likewise is a false Idea and
Representation of Death; and as long as any man retains it, it is impossible he
should prepare himself for it. Wherefore we are to urge this on our minds, as
an undeniable truth that this World is a stage of vanity, Folly and Misery, and
is nothing worth in comparison of the other, that all its Enjoyments and
Possessions are mean and contemptible in respect of the Glories of the future
state. I we dye in the Lord, Happiness of Dying well.
we shall change the comforts of this Life for those that are Infinitely more
excellent, we shall pass from a short, troublesome, Dying Life, to one that is
Eternal and never failing, and which abounds with e^dless pleasures that are
pure and unmixed. We leave the Company of our Earthly Friends and Acquaintance,
to be admitted into the presence and ^^uition of the whole Sacred Trinity, and
of all the glorified Angels, Saints and Servants of the Blessed Jesus. And if
any of our Relations and Friends be of the number of these latter, when we
cannot be properly said to leave them, because we shall meet them in the
mansions of happiness, and enjoy them with greater delight than ever. There we
shall rest from our labors, and be free from all the calamities of this World.
There shall be no sad objects to grieve us, no Enemies to invade us, no Wars
and Alarms to aff^ight us, no poverty or sickness to wast us, no disputes and
controversies to discompose us. In a word, God shall wipe away all tears from
our eyes, and when they are thus cleared, they are fitted for the Beatifical
Vi^sion of the ever-glorious and undivided Trinity.

. 5. These are the conceptions we ought to have concerning the Death of those
that sleep in Jesus: and if these thoughts dwell with us, and make a deep
impression on our minds, we shall contentedly wait all the days of our
appointed time, till our Change comes: we shall bear sickness and pain, and all
bodily infirmities with patience. Yea, these and all other u^^^si^^sses of our
present state will but serve to reconcile us unto Death, and to make us stand
with open Arms to ^mbrace it, If with the Apostle we are on good grounds
persw^ded that to dye is gain t^ us (Phil. 1.21.) we shall easily Co^quer the
fear (...) Death, and desire to depart, that we may be with Christ.

. 6. And when such suitable thoughts of Death as I have mentioned, bec^me
familiar to us, we shall soon experience the happy (...) and consequence of
them, in their eff^ctual exciting us to make it the grand business of our ^^ves
to keep our Consciences pure and unstained; for these only next unto the Blood
of Jesus, can speak comfort to us when we are launching out into another world.
Then a Good Conscience will be our best Friend, A pure Conscience, means of
dying well.
and our greatest Solice, as we see in the example of Hezekiah, who when he was
under the apprehension of approaching death, comforted himself with the
reflection on his walking before God in truth, and with a perfect heart, and
having done that which was good in his sight, Isaiah 38.3. So it cheered St.
Paul, when he considered the time of his departure was at hand, that he had
fought a good fight, and finished his course, 2 Timothy 4.6. This was a
comfortable reflection to our Savior, when he was leaving the world, that he
had glorified his Father on Earth, and that he had finished the work which he
gave him to do. John 17 4.

. 7. Nothing is more certain then that the thoughts of Dying are usually very
dismal to unsanctified minds, whence it is that all ways imaginable are made
use of to divert, and, (if it be possible) quite to expel such black methods of
thinking: but when sinners come to leave the world, they cannot with all their
Artifices put these sad apprehensions by? the King of Terrors will then stare
in their Faces, and urge their sins and enormities upon their Consciences. At
such a time what will it profit a man to look back upon the Riches, or Honors,
or Pleasures which he has enjoyed? what advantage can these things bring to
him now when he is to be deprived of them, and that for ever? What do they
signify to a Man that is dying, and passing into the infernal Flames? It is
such a thought as this that makes Death look with so ghastly and formidable a
countenance on him.

But it is otherwise with the Righteous Man, he is willing to resign his
Breath, and to quit the World, and to go to him whom he has sincerely (though
with great Imperfection) served. Now his Language is that of the Psalmist, Whom
have I in Heaven but thee? and there is none upon Earth I desire besides thee.
My Flesh and my Heart Fails (Death is now entering upon them) but God is the
strength of my Heart. and my portion for ever. And in the joyful Sense of this
he gives up the Ghost, and takes his fli^ to Heaven, and triumphantly passes to
the Regions of Glory. This he gains by his being always provided for Death and
the Consequences of it: This is the Benefit and Privilege of a due Preparation.

And thus I have finished the Practical Part of Christianity, with all its
Branches and Members, whether they belong to the inward or the outward Man, the
Heart or Life, the disposition of the Mind or external Performances and
Actions, And I have all along endeavored to give you the right and just
Measures of every Grace and of every Duty, and not to blend and confound one
with another.

8. After all, let me add somt pertinent and useful Reflections on the whole,
as,

1. Here is justly grounded a Reproof of those that are Partial in their
Religion, who separate these three Parts of Christianity (which I have been
treating of) from one another. Some we see are inquisitive and precise only as
to (...) sert of Common is, but wholly (...) the rest. Thus the Two Tables are
knocked one against another, and are set at opposition to each other. First,
they are justly to be blamed who pretend to live Soberly and Righteously, but
take no care of being Godly: Secondly, those that make a show of living
Godlily, but neglect Sobriety and Righteousness. I will speak of these
distinctly.

. 9. First, Some seem to lead their Lives Soberly and Justly, but in the mean
time neglect Godliness. They run not into Intemperance, they are Chaste, Modest,
and Grave, they injure not their Neighbors, but carry themselves very lovingly
and obligingly toward all Men, but yet they wholly forget their Duty to God.
These Men are to be reminded that Temperance, and Justice, and loving their
Neighbors, if they be devoid of Godliness are but empty and insignificant
Names: They are but outward Shows and Appearances, and utterly destitute of an
inward Principle to actuate and guide them, and to make them acceptable. For a
Sense of God is the spring of all due Behavior rewards our selves and others.
Such then are grossly mistaken who imagine that there is ^o other Good but that
wh^ respects humane Righteousness, The Sin and Danger of being Partial in
Religion.
and therefore they have no regard of any Duty to God. These Men are to be
informed of this gran^ Truth, that ill Righteousness abst^^cted from Godliness
is false and (...), and of no value. It is not a real part of Religion, but a
^t semblance and (...) of it only. The fear of the Lord, says (...) is the
Head or principal P^ ((...) signifies) of Knowledge, (...), Prove 1.7 it is the
chief thing in Religion: Yea, it is the Heart and Life of it; whereas Justice
and Judgment and Equity make up but the Body of it. If the Body be divided from
the Head, or from the Heart, which are the sources of Life and Action, what is
it but a senseless Trunk, and an unactive Mass of Matter? In like manner if Men
pretend to be Righteous, and yet are destitute of this vital Principle of
Godliness, it may be said of them as of the wanton Widow, They are dead whilst
they live, or, as it was said of the Church of Sardis, They have a name that
they live, they have some show and appearance of Spiritual Life, but they are
really dead. Acts of Sobriety, and Justice, and Honesty separated from Piety
are mere Carcasses of Religion: But then they may be said to have Life put into
them when they issue from and are grounded upon our Duty to God, and when they
all refer to this: For we must do them all for God's sake: In the performing of
them we must discharge our Consciences toward him, we must make him our
principal Object and ultimate end in them: Briefly, we must serve and honor
him by them. Wherefore this reproves, and at the same time baffles the Folly of
those Persons who place all their Religion in the Second Table, and persuade
themselves that if they live temperately and soberly, and give every Man his
own, they are complete Christians, and they shall be excused though they deny God
his due. They think that their Temperance and Justice, their fair Dealing and
Converse in the World, their laudable Behavior toward Men will compound for
their Atheism, or Idolatry, or Superstition, or Profaning God's Holy Name or
Day: This is the notorious Folly and Sottishness of a considerable part of Men
amongst us, but the foregoing Discourse is a sufficient Con^utation of it.

. 10. Secondly, Those are to be reproved who co^t themselves with a show of
living Godlily, whilst they are Unjust and Unrighteoas toward their
Neighbors. These pretending to be carried away with an ardent desire of Piety,
bid farewell to all other Duties. They think that Acts of Devotion toward God
ex^se their Unrighteousness toward Men. They resemble the Harlet whom Solomon
speaks of, that imagined her Religious Offerings would make satisfaction for
her living i^ Uncleanness: Yea, she made her Vows P^le^s to her Whoredom, Prove.
7.14. The Pharisees were egr^g^sly gui^y in this kind: they would seem to
afflict themselves to Piety, whilst it was easily t^ (...) of that they
neglected Honesty (...) Justice. Those vain Man thought that the Vow of Corban,
which obliged them to works of Piety, exempted them from their Duty to their
Parents, Matthew. 15.5, 6. We read that at another time these Pharisees were
lightly disturbed and enraged* because Christ healed a Person on the Sabbath
day: They cried out against this as a great Sin, this was an unpardonable
Prop^n^ion; but these Men were ready to comm^t M^er at the same time, and were
not st^tled at it, for the Evangelist tells us, that they sought to take away
Christ's (...) because of this; They held a Council against him how they might
(...) him, Mat. 12.14. And at other times (...) will find our Savior
inveighing against those Men on this very account, namely, because of their
P^ri^ty is R^ because they so exactly paid Tithe of Mint, Arise and Cummin, and
fosted twice a Week, and made long Prayers, but omitted the weightier Matters
of the Law, Judgment, Mercy, and Faith, and palpably violated the Laws of
Righteousness and Honesty, by devouring of Widows Hoases, Mat. 23.14, 23.
Again, we are told that these very Persons would not enter into the Judgment
Hall, left they should be defiled, and so make themselves unfit to eat the
Passover, John 18.28. Here was a great show of Godliness, but at the same time
they could hale the Innocent Jesus into that place of Judicature, and they
accused him, and sought his Blood. We read likewise that the Chief Priests, who
gave the Sum of Thirty pieces of Silver to betray Christ, when it was returned,
would by no means put it into the Church-Treasury. The Price of Blood must not
be among the Gifts offered to God, Matthew. 27.6. and yet behold! at the same
time it was no sin with them to shed Innocent Blood, even that of the Blessed
Messiah.

I might add to these the Instance of Herod, who pretended he was bound by his
Oath a very Religious Tie, to accommodate Herodias's Daughter with John
Baptists head, Mat. 14.9. But he considered not what a horrid sin it was to
take away the Life of a Prophet, to behead such a Saint of God. He would seem
to be very observant of a Duty of the First Table, but with an utter
disregarding of an indispensable Duty of the Second. This has been the absurd
practice of men in all Ages, and Christians (I mean those who own that Name,
and make a profession of that Religion, but are not sincere Vota^i^s of it)
have offended in this kind as well as others. Some of them have seemed to be
very Pious, but they have had but a mean opinion of that part of their Duty
which concerns themselves and their Neighbors. They make the Second Table
truckle to the First, and their seeming Holiness toward God compounds for all
their visible offenses against Men. They cry up Religion, but they mean a part
only of it, and they stickle for that one part, whilst they neglect the others.
They magnify some Graces and Duties, but never think of the rest: they cry out
against some Vices, but hug others that are as bad. They lie and ^ssemble,
cheat and defraud, and trample down Justice and Honesty, and yet retain a form
of Godliness. Now such Partial and Counterfeit Religion, such a show of some
acts of Piety mixed with a plain violation of the Laws of Righteousness and
Justice, is a thing most Abominable in the Eyes of God.

Hence you hear him complaining of the Jews, and upbraiding them after this
manner, Isa. 1.11, etc. [ To what purpose is the multitude of your sacrifices
unto me? Bring no more vain oblations, incense is an abomination to me. The
new mons and Sabbaths, and the calling of Assemblies I cannot away with: it is
iniquity, even the solemn meeting. Your new mons and your appointed Feasts my
soul hates, they are a trouble unto me, I am weary to bear them: and when ye
spread forth your hands, I will hide mine eyes from you: yea, when ye make many
prayers, I will not bear.] What is the reason that all these Offices of Piety
are thus disregarded and loathed? how come their Sacrifices and Oblations, the
New Mons and Sabbaths, their Assemblies and Solemn meetings, their appointed
Festivals, and even their Prayers (all of them great Instances of Religion and
Devotion) to be even an abomination? The next words give the true account of
this, your hands are full of blood: as much as to say, notwithstanding your
great pretenses of Godliness which you think you make a great show of by your
Sacrifices, and all the other acts of Religious Worship, you take no care to
observe the rules of Righteousness, you are guilty of Violence and Oppression,
of Unmercifulness and Cruelty (for these are meant by blood here, as appears
from the following words, where they are exhorted to seek judgment, and relieve
the oppressed, to judge the Fatherless, and plead for the Widow: which shows
that these were the heinous crimes they were guilty of. Till you wash your
hands of these, says God, till you put away the evil of th^se doings from
before mine eyes, you must never expect that I will have regard to your most
Solemn Worship. Your neglect of your Duty to your Brethren renders all your
Service to me unacceptable, yea detestable.

Thus God not only reproves but denounces and abhors this sort of men. There is
ground therefore for this Reproof of mi^, which I wish may have effect upon
those deluded Christians who separate those things which God has joined, who
divorce those Duties which reason and Scripture and Christianity it self have
matched together, who are pretenders to Godliness, and make to conscience of
Justice and Charity. I will only desire these persons to consider seriously
those words of St. John (with which I will conclude this first Inference) 1
John 4.20. If any man say, I love God, and hates his Brother, that is, if he
pretends to Piety, and yet is neglectful of his Duty to his brethren, he is a
liar, his Religion is a Lie and a Cheat, and a down right Imposture: and it
will soon appear to be such when it comes to the Trial.

. 11. 2 dly then, Impartial compliance with God's will, the standing Test of
practical Christianity.
let the foregoing Discourse of Practical Religion be a standing Test to try
your selves and others by. For I have there laid down evident and ^ering Signs
or Testimonies of men's being entirely Good and impartially Religious: so that
thence you may be able to correct the mistaken Judgments of men about Religion
and Goodness. You shall hear it said of such or such a man, He is a very sober
person, he was never seen drunk, he is known for his chastity, and leading a
Life free from wantonness and lewdness, therefore without doubt he is a Good
man. But this is not ground sufficient to build such a Conclusion upon, for you
are to inquire further whether he minds that part of Religion which enjoins
Justice and Charity: is he kind and loving to the poor, and does he give every
one their due? Or, if these things be practiced by him, still you cannot
pronounce him a man entirely Good till you ask further whether Piety be visible
in his Life: is he one that fears God and devoutly worships him? does he
privately addict himself to Religion, and does he duly attend on the more Solemn
and Public service of God? and can you dis^ern that he aims at the Glory of
the most High in all that he does? then (so far as you or any one else can
judge) he is a good and holy man indeed.

. 12. You shall hear it said of another man, He is very ^st (...) nobody, he
was never charged by any one with violence and oppression but on the contrary
he is very eminent for his acts of Charity and Benevolence, therefore certainly
he is a Good man. But this likewise is a groundless conclusion, for there are
other things besides these to constitute a Good man. You must satisfy your
selves therefore whether his Life be Sober and Godly, as well as Just, and if
you find it to be so you have reason to believe he deserves that Character.

. 13. Again, it is said of another man, that he is very Devout and Pious, he
constantly resorts to his Parish Church, he frequents the Public Prayers, and
behaves himself there with great signs of Godly zeal, and is careful that those
of his Family should do as he does; accordingly he sees that they also be
present at the Service of God, and there demean themselves devoutly and
piously: this m^ therefore must needs be a Good man, and one that is accepted
of God. Here again I deny the Consequence, for though in all this he does well,
yet till I am informed how he stands affected to the other parts of his Duty, I
cannot fix that Character on him. Is he Seb^r as well as Devout? He seems to
hate Impiety, but does he not practice Debauchery? He observes very Reverent
Postures at Church, but is he not seen sometimes to Reel in the streets? does
he not bow at the Name of Jesus, and swear by it likewise? though he seems
Humble at his Prayers to God, yet does he not carry himself Proudly toward his
Brethren; It is thus oftentimes: in the Church, there is nothing but Divinity,
but out of it there is scarce Humanity. He duly attends at the Lord's Supper,
and is much offended that that Sacred Ordinance is so neglected: but does he
not come away thence the same man that he went? do you see that he remains from
Lasciviousness or Drunkenness, or profane Oaths afterward, yea on that very
day.

. 14. You shall hear Others say, such a one is a Godly man he goes to a Select
Meeting, he is of a Particular Congregation, of a Purer way then others. He
cannot submit to the use of the Common Prayer and the Ceremonies, he dislikes
all things in the National Church, and therefore in conscience he seperates
from it, and betakes himself to a stricter form of Doctrine and Worship. This
man without controversy is a Good man, say they, if there be any such in the
World. But I cannot ^ss^t to this Proposition, because to true Good^ss or
S^ct^y are required all the essential parts of it: therefore (waving at present
his particular Pers^sion and Practice with relation to the (...)) I ask, does
this man you speak of act (...) Righteously? does he moderate (...) affections
and desires, does he suppress (...) the World? does he subdue (...) does he
quell pride and (...) not uncharitably censure, (...) his brethren? is ^e
honest and (...) and commerce? is he true and (...) words and promises? is he
very careful not (...) and injure his neighbors? does he (...) others ^s he
would be dealt with himself? (...) a quiet, humble and ^ble Spirit, and willing
to maintain Amity and Friendship with those that (...) in some lesser matters
of Religion* And many other things relating to his Duty toward his brethren
(of which I spoke before) must be found in that person who is to be called and
thought a Good man. Deceive not therefore your selves or others as to this
matter, mistake not one part of Religion for the whole. But when you set about
the great work of Self-Examination, remember to try your selves by this
Complete Test, lay the whole Rule to your Lives, and ask your selves, whether
you have lived not only Soberly, but Righteously, and not only Righteously but
Godlily.

. 15. 3 dly, Be exhorted to show your selves thus Impartial in Religion. See
that you evince the Truth and Reality of it by your being Universally Holy, by
being Uniform and Entire in the performance of your respective Duties. Be good
Christians on all accounts; be severe toward your selves, be just toward Men,
and be pious toward God. Walk not as if Morality were no part of the Christian
Religion, and yet do not confine Christianity to that; but let the fear of God
and the sense of his Divine Majesty inspire you in all your Actions: especially
now, in these Days of Apostasy and Profaneness, engage your selves to the
serious Practice of what I have said. There is a great variety of Duties, you
see, before you, a wonderful diversity of Graces and Virtues. Let it be your
study and endeavor to practice them all without Exception and Reserve. Wherein
you have offended and miscarried as to any of them, humbly beg Pardon of God,
and implore the Divine Assistance that for the future you may be enabled to
discharge the Duty toward your selves with greater Sobriety* toward your
Brethren with more Righteousness and Charity, and toward God with greater
Devotion and Piety.

16. Nor do I shut up all here; it remains still, in the last place, nor you be
exhorted to join both Parts of this Treatise (...) ^ther, viz. Knowledge and
Practice, for these are the Two great Things that ma^^ up the Whole Concern of
Man. Therefore here in the final close of all let me request you to unite both
these, that you may be every way complete in your Religion. Observe the
Connection of the Apostle St. Peter's Words in his Second Epistle, Third
Chapter, and last Verse, Grow in Grace, and in the Knowledge of our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ. This is a happy Conjunction, and let it be observed in
the whole course of your Lives, let your Knowledge be ever attended with growth
in Grace. And indeed all the Principles of our Religion, even the most
Mysterious of them, have a tendency to this, namely, an increase in Grace and
Holiness. There is nothing in Christianity but what is productive of Purity of
Life, of a virtuous and godly Conversation. Yea, if our Knowledge does not
contribute toward this, it is of no worth at all, it is empty and
insignificant, and does not deserve the Name of True Christian Knowledge.
Hereby we know that we know him if we keep his Commandments, 1 John 2.3. He can
give but little Proof of his Knowledge of God, whose Soul is not earnestly
devoted to Obedience and a holy life. And it follows. He that says, I know
him, and keeps not his Commandments is a Liar, and the Truth is not in him
The Apostle (you bear) is downright and peremptory: He plainly tells you, that
you Lie against your own Consciences, you Cheat and Deceive your selves, if you
pretend to true Knowledge of God, and yet are not careful to observe the Divine
Commandments. Your Knowledge, if it be right, will be accompanied with Piety
and good Works; but if it be void of these, it is Knowledge falsely so called,
and no ways worthy of a Christian.

. 17. I appeal to you, what Advantages can you hope to reap from a barren and
fruitless Knowledge? What will it avail you to have Bibles by you, and to be
able to turn very dexterously to Chapter and Verse, and thence to inform your
selves of your Duty in all kinds, if you perform it not? What will it profit
you to understand the Doctrines contained in that holy Book, if you discover
nothing of them in your Lives? What will it advantage you to Discourse of those
excellent Truths, unless you practice the Contents of them? O then be
persuaded, that That is the only Advantageous Knowledge which makes you better.
They that knowing God aright, do sincerely serve him through their whole Lives,
are the Persons that know and understand to purpose. If then you be well
informed concerning God, his Nature, Attributes, Works, and all the Doctrinal
Part of Christianity, see that you add the Practical Part to it, and thereby
secure your Salvation and Happiness, according to what our Savior has
delivered, John 13.17. If you know these things, Happy are you if you do them.

DEVOTIONS FOR Several Occasions.
A Morning-Prayer for the Lord's Day.
O Most Holy and Merciful GOD, the Creator, Governor and Preserver of all
Things both in Heaven and Earth I Vouchsafe to look upon thy Servants who come
before Thee at this Time, to offer up Praise and Thanks for all thy Benefits
bestowed upon us; more particularly, for thy Gracious Protection of us this
Night past: And seeing thou have brought us to the Light of another Day, even
thine own Day; we Humbly beseech Thee. O LORD, to keep and protect us in the
same by thy Good Providence. Watch over us and Defend us from Sin, and all
Temptations to it. We most Thankfully acknowledge it as a singular Mercy, that
thou have been pleased to set apart this Day for our Attendance upon Thee in
the more Solemn Duties of Religion. And We earnestly implore thy Grace and
Assistance, that We may duly Observe this Day, not only as a Rest from our
Common Employments, but as a Day in a more especial Manner appointed for the
Honoring of Thy Great Name, and the Furtherin^ of the ^vation of our Souls. O
that we may take Delight in Prayers and Praises, in ^ing and Hearing thy Holy
Word, in Meditating and Speaking of all thy Wondrous Works of Creation,
Providence and Redemption; that we may be this Day preparing our selves for
that Everlasting Rest which is to come, where our whole Work and Business shall
be to Glorify and Praise Thee, to Rejoice in Thee, and to Enjoy Thee for Ever.
We desire, O GOD, to be employed in this Blessed Work, even Now whilst we are
Here on Earth; we desire to begin those Hallelujahs which shall be finished and
perfected in the Highest Heavens.

LORD, Be pleased through thy Infinite Mercy to forgive the many Miscarriages
which we have heretofore been guilty of, in our Attendance on Thee in thy Holy
Ordinances; and let not our former Unworthiness hinder a Blessing from coming
down upon us in a plentiful Manner this Day. O LORD, Vouchsafe to be present
with us in the Duties of it, and afford us the Assistance of thy Grace in all
our Religious Undertakings and Performances. O that our Minds and Hearts may be
in such a Pious Temper, that we may be glad that we are often called to the
House of the Lord. And when we are there, enable us to offer up our Prayers and
Praises with great Zeal and Fervency: Let us draw near unto Thee, not only with
our Lips, but let our Hearts be engaged to a sincere Waiting on Thee Let us be
deeply Humbled in all our Confession of Sin, and filled with Holy Longings
after those Graces which we pray for, and let us be unfeignedly Thankful for
all the Mercies for which we give Thee Praise. Help us, As new born Babes, to
desire the sincere Milk of the Word, that we may grow thereby. Let us
experience thy Holy Word to be Quick and Powerful, sharper than any Two edged
Sword, dividing between the Joints and the Marrow, and discerning the very
Thoughts and Intentions of the Heart. Let the Word, which this Day is to be
preached to the Outward Ear, be mixed inwardly with Faith in the Hearts of all
that shall hear it, and let our whole Lives and Actions be governed by it. Let
not the Cares of the World choke the Seed of thy Word, nor let Satan steal it
out of our Hearts; but let it be as good Seed sown in good Ground, and take
root, and bring forth fruit abundantly. Let this be our firm Resolution, to
perform and practice whatever shall be discovered to us to be our Duty, and to
forsake every Sin which we shall know to be such.

Let our Souls be filled with an awful Sense of thy Glorious Majesty in all our
Approaches to thee this day. Preserve us from Sloth and Idleness, from
Carelessness and Irreverance, from Vain and Wandering Thoughts, and from
whatsoever may hinder our acceptable Performance of the Duties we are called
to. And we further beg of Thee, O Most Merciful LORD, that thy B^ssing may be
this Day upon all the Assemblies of thy Servants, who meet together in thy Name
and Fear: Be with them and Assist them, and Graciously accept of their Services
and Performances. More especially, Bless all the faithful Preachers of thy
Gospel throughout the Land; Increase daily their Numbers, and Prosper their
Labors and Endeavors, that they may instruct and inform the Ignorant,
convince the Erroneous, reduce thee Wanderers, reclaim the Licentious, Comfort
the Disconsolate, raise up the Fallen, confirm and strengthen those that stand,
and be every ways the Happy Instruments of the Eternal Salvation of many Souls.
Finally, Let thy Grace enable us, and all thy Servants who call upon thy Name
this Day, so to improve this, and all other Seasons and Opportunities which
thou affordest us, that we may thereby be brought to a deeper sense of our
Sins, greater Longings after Thee, and Unfeigned Thankfulness for all thy
Mercies, and that we may be built up in our most Holy Faith unto Everlasting
Salvation. This, we Humbly crave, for the s^^e of our most Blessed Savior, in
whose Name and Words we continue to call upon Thee (as he himself has taught
us) saying, Our Father, etc.

A Morning-Prayer on any other Day of the Week
BLessed be thy Holy Name, O most Glorious Lord GOD, that Thou have w^c^ed over
us, and preserved us this last Night; that our ^e^s were not our Graves, and
that Sleep was not Death unto us; that Thou have given any m^re of Rest and
R^p^se, and that Thou have raise^ us up this Morning by thy Merciful (...). We
acknowledge thy Good Providence in our Preservation, and in bringing us to the
Light of another Day. We desire to begin the same in a Holy Manner by Offering
us to Thee our Morning. Sacrifice of Praise and Thanksgiving for all thy
Goodness and Loving Kindness manifested unto us. Our Voice shall Thou hear in
the morning, O LORD; in the morning do we direct our Prayers unto Thee, and do
look up; for we laid us down and slept, and are now risen again, and Thou, O
LORD, have sustained us. O Gracious Father, who art abundant in Goodness and
Mercy, what great Cause have we to bless Thee, for the daily and constant
Returns of thy Favors! Thou art never weary of doing Good unto us: All thy
Dealings with us are Testimonies and Assurances of thy exceeding Bounty and
Love. We Daily and Hourly taste and see that Thou art Good. Day unto Day
shows thy Goodness, and Night unto Night utters thy Loving Kindness. In the
Morning Thou preventest us with thy Mercies; in the Evening, Thou loadest us
with thy Benefits. O let the Mercies of every Morning and Evening, and of our
whole Lives, stir us up Effectually to Thankfulness, and a conscientious
Discharge of our Duties. We confess, O LORD, we have been forgetful of Thee,
and we have shamefully neglected that which is our greatest Concern, namely,
the Salvation of our Immortal Souls. We beseech Thee make us thoroughly sensible
of our past Miscarriage, and affect our Hearts with it, and make us more
Watchful and Diligent for the Time to come. Let us herein Exercise our selves,
to have Consciences void of Offense, both toward Thee and all Men. Whilst
there be many that say, Who will show us any Good, any Worldly and Temporal
Good? Let this be our Request, that Thou would lift up the Light of thy
Countenance upon us. Be thou Reconciled to us, and then let us not be troubled
and discontented whatever our Allotment be in this World. Teach us to live by
Faith in the worst and lowest Condition; and after this short State of Trial
Here, make us for Ever blessed with thy Self in the Highest Heavens.

Together with Us, we beseech Thee to show Mercy to the whole World. Let the
Glory of thy Name, and the Welfare of Mankind, be every where promoted by the
Knowledge and Practice of Christianity. Let all thy Great and Excellent Designs
of Mercy and Love be actually and fully accomplished in the World. Let thy Way
be made known upon Earth, and thy saving Health among all Nations. Let all
Christian Churches be delivered from their Enemies without, and from their
Contentions and Divisions among themselves, and from all Error, Superstition
and Profaneness. Be merciful to these Kingdoms to which we belong, Humble us
under the Sense of our great Wickedness and Provocations; and then do Thou
exalt us to thy Favor, and show Kindness unto us. Let thy good Providence
defend us from the Malicious Designs of all that bear ill Will to our Sion; and
suffer not these Countries to be overspread again with the gross Darkness* and
abominable Corruptions of Popery; but let thy Gospel, in the Power and the
Purity of it, be continued to us, and the Generations after us. Bless, with the
choicest of thy Blessings, Him whom Thou have set in Authority over us, and
make him an Eminent Instrument of thy Glory and thy Churches Welfare. Let thy
Blessing be upon Magistrates and Ministers, that they may do their utmost for
the promoting of Holiness and discourageing of all Wickedness, both by their
Example and Authority. Make the Inhabitants of this Nation a Religious, and
then a Happy People: Root out our us whatever is displeasing in thine Eyes, and
let the Profession of the Gospel be accompanied with Purity of Worship and
Circumspectness of Life Although we deserve to be utterly cast off, and made a
desolate Wilderness, yet be pleased still to lengthen out the Day of Mercy to
us. Let thy various Dispensations toward us teach us Righteousness, and let
us, whilst it is called To Day, see the Things which concern our Peace, lest
they be for ever hid from our Eyes.

Comfort and Relieve all that are in Sorrow and Distress, Extend thy Mercies
and Loving Kindness to all the Sons and Daughters of Affliction. And let thy
Blessing be upon us this Day, and thy good Presence with us, directing and
assisting us in the Duties which Thou requirest of us. Grant that we may always
retain a deep Sense of Thee upon our Minds, and walk as in thy sight
continually. Let there be nothing in this Family displeasing unto Thee, who art
a God of purer Eyes than to behold Iniquity with the least Favor and
Approbation. Help us to walk in the fear of thy Great Name, and in the
Discharge of our Duty toward one another, doing all we can to promote thy
Glory, and to set forward the Salvation of our own Souls. All which we most
earnestly pray for in the Name of Christ the Righteous, to Whom with Thee, O
Father, and thy Eternal Spirit, be ascribed all Honor, Glory and Praise,
Henceforth and for Ever.

Another Morning-Prayer.
O Most Holy Lord GOD, who art of purer Eyes than to behold Iniquity, how shall
We sinful Wretches dare to appear before Thee? We are defiled in our Natures,
having in Us a Backwardness to all Good, and a Proneness to all Evil. But we
have defiled our selves yet much more by our Actual Sins. We have transgressed,
and that not only through Ignorance and Frailty, but knowingly and wilfully,
against the Motions of thy Spirit and the Checks of our own Consciences. And
now, O LORD, what shall we say, or how shall we open our Mouths, seeing we have
done these Things? The Wages of Sin is Death, and therefore This may justly be
our Portion; yea, Everlasting Death and Damnation are due to us. But LORD,
since Thou have been pleased to accept of that Ransom, which thy Blessed Son
has paid for lost Sinners, let us be of the Number of Those that have a share
in it. For his sake Pardon all our Offenses, and be reconciled to us, and
receive us into thy Favor. When Thou have spoken Peace to our Souls, let us
not turn any more to Folly; but so Establish us with thy Grace, that no
Temptation of the World, the Devil, or our own Flesh, may be able to withdraw
us from our Obedience to Thee. Increase in us daily all the Graces of thy Holy
Spirit. Work in us such a Faith as may be acceptable in thy Sight, that it may
be that Victorious Faith which may enable us to overcome the World, and to
conform our selves to the Image of Christ on whom we believe. O LORD, who art
the Hope of all the Ends of the Earth, let us never be destitute of a
well-grounded Hope* such as may cause us to purify ourselves from all
Filthiness both of Flesh and Spirit; that it may indeed be to us an Anchor of
our Souls both sure and steadfast, entering even within the Vail, whither the
Forerunner is for us entered, even Jesus, Christ our High Priest. Inflame our
Love to Thee more and more. Thou art pleased to require our Hearts, and Thou
only have Right to them. Let us render them up whole and entire to Thee. Let us
love Thee with such a Degree of Love, as may make us endure any thing for Thy
sake, such a perfect Love as casts out all Fear and Sloth; that nothing may
seem too grievous to us to suffer, or too difficult to do, in Obedience to
Thee. O Holy LORD, who requirest Truth in the Inward Parts, purge us from all
Hypocrisy. O Thou who searchest the Heart and the Reins, search and try us,
and make us sincere in all our Doings. Suffer us not to speak Peace to our
selves when there is no Peace; but grant that we may judge of our selves as
Thou judge of us. Wherefore do Thou thoroughly acquaint us with our selves,
and show us the Condition of our own Souls. If there be any secret way of
Wickedness in us, any unmortified Lust, any Vice unrepented of in our Hearts or
Lives, O LORD discover it to us, and give us true Repentance for it, and for
all the Transgressions which at any Time we have been guilty of; and do Thou
work in us sincere and steadfast Purposes of Amendment of our Lives for the
future. O Thou High and Lofty One, whose Throne is in Heaven, and yet art
pleased to dwell with the Humble Spirit, pour into our Hearts that Excellent
Grace of Humility. By this do Thou convince us of our own Meanness and
Unworthiness, make us to see that we are in our selves Miserable, and Poor, and
Blind, and Naked; that from a due Consideration hereof, we may walk Humbly
before Thee; and in all thy Dispensations toward us, submit our selves wholly
to thy Good Will and Pleasure. Give us Grace, we beseech Thee, in all our
Difficulties and Distresses to trust and rely upon Thee, to rest satisfied
with Thy Providence, and to cast all our Care upon Thee. O that we may always
resign our Wills to Thine, and be content with thy wise Disposal. To this End
do Thou purge out of our Hearts all Covetous Desires and Affections. Give us
such a Contempt of the fading Riches of this World, that whether they increase
or be diminished, we may never set our Hearts upon them, but that all our Care
may be to be rich toward GOD, and to lay up Treasure in Heaven. Enable us to
set our Affections on Things above, that when Christ who is our Life shall
appear, we also may appear with Him in Glory. Grant, O Gracious Father, that we
may continue and persevere in all those Virtues and Graces which we desire of
Thee. Let not our Goodness be as the Morning-Cloud, and as the Early Dew that
passes away; but cause us to cleave steadfastly unto Thee, that whatsoever Good
Work Thou have wrought in us may be accomplished, and brought to Perfection.
LORD, Thou see our Weaknesses, and know the Number and Strength of those
Temptations which we struggle with. Leave us not to our selves, but in all our
spiritual Combats make us more than Conquerors. Make us unmovable and
steadfast, that we may abound in the Work of the LORD, and by patient Continuing
in Well-doing, seek, and at last obtain, Glory, and Honor, and Immortality,
and Eternal Life.

Accept, we beseech Thee, of our Praises and Thanksgivings for the Safety and
Refreshment of this last Night. We own it as a signal Token of thy Mercy and
Forbearance, that we see the Light of another Day. As Thou art pleased to renew
thy Favors to us, so let us renew our Resolutions of Repentance and Obedience.

And we still wait upon Thee, O LORD, for farther Instances of Thy Goodness.
Thou who have watched over us this last Night, be pleased to continue thy Good
Presence with us this Day. Vouchsafe to receive us into thy Protection and
Tuition, and to defend us, if it be thy Blessed Will, from all Dangers and
Perils; and do Thou enable us to discharge those Duties aright which this Day
requires of us. As we have been now Praying unto Thee, so let us remain in a
Holy F^ame and Temper all the Day. Let us Think, Speak, and Act as in thy
Sight; let us give up our selves wholly to thy Service, and make thy Glory the
Great and Principal End of our Lives. This we Humbly crave, for the Merits and
Mediation of Jesus Christ, the Son of thy Love, to Whom with Thy Self, and the
Holy Spirit of Grace, be rendered, as is most due; all Honor, Praise and Glory,
Now and Ever, Amen.

Evening-Prayers.
An Evening-Prayer on the Lord's Day.
WE bless Thee, O LORD of Heaven and Earth; that, notwithstanding our great
Unworthiness; Thou do still continue ^us the Means and Opportunities of
Grace; that Thou have this Day given us the Liberty of coming into thy
Presence; that we have had the Blessed Privilege to join together in Prayers
and Praises, that our Tea^^ers are not removed into Corners, th^^ our Ears have
heard the joyful Sound, and th^^ thy Sabbaths and Ordinances are yet vouch^^^ed
to us. O that we may love, and rejoice in the Duties of thy Worship and
Service, that we may this Day experimentally say, that it has not been in vain
that we have drawn near to God in his Holy Ordinances. O LORD, make us thankful
for the Light of the Gospel. Thou have not dealt so with every People; this
Favor which Thou vouchsafest unto us, is denied unto Many, who are driven from
their Habitations, and are miserably person (...) at this Day. O raise up our
Hearts to a thankful Acknowledgment of thy Mercy, that we are not in the like
Condition, that we sit under ^r Vines and Fig Trees, and enjoy not only Earthly
Comforts, but those that are Spiritual; Namely, that we have had Leave and
Liberty to meet together this Day, and Publicly to partake of the Benefits of
the Gospel. Let us remember that to whom much is given, of them will much be
required. Therefore suffer us not to neglect so great Salvation, or to receive
the Grace of God in vain. O let this never be our Condemnation, that Light is
come into the World, and yet we have loved Darkness rather than Light. But
enable us to walk worthy of these signal Mercies, lest Thou be provoked to
deprive us of them. Let it be our Hearty Desire and Intention to get Good to
our Souls by acquainting our selves with thy Holy Word, and by Hearing the
Scriptures opened and applied. Let us take Delight in conversing with those
I^sp^red Writings, where thy Will is reve^l'd. (...) the Mysteries of the
Gospel are disco^, where Truth is clearly manifested to us, and where there is
that Wisdom which will make us wise to Salvation. Fix on our Minds the
Instructions which we have heard this Day, and let us be Doers of thy Word, and
not Hearers only, deceiving our own selves. Let us show the Efficacy of thy
Word in the Holiness of our Conversations; let us endeavor to be more
Righteous and Pure, more Exact and Circumspect, more Religious and Heavenly;
that it may be seen in our Lives, that the Means and Opportunities of Grace are
improved by us to our real Good and Advantage, to the Increase of our Spiritual
Knowledge, to the vanquishing of our Sins and Corruptions, to the mortifying of
our sinful Desires, and to the advancing of our Graces, and fitting us for
Eternal Glory and Happiness.

LORD, We earnestly implore thy Pardon for the Failings we have been guilty of
this Day in our Holy Duties; pass by the many Miscarriages in our Performance
of them. Enter not into Judgment with thy Servants for our Carelessness and
Irreverence, for our Coldness and Formality, for the Vanity and Distraction of
our Thoughts, and whatever other Weaknesses thou have seen in us this Day,
either in our Private or Public Attendance upon Thee. For the sake of the Son
of thy Love forgi^^ all our Defects, and let not any of our Miscarriages be
imputed to us.

O LORD, make us sensible of the manifold Favors and Mercies, which we are
daily receiving from ^e: Keep i^ ever mindful how deeply we are engaged to
Thee, how we received our Being from Thee, and that all the Conveniences of our
Lives are purely from thy Bounty. Yea, Thou have promised no less than an
Eternal Kingdom to them that serve Thee. And shall we not serve Thee, who art
the Father of all Mercies, and the only Rest and Satisfaction of our Immortal
Souls? We are convinced that Thou have framed and fitted our Souls for. Thy
Self, so that nothing else in the whole World can give us Content without Thee.
The inordinate Love of the Things of this World, proves at last a Pain and
Torment to us; the more we love any Thing which withdraws our Hearts from Thee,
the more Vanity and Vexation do we find in it. O LORD, there is nothing but Thy
Self, the Infinite and Eternal Good, that can replenish, and satisfy our
Desires. Wherefore let us place our whole Happiness in Thee, and above all
Things endeavor to obtain and preserve thy Favor. Do Thou unite our Hearts so
closely to Thee, and so thoroughly possess Thy Self of our Souls, that all
sinful Affections may be kept out thence. Let no manner of Earthly and Outward
Comforts take up that room in our Hearts, which is due to thy Blessed Self.
Seeing all Things compared with Thee are as Nothing, let our Affections to them
comparatively be as Nothing; that we may be able to say in Sincerity, We have
None in Heaven but Thee, and there is none on Earth that we desire besides
Thee. Be Thou the mos^ Beloved and Delightful Object of our Souls; a^e^ us
regard other Things ^o otherwise than as they either come from Thee, or lead
unto Thee.

Be pleased O Merciful Father, to take a^ under thy Protection and Blessing
this Ensuing Night; and let no Evil come near to hurt us or our Habitation.
Bring us, we entreat Thee, to the Light of another Day, and then, and through
our whole Lives, let us live according to what we have prayed and heard this
Day. Let thy Good Spirit bring to our Remembrance the Truths which have been
delivered to us, and let thy Word be hid in our Hearts, that we may not sin
against Thee. Grant that Religion and Holiness may be the Great Business of our
Lives, and that we may strive to increase in these every Day more and more; so
that after the Celebrating of thy Sabbaths here on Earth, we may arrive to that
Rest which remains for the People of God, and may keep an Everlasting Sabbath
with Thee in the Mansions of Glory. Comfort and Relieve all that are in any
sort of Affliction and Distress, whether in Body or Mind. Let thy Blessing be
upon all our Friends and Relations, and those that wish well to us. As for any
that have done us Injuries, LORD, forgive them, and grant them true Repentance,
that they may partake of thy Favor both Here and Hereafter. LORD, hear the
Petitions which we have at this Time presented unto Thee, and let not the
Mixture of our Weakness and Unworthiness turn them into Sin; but Graciously
vouchsafe to accept us and our Services, for the sake of Christ Jesus, our
Redeemer and Savior; in Whose prevailing Name and Words, we further call upon
Thee.

Our Father which art in Heaven, etc.

Another Evening or Night-Prayer.
MOST Holy and Ever Blessed God! Thou art the Maker and Preserver of all
Things, on whom all Creatures depend, both for their Beings and all the
Comforts they enjoy. For with Thee is the Fountain of Life, and with Thee art
all the Treasures of Love and Goodness. And Thou take Delight in
communicating the same to all the Creatures Thou have made, according to their
Wants and several Capacities. And therefore wast Thou pleased to create Angels
and Men, and to furnish them with Reason and Understanding, that Thou might
manifest thy Self and thy Goodness to them, and make them most Blessed in the
Enjoyment of Thee for Ever. And when we the Children of Men were fallen from
Thee, and had thereby brought our selves into a State of Misery, Thou wast
pleased, out of thy own Free Grace and Mercy, to give us thy Son from Heaven,
to reveal unto us thy Readiness to pardon us, thy Willingness to receive us
again into thy Favor, and even to advance us to Eternal Life and Glory, that
hereby we might be encouraged to return unto Thee, and repent of our Evil
Doings, and cleave unto Thee for Ever. O Blessed LORD! what are we wretched
Sinners, that Thou should manifest so great Love to us, and should be so
desirous to make us Happy? What are we, that Thou should delight in our
Service, of which Thou stand in no need? But thou art Good, O GOD, and
therefore Thou do Good, and that is thy Delight and Happiness. Thou art
Goodness and Love it self, and thence have invited us to partake of Happiness,
which alone is to be found in Thee. As Thou art pleased to call and invite us
to come unto Thee, so it is by thy Powerful Help and Assistance, that we shall
be enabled to come. Wherefore we earnestly entreat Thee to put forth thy
Almighty Power, and to rescue us from Satan, and from the Power of Darkness,
and to translate us into the Kingdom of thy Dear Son. We are weak and infirm
Creatures, and are disabled by our Natural Corruption, and by our accustoming
our selves to Sin: Wherefore unless Thou vouchsafest to exert thine Infinite
Power, we shall have no Ability to struggle with Our Spiritual Enemies, and to
conquer our Lusts. Help us therefore, or we perish.

And that we may be made capable of thy Mercy both Here and Hereafter, do Thou
open our Eyes, that we may see our Sins and Follies, and be heartily sorry for
them. And give us such a perfect Understanding in the Way of Godliness, that we
may choose to walk in it with Delight and Pleasure all our Days. Grant that the
Welfare of our Immortal Souls may be the great Business of our Lives, that it
may be our principal Care to obtain thy Love in Christ Jesus, and to arrive to
a solid and well-grounded Hope of Eternal Life. Convince us, O GOD, that the
main Work we have to do in this World, is to glorify thy Name, and to work out
our own Salvation with Fear and Trembling. Cause us to regard this as the One
Thing Necessary, and without which, nothing will or can avail us. To this End
give us a hearty Compliance with the Gracious Terms of the Gospel, wherein Thou
have plainly revealed thy Will, and the Way to Happiness. Whilst we have this
Light, make us faithful in the Improvement of it, that we may examine and judge
our Lives by it, and be guided and directed by it in all our Ways. Suffer us
not to mistake our Spiritual Estate, and to deceive our own Souls. Make us
careful to build our Hopes on a sure Foundation, and not on the Sand. Let us
not content our selves with a mere Profession and Form of Godliness, without
the Power of it. But effectually persuade us that the Grace of God in the
Gospel, which brings Salvation, teaches us to deny all Ungodliness and
Worldly Lusts, and to live Soberly, Righteously and Godlily in this present
World. LORD, Help us to bring forth fruits meet for Repentance; and give us
that Faith which works by Love, and produces a constant Obedience to thy
Commandments. Enable us to devote our selves wholly to the Service of our
Blessed Redeemer, and to live unto Him who dyed for us; imitating the Example
he has given us, and being obedient to Death, if we are called to it. Let our
Affections be fixed on Things above, where Christ is at thy right hand, and let
us ever be waiting for the Times of Refreshing, that shall come from the
Presence of the Lord, when he shall appear to judge the World in Righteousness.
O that we may be daily preparing our selves for our Appearance before him. O
that we may be made so acceptable in his Sight, that at the last we may hear
from him that most Joyful Sentence, Come, ye Blessed of my Father, inherit the
Kingdom prepared for you.

Blessed be thy Name, O LORD, for thy Mercies to us this Day. O Thou Keeper of
Israel, that neither slumberest nor sleep, be pleased also to watch over us
this Night. Defend us from all Dangers, and Grant us such refreshing Sleep and
Repose, that we may be fitted for the Duties of the Day following. Make us ever
mindful of that time when we must lie down in the Dust, and sleep in the Grave.
And because we know neither the Day nor the Hour when our Master will come, let
us always be ready and prepared to meet our Lord. Let us live so, that we may
not be afraid to dye; but that whether we live, we may live unto the Lord; or
whether we dye, we may dye unto the Lord: So that living and dying we may be
the Lords, through Jesus Christ the Righteous, our most Blessed Lord and
Savior; to Whom be Everlasting Honor and Glory. Amen.

Another Prayer to be used at Night.
O Most Holy and Blessed Lord GOD, who art the Creator of all Things, and
upholdest them by thy Power, and governest them with Infinite Wisdom: We are
the Workmanship of thy Hands, we depend upon thy Providence, and we have
constant Proofs of thy Righteous and Merciful Dealings with us. We bless and
praise thy Name for the Mercies of the Day past, and for the Innumerable Tokens
of thy Goodness to us at all Times; for the Comforts, as well as the
Necessaries, of this Life. And as we are daily supplied from thy Bounty with
Mercies for our Bodies, so Thou have extended thy Infinite Compassion toward
our Souls, and have afforded us the Means of Eternal Happiness. We desire at
this time to wait upon Thee for the continuance of these Blessings, but more
especially those of a Spiritual Nature, namely, thy Grace and Good Spirit,
which are the choicest of all Gifts and Endowments. Let us grieve for Sins
past, and hate all manner of Evil for the future. Let us not wilfully offend
Thee, though we are sure to escape Punishment. Let thy Loving Kindness be
always before our Eyes, that we may be encouraged to walk uprightly. Let us
discern the Inward and Real Goodness of those Laws which Thou have given us,
that we may cheerfully comply with them. Let Love be the free and ingenious
Principle of all our Obedience, that so thy Commandments may never seem
grievous to us. Make it our Delight to do thy Will; let our most Serious and
Affectionate Thoughts be ever upon Thee; and let the Meditations of thy
Goodness be sweet and pleasant to us. From an Inward Sense of Holiness on our
Hearts, let our Tongues be speaking good of thy Name; and let us endeavor to
draw others to love and serve Thee. Let it be the Joy of our Hearts to converse
with Thee in Humble Prayers and Thanksgivings, in laying open our Wants before
Thee, and in acknowledging thy daily Mercies and Favors to us. O do Thou so
rejoice the Souls of thy Servants who are now praying unto Thee, that they may
be more and more encouraged to wait upon Thee, and that they may rest satisfied
in Thee alone. Shed abroad thy Holy Spirit into our Hearts, and thereby kindle
in our Souls a most sincere and servent Love to Thee, though it cannot bear any
Proportion with that Infinite Love of Thine, whereof we have ever had such
large Experience. We know it is not possible to love Thee as Thou deservest;
but, LORD, let us be filled with all that Love which these Narrow Hearts of
ours can contain. O Give us such a lively and powerful Sense of thy Goodness,
and of all thy Infinite Perfections, that we may love Thee with the whole
Heart, Soul and Strength, preferring Thee before all Things, choosing Thee as
our only Portion, esteeming thy Loving Kindness better than Life, and all the
Comforts of it. Make us, O LORD, perfect in every good Work, to do thy Will,
working in us that which is well-pleasing in thy Sight, through Jesus Christ.
Our Eyes are unto Thee, O GOD the Lord, in Thee is our Trust, leave not our
Souls destitute. Let thy Presence be with us, while we are here in this
Wilderness, and lead us through it to the Heavenly Canaan. Let us take heed of
provoking Thee by Disobedience or Unbelief; but enable us by Faith in thy
Goodness and Power, to resist and overcome all our Spiritual Enemies. Enable us
to follow the Lord fully, and to continue patiently in Well-doing, that through
Faith and Patience we may inherit the Promises, and enter into thy Rest. Guide
us, O Lord, with thy Counsel, and afterward receive us to thy Glory.

We beseech Thee, that Thou would manifest thy Goodness and thy Power
throughout the World. Let the Doctrine and Truth which are according to
Godliness, prevail every Day more and more against the Spirit of Error and
Profaneness. Let those that enjoy the Light of the Glorious Gospel, walk as
Children of Light, and show forth the Virtues and Praises of Him, who has
called them out of Darkness into his marvelous Light. Preserve thy little
Flock, and deliver the afflicted Churches of Christ out of all their Troubles.
Weaken the Power, and disappoint the Devices of their Enemies, and let all
those that love thy Name be joyful in Thee.

Have mercy upon this Land of our Nativity, and for thy own Name sake, take
away from amongst us all that is displeasing unto Thee, and which provokes the
Eyes of thy Majesty; and so thoroughly purge us from our Impurities and
Abominations, that we may be an acceptable People in thy Sight, and that Thou
may vouch safe thy Presence and Blessing to us and our Posterity We entreat
Thee also to be Merciful to all the Nations of the Earth that are without
Christ. Hasten, O LORD, that Glorious Time, when the Man of Sin shall be
consumed with the Spirit of thy Mouth, and destroyed with the Brightness of the
Coming; when all Antichristian Powers shall cease, when Jews and Gentiles, and
all other Infidels shall believe in the Lord Jesus, and when Universal
Righteousness and Peace shall flourish in the World; which we beseech Thee to
accomplish in thy due Time.

Be pleased, in thy abundant Mercy and Goodness, to show Favor to all the Sons
and Daughters of Affliction. Visit the Sick, strengthen the Weak, pity those
that languish, and remember them in their low Estate. Instruct the Ignorant,
Enlighten those that are in Darkness, Convince and Humble those that are Secure
and Presumptuous, Confirm those that are Converted, Assist those that are
Tempted, and Comfort those that are Distressed, and let those that are Heavy
laden find Rest unto their Souls.

And Now, O Heavenly Father, we recommend our Souls and Bodies unto thy
Fatherly Care and Keeping this Night. We cannot be safe but in thy Hands; do
Thou therefore preserve us; and watch over us, and after Thou have refreshed us
with convenient Sleep and Rest, bring us to the Light of another Day, and then
lift up the Light of thy Countenance upon us, and cause us to hear thy Loving
Kindness in the Morning, for in Thee do we trust. O LORD, Hear; O LORD,
Forgive; O LORD, Hearken, and Do abundantly for us, above all that we can ask
or think. Answer us, and Accept us in the Beloved, thy Dear Son, Jesus Christ;
to Whom, with the Father and the Holy Spirit, be all Praise, and Love, and
Obedience, this Night and for Evermore.

Another Prayer at Night.
ETernal and Ever-blessed Lord GOD! Be pleased to look down upon thy Poor and
unworthy Servants who are here before Thee, and desire to implore thy Favor
and Mercy toward them We are weak and Sinful Creatures, and have no ability to
relieve our selves; so that unless thou shall be pleased to show thy self
gracious to us, and to help and succor us with thine Almighty Arm, we shall
sink and perish under the Load of our Sins. Wherefore, O most Merciful LORD,
Extend thy Compassion toward us, and Pity thy Servants who are in this dark
and sinful World, full of Baits and Snares, where Temptations are pressing hard
upon us, and are apt to draw away our Hearts from Thee. 'Till we shall be
admitted to see Thee in the Glorious Mansions above, let a steadfast Faith be
our Guide and Security; and let thy Holy Spirit so direct us, that we may be
kept faithful to Thee. Let not any of the good Things of this Life entice us to
Sin and Vanity: Let us remember, that there is no Goodness in any Thing but
what is derived from Thee: And if there be any Refreshment in these remoter
Streams, what are those pure and perfect Pleasures which are to be found in
Thee the Fountain? Yea, let all the Evils and Afflictions we meet with, work
together for our Good, and cause us to love Thee more, and the World less; and
to long with greater Vehemence after that Rest which remains for the People of
God. Above all, affect our Hearts with the Discoveries of thy Goodness, which
shines forth in the Face of Jesus Christ; who is the Brightness of thy Glory,
and the Express Image of thy Person, in Whom Thou have visibly represented thy
Love to Mankind. Let Him ever be Dear and Precious to us, as He is to all true
Believers. Let his gracious Designs be accomplished upon us, that we may be of
that Blessed Number, who though they have not seen Him, yet believe in Him, and
rejoice with Joy unspeakable and full of Glory. LORD, strengthen our Belief of
his Great and Precious Promises, let them be our Meditation Day and Night; that
we may be constantly remembering what is that Great Goodness, which Thou have
laid up for them that fear Thee; that we may ardently breathe after that
Blessed Time when we shall see Thee, not darkly through a Glass, but even Face to
Face; when all the Treasures of never-failing Goodness shall be disclosed to
thy Servants. And That we may obtain those Great Things which Christ has
promised, make us careful to do what he has commanded. Let it be our main and
principal Study to please Thee. Help us to be wise for Eternity, and to mind
the One Thing Necessary, which cannot be taken from us. Let us feel the Power
of Sin decaying in us daily, and let our Increase in all the Graces of thy Holy
Spirit, be manifest in our Hearts and Lives. Teach us to walk circumspectly,
not as fools, but as wise; redeeming the Time, because the Days are Evil. Make
us always watchful against Sin, and all Temptations to it; and especially give
us Power and Strength against those Temptations which we are most liable to.
Make us thankful for all thy Mercies, and humble under all Afflictions that
thou do exercise us with. Pardon our past Miscarriages, make us sorrowful for
our present Failings, and keep us from Offending Thee for the future. Hear us,
we beseech Thee, O Thou God of Mercy, and make us upright and sincere in these
our Prayers and Supplications: Yea, make our Desires still more and more
earnest after those Things which we have been Praying for; and then do thou
graciously fulfill them. Thou that satisfiest the Desires of every living Thing,
who hear and feedest the very Ravens when they cry, will Thou not satisfy
the longing Soul, and fill the Soul with Goodness, the Soul which longs after
nothing but thy Blessed Self? We hope, O LORD, that the Desires which we feel
in our Hearts toward Thee, are of thy own Working. Do Thou be well pleased
with them, and accept of them, and answer them. O LORD, Empty our Hearts of
every Thing that shuts Thee our thence, and dwell in our Souls by thy Holy
Spirit, 'till at length Thou shall advance us to dwell with thy Self in the
State of perfect Joy and Happiness which shall continue for ever.

Be merciful, we beseech thee to all Mankind, and let the saving Knowledge of
the Gospel be propagated throughout the whole World. Show pity to these Nations
and Kingdoms to which we belong, and root out from amongst us whatsoever is
scandalous and profane; and raise up such happy Instruments in the midst of us,
as may effectually advance thy Glory. Bless our Sovereign whom Thou have set
over us; Possess his Heart with an entire Love to Thee, and sincere Intentions
to glorify Thee, by advancing thy Name and Honor amongst us, and by studying
the Welfare and Happiness of those whom Thou have by Extraordinary Providence
committed to his Charge: O LORD, Be gracious unto thy Servants, who are now
before Thee, and who come to beg the Pardon of their Sins, which they have been
guilty of this Day. Forgive, we beseech Thee, the Vanity of our Thoughts, the
Rashness and Unprofitableness of our Words, and what has been amiss in our
Actions. Lord, Enable us to be more and more watchful over our Ways, give us a
Command over our sinful Inclinations, and give us a perfect Hatred of all that
is displeasing to Thee, and an Impartial Love to Thee and thy Ways. Be pleased
to preserve us this Night from all Sin and Danger, and from the Malice of the
Spirits of Darkness. Watch over us whether we steep or wake. Le^ thy Angels
encamp round about us to defend and protect us. Be Thou first and last in all
our Thoughts; Continually be with us and assist us. Preserve our Bodies, and
Pardon the Sins of our Souls; and Sanctify us throughout, in Body, Soul and
Spirit. Enable us by thy Grate to live Soberly, Righteously and Godlily in this
present Evil World; and when thou shall be pleased to call us hence, receive
our Souls into thy Hands, O Holy and Ever-blessed Father, for the alone Merits
of thy Son Christ Jesus, in Whom Thou art well-pleased, and in Whom alone we
desire to be found; through whose precious Blood we hope to be made Partakers
of thy Favor and Mercy; for whom we desire Eternally to bless Thee, and in
whose Name and Words we further implore thy Favor.

Our Father, etc.

A Private Prayer, to be used in the Morning.
O GOD, most Blessed for Ever, from Whom I receive whatever I have or enjoy. I
come I come before Thee at this Time to make some poor Expression of the Sense
I have of thy Infinite Bounty to me. For it is fit I should acknowledge and
praise Thee, though I cannot thereby add any Thing unto Thee. Accept then, I
beseech Thee, this Morning-Sacrifice of Praise and Thanksgiving, which I Offer
to thy Divine Majesty. I thank Thee, O LORD of Heaven and Earth, that thou do
continually load me with (...) Benefits, They are great, and many more than
(...) and reckon up before Thee; More (...) Admire and Extol thy Love in Christ
(...) have encouraged me through Him to come unto Thee, with Hopes of thy
Gracious Acceptance. I desire to have such a Lively Sense of this thy wonderful
Love, that I may be constrained to love Thee, to obey Thee, and wholly to
depend upon Thee. Since Thou have not spared thy own Son, but delivered Him up
for me, how shall Thou not with Him freely give me all Things? Give me, I
Entreat Thee, the Greatest of Blessings, thy Holy Spirit, the Author of all
Grace; by his Aid and Assistance let me perform all the Duties which Thou
requirest of me, and shun all the Sins which Thou have forbidden. Enable me, by
Strength derived from Him, to keep my Self unspotted from the World; and to
cleave unto Thee in Righteousness, Purity, Humility and Charity, and all other
Divine Virtues, of which our Lord has given us an Example. For his sake I hope
for thy favorable Acceptance of these my Prayers; and I wait upon the same
Goodness for thy Blessing to accompany me this Day, that I may do nothing but
what is pleasing to Thee, and that I may be so prosper'd, protected and
assisted by thine Almighty Power, that I may return with my Heart full of
Thankfulness to Thee in the Evening, again to Praise and Magnify thy continued
Kindness to me. Unto which I commend most Heartily the rest of Mankind,
desiring that they may all know Thee the True God, and Jesus Christ whom Thou
have sent. More particularly be Gracious to the People of this Land, Bless them
in turning all of them from their Iniquities. Enable them so to disch^ their
several Duties, according (...) wherein Thou have set them, the (...) may rest
upon them, and that (...) ^ity may have abundant Cause to Praise and Extol thy
Name, through the Infinite Love of Christ Jesus our Savior, to whom with thy
Self and the Holy Spirit of Grace, be ascribed Everlasting Honor and Glory.
Amen.

Another Private Prayer for the Morning.
O Most Blessed and Glorious Majesty of Heaven and Earth! I come before Thee at
this time, to acknowledge thy Infinite Goodness in preserving me this Night
past, and in conferring Innumerable Mercies upon me through the whole Course of
my Life. I desire also to acknowledge, how unworthy I am of all thy Mercies and
Favors. I am a Vile and Sinful Wretch, whose very Nature is stained and
polluted, and has in it an inbred Proneness to all Evil, and a Backwardness to
all Good. But besides the Pollution and Corruption of my Nature, I acknowledge
my self guilty of many Actual Sins and Transgressions, Sins of Omission, and
Sins of Commission; Sins in Thought, Word and Deed; open and secret Sins. Here
confess your Particular Sins.
Thou who searchest the Hearts, and triest the Reins, know that I am much
more guilty than I can express before Thee. Wherefore, O LORD, I desire to be
sensible of thy wonderful Patience and Long-suffering toward me; and I
earnestly beseech Thee that this thy Goodness may lead me to Re^ (...) me be
ashamed when I look (...) Offenses and Miscarriages (...) me still more and
more to reflect upon them with Sorrow and Grief of Mind, with a perfect Hatred
of them, and with a steadfast purpose never to be guilty in the like kind again.
O that nothing may be so bitter to me, as to think that I have offended Thee! O
that Nothing may be so mavelous in my Eyes as thy Exceeding abundant Love in
the Lord Jesus, by whom Thou have encouraged Sinners to place their Faith and
Hope in Thee.

Be Merciful then unto me, O LORD, according to thy Loving Kindness; according
to the Multitude of thy tender Mercies, blot out my Transgressions. O be
Merciful to me for Christ Jesus sake, who came into the World, and died to save
Sinners. O LORD, make me see my want of a Savior, and the absolute Necessity
of having an Atonement made for me by his Blood, Let me be convinced that
there is no Name given among Men, whereby they can possibly be saved, but the
Name of Jesus Christ the Son of thy Love, in Whom Thou art well pleased. O
Convince me thoroughly of the Excellency and Worth of this Blessed Redeemer,
that He may be precious in my Eyes, and that I may Heartily embrace and love
Him, and steadfastly cleave unto Him, and choose Him as the only Portion of my
Soul. Let the Sense of His Infinite Love, discovered in His Glorious
Undertakings for me, Produce in me an utter Abhorrence of all my Evil Ways, and
firm Resolutions of devoting my self to his Service and Glory. And Grant, O
Blessed LORD, that the Sense of my former Negli^ (...) ^bedience, may make me
m^ (...) ^n the discharge of my l^ (...) Let me walk always (...) speak, and
act, as in thy Presence. And do Thou possess me with such an Entire Affection
to all thy Commandments, that none of them may be grievous to me, but that I
may Count thy Yoke to be easy, and thy Burden light. Support me, O LORD, under
all Discouragements; Advise me in all Difficulties, Comfort me in all my
Sadnesses, and Strengthen me in all my Infirmities. Without thy Gracious Help,
and Powerful Assistance, I can do nothing: Therefore I look up unto Thee for
Power, to enable me to live and act, according to what Thou requirest of me;
that I may do all Things through Christ who strengthens me, and through the
Holy Spirit who assisteth me. Thou art my Hope and my Confidence, my
Satisfaction and my Peace; therefore never leave me nor forsake me, but Conduct
me safely by thy Counsel, through all the Temptations and Troubles of this
Life, to that Blessed Place where the Lord Jesus is now seated in Glory.

Preserve me this Day by thy Good Providence from all Sin and Danger; and let
thy Good Angels watch over me, to keep and defend me. Let me ever study to
approve my self acceptable to Thee in all the Actions of a Sober, Righteous and
Godly Life; that I may live to the Praise of the Glory of thy Grace in Christ
Jesus, walking worthy of Thee, and behaving my self in all Things as becomes
him who has received such Tokens of Love already, and who looks for thy
Mercy into Eternal Life. Hear me O LORD, and ^nswer me, for the All sufficient
Merits of thy (...) Christ Jesus, to Whom be ascribed all Ho^ (...) Glory, this
Day and for Ever. Amen.

A Private Prayer, to be used in the Evening, or at Night.
O Blessed GOD! All Honor and Glory be given unto Thee for thy merciful
Protectin^ ^me this Day past. Thou continually pourest thy Blessings upon me,
and therefore I desire to pay unto Thee the continual Tribute of Praise and
Thanks, together with the Hearty Oblation of my Soul and Body, which I here
Dedicate to Thee and thy Service. Let me express my Thankfulness by a Humble
and Holy Walking before Thee all the Days of my Life. Do Thou vouchsafe me the
Assistance of thy Holy Spirit, to Enable me to live and act according to the
many Obligations which Thou have laid upon me, and according to my former
Purposes and Resolutions. I can do no good of my self, I have no strength to
resist the Evil Spirit and his Temptations. All my Sufficiency is from Thee. Be
Thou therefore pleased to help and assist me, to direct and govern me, and so
effectually to enable me to order my Conversation aright, that I may at last
see the Salvation of God. Pardon, O Gracious Father, all my past Offenses, Deal
not with me according to my Sins, neither reward me after mine Iniquities; but
in the multitude of thy Tender Mercies blot out all my Transgressions, and be
reconciled to me for the Merits of thy Son our Savior.

I Commit my self this Night to thy Go^ Providence, which has preserved me i^
(...) this Day. I fly unto thy Almighty (...) beseeching Thee to watch over me,
(...) me from all Danger whatsoever, a^ (...) quiet Sleep and Rest. And O that
thou would prepare me for my last Sleep, even the Sleep of Death; let me O
LORD, be fitted for it by constant meditating on it, by Mortification and
Self-denial, and circumspect walking; by a lively Faith in Christ Jesus my
Savior and Redeemer, who conquered Death and the Grave; and finally, by
looking beyond Death, even unto the Mansions of Eternal Life and Glory, which
thou have prepared for all those who faithfully serve Thee Here on Earth.
Hearken, O Gracious LORD, to these my Supplications and Prayers, for His sake
alone in Whom Thou art well-pleased, and in whose most prevailing Name and
Words, I desire yet further to call upon Thee,

Our Father, which art, etc.

Another Private Prayer to be used at Night.
BLessing, and Glory, and Praise, be given unto Thee, O most Merciful Father,
for thy Exceeding great Kindness to me this Day past, that I am alive to praise
Thee, that I enjoy any Measure of Health, and of the good things of this Life,
and that I have been preserved this Day from those many Evils and Dangers which
my Sins have deserved, I desire with Thankfulness to recount thy constant Care
and Providence over me ever since I was born. Innumerable Mercies have Thou
bestowed upon me from the beginning of m^t^e to this present. Here reckoning
the Particular Mercies of your Life.
But the Spiritual Blessings which (...) have in great Abundance bestowed upon
me, are more especially to be mentioned by me. For ever Blessed be thy Name for
Christ Jesus, our only Savior and Redeemer, that thou have by Him offered unto
me Grace and Life, and Eternal Glory; that the Day of thy Grace is still
prolonged to me, and that Thou give me leave at this Time to call upon Thee.
Blessed be thy Name for thy preventing and thy assisting Grace; and that Thou
have hindered me from committing the Evil which I would have done, and that thou
have excited me to do the Good which I was averse to. Every way Thou have been
Gracious unto me, notwithstanding my great Undeservings and high Provocations.
O my Soul, never forget the Loving Kindness of the Lord; let his Name be daily
praised with a joyful Heart. Unto Thee I ought to live, and not unto my self. O
that I may glorify Thee both with my Body and with my Spirit, which are Thine.
Let my whole Life speak thy Praises, let my Conversation declare thy Goodness
toward me. And accordingly do Thou assist me always with the renewed
Influences of thy Heavenly Grace, that I may order my Conversation aright, that
Religion may be the great Business and Study of my Life; that it may be my
greatest Pleasure and Satisfaction to please Thee in all Things. Teach me to
know my Duty aright, and heartily to love it, and to give all Diligence to
perform it. Dispose my Heart to cast all its Care on Thee, to Pray without
ceasing, to bless thy Holy Name at all Times, to trust in Thee always with a
steadfast Confidence in thy Power, Wisdom and Goodness; to make Thee my Strength
and my Fortress, and the Rock^ my Salvation. Enable me to maintain a constant
sense of thy Divine Presence wherever I am. Cause me to reverence thy Holy Name
and Word, and to walk before Thee in all Humility, Purity, Patience,
Heavenly-mindedness. Help me likewise to exercise all Justice, Charity,
Meekness and Forgiveness toward all Men; and to live in a sober and moderate
Use of all the good Things of this World. Let a fear of thy Judgments, and a
Love of thy Holy Laws, excite me to do thy Will; and let the Hope of Eternal
Bliss strengthen and encourage me in all the Troubles and Hardships of this
Life; that persevering in Well-doing, I may finish my Course with Joy, and
inherit the Crown of Righteousness which Thou have promised to those that fear
Thee.

And now, O LORD, Cause me to reflect with Shame and Sorrow upon whatever I
have done amiss this Day, or through my whole Life: Let me heartily bewail my
Offenses, which have been committed against thy Divine Majesty, and do Thou
give me a Hearty Repentance for them. Let nothing be so afflictive to me, as
the remembrance that I have at any time sinned against Thee, and broken thy
Sacred and Righteous Laws. Enter not into Judgment with thy Servant, for if
Thou, LORD, should mark Iniquities, who shall stand? But there is Forgiveness
with Thee, that Thou may be feared and served. Thou art Good, and ready to
Forgive, and Plenteous in Mercy unto all them that call upon Thee. Give Far
therefore unto my Prayer, and for thy Names take pardon mine Iniquities, for
they are great. Grant me thy Grace that I may leave all my (...) and (...)
being reconciled unto Thee, through the Mediation of thy Son Christ Jesus, I may
obtain Eternal Life and Happiness in the Highest Heavens. Finally, O Gracious
Father, I beg thy Mercy toward me this Night; vouchsafe me comfortable Sleep
and Rest; and if it be thy Blessed Will, raise me up in Health and Strength the
next Morning, that I may be enabled to serve Thee cheerfully in the Duties
which Thou requirest of me. Grant this, O Blessed LORD, for the sake of thy Son
Christ Jesus, my Dear Savior and Redeemer, to Whom with thy Self and the Holy
Spirit, be given of me, and all thy Servants, Praise, Honor and Obedience, Now
and Evermore.

Prayers on Extraordinary Occasions.
A Prayer in Time of Public Calamity, especially of War or Invasion.
LOok down, O LORD, with an Eye of Mercy on this poor Distressed Land of our
Nativity; make us sensible of the Judgments which are now amongst us; let us
see that thy Hand is still stretched our against us. But especially, let us be
deeply sensible of our Sins, our great and crying Sins, which are the Procurers
of all our Troubles and Calamities. Cause us to feel the (...) of our
Iniquities and to groan under that; (...) Affliction and Distress will not be
so (...) us. First, Let us desire to have our (...) ^w^d, and the Loves
reformed, and our (...) away; and then let us prevail with (...) the removing
of thy Judgments. Let us learn Righteousness by all thy Dealings toward us,
and let us be put in Mind of those manifold Provocations which we are guilty
of, and which have pulled down these Evils upon our Heads. Let us now search
and try our Hearts, and turn unto Thee by Unfeigned Repentance. Show us that it
is an Evil and Bitter Thing to rebel against Thee, and to break thy Holy Laws,
and to walk contrary to what Thou have commanded us, and to offend so Merciful
and Gracious a God as Thou have been to us. Now make us truly apprehensive, we
Humbly entreat Thee, of our Forgetfulness of Thee, of our Unthankfulness for
thy Mercies, and of our Unfruitfulness under all the Means of Grace. We have
not attended to thy Word, now Enable us to hearken to the Voice of thy Rod, and
to learn our Duty by the Calamities which are abroad in our Land. Teach us to
renounce all our Evil Ways, and to give up our selves wholly to Thee. And do
Thou, O LORD, make bare thine own Arm, and appear for us against those who
design Mischief to thy Sion. Stir up thy Strength, and come and save us.
Destroy, bring to naught, and confound all the Devices that are against thy
Church. Let no Force or Might, let no Fraud or Policy, prevail against thy
Servants, who sincerely design the promoting of thy Glory, and the Welfare of
thy Chosen amongst us. We are not able of our selves, to resist and withstand
either the Malice or Cruelty of Satan's Instruments; we shall fall under our
Enemies Feet unless Thou hold us up, unless Thou vouchsafest to assist and
defend us, to protect and deliver us. For thy own Name's sake, for thy Glory's
sake, show Favor unto us, for the sake of Human whom Thou art well-pleased,
Extend thy Kindness to us in this Day of our Distress. Crown those with success
who maintain thy Cause, and every ways Bless and Prosper the Enterprises of
those who are Faithful. Hear the Supplications of thy Servants, who call upon
Thee in this Time of Danger; give a Gracious Answer to their Petitions, and
frustrate not the Desires and Prayers of those who truly fear Thee. Enable us
to put our whole Trust and Confidence in Thee, and not to rest on the Arm of
Flesh. We desire to rely on thy Good Providence, and leave the Issue of all
things to thy Disposal. Thou art God Omnipotent, and nothing is too difficult
for Thee. If Thou please to speak the Word, we shall be a settled, and we
shall be a Happy Nation. Thou art able to defeat the Counsels and Contrivances
of the most Politic Achitophel's: Thou can even by weak means bring to pass
what thou have determined. We therefore cast our Care upon thee, we submit
wholly to thy Good Will and Pleasure. Do with us and this Nation as Thou
think fit, manifest thy own Glory which way Thou please, and in what
manner it seems best unto Thee. If Thou shall exercise us with Sufferings
Grant, O LORD, that we may be enabled to bear them with Patience and
Contentment: Let us live by Faith in the worst and most perilous Times. Take
away from us all inordinate Fear and Dread; teach us to rest upon thy Wisdom,
Power and Goodness, whatever befalls us or our Church. Help us to do our
Duty, and to discharge a good Conscience, and then let us be sati^fied with thy
Dealings toward us, of what nature soever they are LORD, fit us for Heaven by
all the Troubles we meet with upon Earth. LORD, Prepare us for the Mansions of
Glory by the unsettledness of our Condition here. O that we may breathe and
long after that Everlasting Rest, where we shall be freed from all
Disappointments and Crosses, all Sorrow and Calamity, and where alone we shall
enjoy an undisturbed Peace and Quiet. And this we beg for the sake of Christ
Jesus, our only Redeemer and Savior. Amen.

Another Prayer in Time of Public Danger and Calamity.
ALmighty and Eternal GOD! Thou who art a present Help in time of Trouble; Thou
who art styled a God hearing Prayer; Thou who art the Rock of Ages, and the
sure Refuge of all that put their Trust in Thee; Vouchsafe to look down upon us
of this Nation with a favorable and merciful Eye. O LORD, give us Help from
Trouble, for vain is the Help of Man. Let the Cries and Supplications of thy
Servants, who are calling upon Thee in this Day of Jacob's Trouble, be
Graciously heard by Thee. Thou would have spared Sodom, if Ten Righteous Men
had been found in it. LORD, we hope there is a greater Number in this Land, who
are counted Righteous in thy Sight, and who sigh and lament for the Sins of the
Inhabitants thereof. Will Thou not give Ear to the Prayer and Petitions of
these thy Servants, and abate thine Anger and Displeasure toward us, and
remember thy wonted Mercies to this Nation? O Thou Hope of Israel, the Savior
thereof in Time of Trouble, why should Thou be as a Stranger in the Land, and
as a wayfaring Man that turns aside to tarry for a Night? Why should Thou
be as one that cannot save? Yet Thou, O LORD, art in the midst of us, and we
are called by thy Name; leave us not.

It is true, O LORD, we have been a Stubborn and Rebellious People, a People
that set not their Heart aright, and whose Spirit is not steadfast with Thee.
There is none among us but have dealt wickedly; and among the faithful there is
none that has not done amiss, yea, and highly provoked Thee. And therefore
Thou may justly send thy Plagues and Judgments among us: Thou may
deservedly punish us yet seven times more for our Iniquities. We are a sinful
and Profane People, and therefore it is just with Thee to make us a miserable
People. We have transgressed against Greater Light, and more Abundant Mercy,
than other Nations; and therefore we may expect to be punished more than
others. Thou have been pleased heretofore, at sundry Times to inflict several
kinds of Judgments upon us, yet have we not returned unto Thee our God. And
therefore this present-Calamity that we now groan under, is the deserved
Recompense of our hardening our selves in our Sins. But, O LORD, though our
repeated Iniquities testify against us, and our Backslidings are multiplied,
yet do Thou be Merciful unto us for Thine own Name's sake, and let thy Glory be
advanced not by ruining, but by reclaiming a stubborn People. Let there be a
Remnant still preserved to glorify thy Name; spare thy Chosen People O LORD,
and give not thine Heritage to reproach. Arise, O GOD, for the sighing of the
Poor and Needy; let not the Men of the Earth always oppress them. LORD,
Continue thy Loving Kindness to those that know Thee, and thy Righteousness to
Men of upright Heart. Be Good unto those who truly fear and serve Thee, and
increase their Numbers more and more. Let the Congregation of thy faithful
People be comforted, and upheld in the midst of all Troubles and Calamities.
Let thy little Flock be preserved in the midst of Wolves. Let not the Foot of
Pride, nor the Hand of Violence come against them. Confound all those who
contrive Evil against them, and strike through the Loins of those that rise up
against them.

Thou that have the Hearts of Kings and Rulers in thy Hand, and can turn and
dispose them as Thou please, make them willing to submit to thy Scepter, give
them Zeal for thy Name and Glory, and make use of them (if it seem good unto
Thee) to promote the Good of thy Church. Bless Him in a special manner, whom
Thou have set in Authority over us; and together with Him raise up such happy
Instruments among us, as may effectually advance thy Honor in these Kingdoms,
by a General Reformation, and a powerful restraining of those Bold Sinners, who
have provoked Thee to visit us with severe Judgments, and to threaten us with
greater. Set up thy Kingdom, O LORD, in the midst of us, and reign among us by
the Spirit of Holiness and Righteousness, every where prevailing in the Hearts
and Lives of the Inhabitants of this Land. Give us Grace, we entreat Thee, to
have recourse unto Thee in all our Difficulties and Streights, and wholly to
trust in Thee, and rely upon Thee For Thou shall keep them, O LORD, in perfect
Peace whose Minds are stayed on Thee. And Grant, O Merciful GOD, that thy
Judgments which we at present feel, may awaken every one of us out of our
Security, and cause us to search and try our Ways, and to turn unto Thee, by a
Timely Repentance and Amendment of Life. O fit and prepare us for Mercy, and
then bestow it upon us. Make us a Penitent, a Religious, and a Holy People; and
then make us a Happy and a Prosperous People. Grant this, O LORD, for thy Son
Christ Jesus's sake, our most Blessed Lord and Savior. Amen.

A Thanksgiving and Prayer for Deliverance from Public Calamities; especially
for God's Delivering his Church in Time of Danger.
MOst Gracious Lord GOD! We desire to call to Mind the signal Mercy which Thou
have vouchsafed unto us; and we beseech Thee raise up our Hearts to a Thankful
Resentment and Acknowledgment of this thy wonderful Goodness to us. We were in
Danger, Extreme Danger, and we cried unto Thee; and Lo! Thou heardest the Voice
of our Supplication. Blessed be thy Glorious Name, that Thou have not delivered
us over as a Prey unto our implacable Adversaries, that Thou have once more
appeared in so singular a manner, for this Land of our Nativity. Whereas we
deserved to be utterly consumed and destroyed by those who rose up against us,
Thou were pleased to defeat their Rage and Violence, to diminish their Forces,
and to make them unable to accomplish their Wicked and Cruel Designs. If it had
not been the Lord, who was on our side, we may now truly say, if it had not
been the Lord who was on our side, when Men rose up against us, when they had
swallowed us up quick, when their Fury was kindled against us. Blessed be the
Lord, who has not given us as a Prey to their Teeth. Our Soul is escaped, as a
Bird out of the Snare of the Fowlers; the Snare is broken, and we are escaped.
Our Help is in the Name of the Lord, who made Heaven and Earth. Wherefore unto
Thee, O LORD, we return Thanks; and we praise and magnify thy Glorious Name,
earnestly Beseeching Thee to make us so thoroughly sensible of this great and
Wonderful Mercy conferred upon us, that we may not relapse into our former Sins
and Miscarriages, which justly provoked thy Anger against us. Seeing, O LORD,
after all the Evil Deeds and great Trespasses of the Inhabitants of this Land,
Thou have punished us less than our Iniquities deserve, and have given us such
Deliverance as this, should we again break thy Commandment, and continue in our
former Abominations, would Thou not be angry with us till Thou have consumed
us, so that there should be no Remnant nor Escaping? Do Thou then, O LORD, so
affect the Hearts of all the People of this Nation with thy late Dealing
toward them, that they may never, by their Unthankfulness for the future
provoke Thee to inflict greater Judgments upon them than we have yet felt. Let
thy exceeding great Goodness to us effectually lead us to Repentance, and an
utter renouncing of all our former Evil Ways, and a giving up our selves to thy
Service.

Divert thy Judgments from us for the future, we most Humbly beg of Thee.
Prevent, Disappoint and Frustrate the malicious Contrivances of our Enemies
both at Home and Abroad, both at Sea and Land. Put a Hook into the Nostrils of
these Leviathans, suffer them not to make use of their Power and Strength
against thy Church. Defeat all their Enterprises, and let it be seen and known,
to the Glory of thy Name, that wherein they deal proudly, Thou art Above Them;
and that Thou will not forsake thy People, who call upon Thee in the Time of
Jacob's Trouble; but that Thou art a God hearing Prayer, and that Thou will
deliver the Poor and Distressed, when they cry unto Thee in their Extremities.
We confess, O LORD, we are not worthy to be heard in these our Petitions, for
we have done wickedly, and have rebelled against Thee. O LORD, Righteousness
belongs unto Thee, but unto us Confusion of Face. But unto the Lord our God
belong Mercies and Forgivnesses, though we have rebelled against Him. O LORD,
according to all thy Righteousness, we beseech Thee, let thy Anger and
Displeasure be turned away from us. O our GOD, Hear the Prayer of thy Servants,
and their Supplications, and cause thy Face to shine upon us, for the Lord's
sake. O our GOD, Incline thine Ear, and Hear; Open thine Eyes, and Behold our
Condition. O LORD forgive, O LORD hearken and do; defer not for thy own sake, O
our God. We do not present our Supplications before Thee for our Righteousness,
but for thy great Mercies. Yea for the sake of thy Well-beloved Son, in Whom
Thou art well pleased, we beg Mercy and Deliverance. Vouchsafe, we beseech
Thee, to complete thy Designs of Mercy toward this Nation, and let us have
daily cause to magnify Thee for thy seasonable appearing for us in Times of
Danger. Unite us all together in the Bands of Love and Holiness; Heal all our
Breaches, Compose all our Differences, Purge away all our Dross and Filth, and
make us a People always zealous of Good Works, and desirous to promote thy
Glory and Honor, as well as our own Welfare and Happiness. Grant this, O
Gracious Father, for the Mediation and Intercession of our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ. Amen.

A Prayer for our Protestant Brethren, that are persecuted in Foreign Countries.
O Most Holy and Blessed Lord GOD! we desire to be made sensible of thy
singular Mercy and Goodness to us of these Kingdoms. Thou art pleased at
present to vouchsafe Peace and Tranquillity to us, whilst many of thy Servants
in Foreign Nations are under Persecution, and are barbarously treated by their
own Countrymen. O LORD, Arise and Maintain thine own Cause, and suffer not
those Unmerciful Men to prosper in their Cruelty. Rebuke the Rage and Fury of
thine and thy Churches Enemies; the Remainder of their Wrath do Thou restrain.
Let not Blood-thirsty Men make Havoc of thy Chosen People; deliver not the
Soul of thy Turtle-Dove unto the multitude of her Enemies. But if it be thy
blessed Will, put an End to them and their Cruelties; and let those that defend
thy Truth and Cause be mercifully protected and delivered by Thee. Or, 'till
Thou shall be pleased to grant them Deliverance, give them Faith and Patience
to bear thine Afflicting Hand; that they may do nothing unworthy of their
Profession, and of that Excellent Religion they have hitherto owned. Make us,
we beseech Thee, compassionate toward those who suffer for Righteousness sake;
and Thou, who art a God of Pity and Compassion, Rescue thy Servants from the
Hands of their Persecutors, and be a Rock of Defense, and a Place of Refuge to
them against their utmost Malice and Fury. And in thy good time, redeem Israel
out of all his Troubles; and let all that fear and love Thee, have abundant
Cause to extol and magnify thy Name, for the wonderful Tokens of thy Mercy and
Goodness to thy whole Church, and to thy Distressed Servants in particular; for
the sake of Christ Jesus, our Blessed Lord and Savior.

A Prayer in Time of Drought, or of Excessive Rain, or any other Unseasonable
Weather.
O Blessed Lord GOD, be pleased to be Gracious unto us of this Land, with
respect to the present Season. Let not the Fruits of the Earth be destroyed for
our sake, though we are an unthankful and an unfruitful People. In the midst of
Judgment vouchsafe to remember Mercy, and withdraw thine afflicting Hand from
us, and Grant us such seasonable Weather, that we may receive the Fruits of the
Ground in their due time, to thy Glory and Praise, and to our Comfort and
Refreshment. LORD, Teach us to see and to take Notice of thy Hand which is now
upon us, and to own it as the Punishment of our Sins. Humble us under thy Rod,
and show us the Evil of our ways, and by thy good Spirit enable us to repent,
and to amend our Lives; and 'till Thou shall think fit to put a stop to this
present Calamity, cause us patiently to submit to thy Good Pleasure and
Disposal. But if it be thy Blessed Will, do Thou hearken to the Cries and
Petitions of thy Servants who now call upon Thee in this Time of Distress; and
though Thou may justly turn a fruitful Land into Barrenness, for the
Wickedness of those that dwell therein, yet be pleased through thy abundant
Mercy, to remove the present Judgment from us. And enable us all so to improve
both thy Mercies and thy Judgments, that they may effectually teach us
Righteousness, and make us more Holy and Strict in the whole Course of our
Lives. This we Humbly beg for the Merits of Christ Jesus our Lord.

A Prayer in Time of any Raging Sickness and Great Mortality.
O Most merciful God, we presume to mention before Thee the Distressed
Condition of this Place wherein we live: Thou do justly stretch forth thy
Hand against several of the Inhabitants, and visi^est them with a dangerous
Distemper of Body. LORD, make every one of us sensible of this Afflicting
Providence, and let us examine our Hearts and Lives, and turn unto Thee our God
by unseigned Repentance. LORD, Sanctify this thy Hand unto us; and let us hear
the Rod, and who has appointed it; and let us learn to submit our selves to
thy Will and Pleasure. Thou can preserve thy Servants, even in the midst of
Danger; and Thou can remove the Danger it self. LORD, Deal with us as Thou
please, and show Mercy to us in what way seems best unto Thee. It is of thy
singular Goodness that we have hitherto been preserved, although surrounded with
Danger. Wherefore, let us Thankfully acknowledge thy Distinguishing Favor and
Kindness, and let our Thankfulness be expressed in our Lives and Conversations.
It is seem good unto thy Blessed Will, rebuke this Evil which rages amongst us,
and suffer it not to proceed any further; but be pleased to restore Health and
Joy unto our Dwellings. And by all thy Dealings and Dispensations toward us,
fit us for thy Heavenly Kingdom. Which we beseech Thee to grant, for the alone
Merits and Mediation of our Blessed Lord and Savior.

Prayers on other Occasions.
A Prayer for a Sick Person.
BLessed Lord GOD, in whose Hand is the Power of Life and Death, who bring
down to the Grave, and raisest up; we Humbly implore thy Mercy and Favor in
behalf of thy Servant, who is now visited with Sickness. Teach him so to number
his short Days, so to consider the Uncertainty of his Abode here that he may
effectually apply his Heart unto Wisdom. Enable him to reflect on his past
Life, and to survey all the Actions of it. Represent unto him all his former
Failings and Offenses, that he may seriously and heartily bewail them, before
he goes hence and be no more seen. Let him call to mind his Sins of Omission
and Commission, his secret and open Sins, his Sins against the First, and
against the Second Table; his Sins which were more immediately committed
against Thee, and those also which were directly committed against his Brethren
and Neighbors, and against himself. Let him remember how unworthily he has
walked, what Mercies he has neglected, what Judgments he has not taken Notice
of, what Resolutions and Promises he has broken, what precious Time he has
lost, and what Guilt he has contracted by all these Make him deeply sensible
of these his Miscarriages, and give him a hearty Sorrow, Contrition, Remorse
and Repentance for them. Let it grieve him at the Heart, that he has offended
so Merciful a God, so Kind a Benefactor, so Loving a Father. And let his Grief
and Remorse proceed from an inward Hatred of all Sins; Namely, because they are
contrary to thy Holy Nature, and are a Violation of thy Just and Righteous
Laws. Work in him a firm Purpose and Resolution, never to commit those Sins
again which he now stands guilty of; but to live more circumspectly for the
Time to come, both toward God and toward Men. Give him an Eye of Faith to
look up unto Jesus who suffered on the Cross, and shed his precious Blood to
reconcile lost Sinners unto God. Enable thy Servant to rely with a firm Faith
and Confidence, on the Merits of his Crucified Lord. Let him trust in these,
and these Alone for Justification and Salvation. Convince him that there is no
Name under Heaven, by which he can be saved, but the Name of the Lord Jesus.
Assist him therefore to depend entirely upon the Righteousness and Satisfaction
of this Blessed Redeemer, and renouncing all Righteousness and Worthiness of
his own, to confide wholly in the Meritorious Undertaking of this spotless Son
of God. And let this Faith discover it self to be a True, and Lively, and
Saving Faith, by its working by Love, by Obedience to thy Will, by all the
Fruits of Righteousness, by a Holy and Exemplary Conversation. More esepecially
grant, that thy Servant may at this Time give a Proof of the Sincerity of his
Faith, by submitting and resigning himself to thy Fatherly Correction. Give him
Grace to surrender himself to thy Will and Pleasure, whether it be in Life or
Death. Suffer him not to murmur and repine at thy afflicting Hand, but teach
him to embrace the Rod, patiently to yield to thy good Providence, and to say,
It is the Lord; let him do what seems him good. Cause thy Servant to look
back with Thankfulness, for all the Mercies and Blessings which Thou have from
time to time conser'd upon him. Let him call to mind all thy past Mercies, from
the beginning of his Life to this Moment. Spiritual and Temporal Mercies,
Mercies to his Soul and to his Body, he ought to recount with a Thankful Heart,
That Thou have lengthned out his Life thus far, that Thou have delivered him
out of many Dangers and Perils, that ^ou have not snatched him away in the
Commission of his Sins, that Thou have granted him Time and Space to repent in,
and that thou do at this present vouchsafe him Liberty and Opportunity to
call upon Thee, and beg Mercy and Pardon for his Sins; that his Distemper of
Body is such, that it does not bereave him of his Understanding and Senses; but
that he is able with a sound Mind and Affection to consider his Condition, and
to lay it to Heart, and to desire to partake of thy Fatherly Care and Love to
him; all this is the Fruit of thy singular Mercy and Goodness to him. Oh! Do
Thou deeply affect his Heart with this thy Kindness toward him, and cause him
with all Thankfulness to resent so wonderful a Favor. Sanctify, we entreat
Thee, this Sickness to him, that it may be his real Advantage and Welfare; that
though his Body, his Outward Man, be impaired; yet his Inward Man, the Virtues
and Graces of his Soul, may be increased and improved. And when this Affliction
is sanct^fied, be pleased to remove it, if it seems good unto Thee. To which
End give a Blessing and Success, to those, Means which are used, for the
restoring of him to his former Health; and give seasonable Sleep and Repose,
for the refreshing of Decayed Nature. There is nothing impossible with Thee;
Thou will but speak the Word, thy Servant shall be made whole again, If it be
thy Blessed Will, speak a Word of Recovery to thy poor Servant, raise him from
his Bed of Sickness, heal his Distemper, restore him to his Friends and
Relations, continue him in the Land of the Living, that he may ^e an Instrument
of thy Glory, and a Comfort and Solace to those who are more nearly concerned
in him. But it Thou have, O GOD, otherwise determined concerning thy Servant,
Fit and Prepare him for his Departure hence. Increase his Faith, Strengthen his
Patience, and Stand by him, and Assist him in his Hour of Trial. Let the Sting
of Death be pulled out, and then it cannot hurt him. Forgive therefore, Pardon
and Blot out all his Sins, let the Blood of Jesus w^sh away all his Stains and
Blemishes. Let him not be affrighted at the Approaches of Death, but enable him
to look beyond it, unto the Place of Glory, where the Lord Jesus is now seated.
Fix his Mind steadfastly on Christ ^is Savior, who has led the Way through the
Grave unto Heaven and Eternal Happiness, And as we recommend this thy sick
Servant to thy Infinite Compassion and Mercy, so we earnestly crave that Thou
would be Gracious unto us who are here praying before Thee. By this, and all
other Spectacles of Bodily Frailty and Weakness, put us in mind that we are
Hourly liable to the same. Help us to consider in this our Day, our Day of
Health and Strength, that our Breath is in our Nostrils, our Li^e is a Vapor,
we are subject to Innumerable Diseases and Distempers, and the least and
meanest of them is able to bring us (and that of a sudden) to the Dust of
Death. Let us remember, that Man at his best Estate is altogether Vanity. Our
Days are like a Shadow that dec^ine^^, and we wither like the Gr^ss. But Thou,
O LORD, Endurest for Ever, Thou art the ^^me, and thy Years shall have no End.
Enable us ^^^refore, to put our Trust in Thee, and to st^^y to please Thee,
whose Favor is better than Life, and whose Loving Kindness will put us into
^ossession of Eternal Life and Happiness. Hearken, O Gracious Father, to these
our Requests which we now put up unto Thee for our selves, and more especially
for thy Afflicted Servant, to whom we again entreat Thee to show Mercy and
Compassion, to forgive all his Iniquities, and to heal all his Diseases, to
redeem his Life from Destruction, and to crown him with Loving Kindness and
Tender Mercies. Grant this, O Heavenly Father, for the sake of thy well Beloved
Son Jesus Christ, to whom be given all Honor and Glory unto Everlasting Ages.
Amen.

A Prayer for a Person troubled in Mind.
MOST Merciful Father, Thou see thy Servant laboring under disordered
Thoughts, and a Troubled Mind; be pleased graciously to appease these
Disturbances, and not to suffer his Spirit to be oppressed under the Sense of
his own Unworthiness and Sinfulness. Let him eff^ctually know, that although he
be Unworthy and Sinful, yet Christ Jesus is worthy, and without all Sin. Enable
him therefore, to rely on the All* sufficient Merits of Christ, the Blessed
Savior and Redeemer. Let him call to Mind what our Lord said when he was here
on Earth, Come unto me, all ye that labor, and are heavy laden, and I will
give you rest. He calls such to come unto him, and thy Servant is of that
Number; he labors, and is heavy laden, under the Burden of thy Wrath and his
own Sins; Thou that call him to come unto Thee, give him Strength to come,
and then make good thy Promise, that he shall find Rest and E^se. A^^ain, our
Lord has declared, that He came not to call the Righteous, but Sinners to
Repentance. He came not to deliver and save those who are Righteous in their
own Opinion, but such as apprehend themselves to be Sinners, miserable Sinners,
lost and forlorn Sinners. Such a One is thy Servant, who desires to make his
Requests known unto Thee at this time. He confesses himself an undone Sinner,
he disowns all Righteousness and Worthiness in himself. Let him see therefore,
that Thou call him to Repentance, and to receive the Offers of Grace and
Pardon. Enable him to consider the Inf^^iteness of thy Mercy and Goodness in
Christ Jesus. Let him be convinced that Thou delightest not in the Death of
Sinners, but art desirous that they should repent and be saved. From all thy
Gracious Promises to Sinners, even to the worst of Sinners, let him be
persuaded of thy Willingness and Readiness to forgive him, and to be reconciled
to him. Remove all causeless Fears and Despondings from his Mind, take away all
Sadness and Dejection of Spirit. Keep him from rash Judging of himself and much
more from charging Thee foolish^ Let him not entertain hard Thoughts of The^
and thy Ways. Let him not suspect thy Gracious Acceptance of him, seeing Thou
art a God of Infinite Compassion and Mercy toward thy Servants. Be pleased
th^n to compose his broken and disturbed Thoughts, to quiet his disordered
Spirits, to quell the Riging and Tumults of his Sou^ (...) a joyful Sense of
thy Tender Mercies in Christ Jesus. Give him a sincere and ^earty Zeal to
discharge his Duty aright, to do the best that he is able, and then give him a
settled Persuasion that Thou requirest no more of him, and that ^hy Grace shall
be sufficient for him. Defend him, we beseech Thee, from the Assaults of Satan;
chain up that Roaring Lion, that he may not come near him; or do Thou so arm
thy Servant against his Temptations, that he may be more than Conqueror through
Christ Jesus; who came to destroy the Works of the Devil, and to bruise Satan
under our feet. Though Thou withdrawest the Light of thy Countenance from thy
Servant, and leav^st him in darkness, under dismal Thoughts and frightful
Apprehensions, yet cause him to understand that herein he is made like unto
Christ, who cried out upon the Cross, My God, my God, Why have Thou forsaken
me? Did our Blessed Lord cry our, that he was forsaken, and shall not thy
Servant be content to drink of the Cup (though a bitter Cup) which his Master
and Savior drank of? Let this Consideration yield Comfort and Relief to him.
And let him also bear the Indignation of the Lord, because he has rebelled
against him, because he has so often forsaken God, and therefore might justly
expect to be forsaken by him. But now at length vouchsafe to bring his Soul out
of Prison, and to speak Peace to his Conscience. Open thy self to the poor
disconsolate Soul, and let in Heavenly Joy into it. Bestow upon him a cheerful
and contented Spirit, let hi^ languishing Soul feel the most comfortable
Influence of the Holy Ghost. Dispel all his dark and confused Thoughts, and
dar^ into his Mind such a clear Light, that he may fully discern the Thoughts
of Mercy and Kindness which Thou have toward him, and that he may not for the
future distrust thy Goodness, or call in Question thy Loving Kindness. And
grant, we entreat Thee, that this sore Spiritual Trial which he has undergone,
may have this happy Effect upon him, to show him how Evil and Bitter a Thing it
is to offend Thee, and to wound his own Conscience. And do Thou likewise
convince him of the suffciency of thy Grace, and that Thou art able to hold him
up, and to support him in the midst of his greatest Weakness. Finally, Let him
have abundant Cause, for the future, to praise and magnify thy Name; and to
declare thy exceeding great Love to him, and to say, that It is good for him
that he was afflicted; it is good, that he fate in Darkness, and law no Light
for a season; it is good, that thy Favor, and the Light of thy Countenance,
were withdrawn from him for a time; it is good, that he was humbled and brought
low. All is good, that his Heavenly Father is pleased to inflict. Let
therefore, his Faith, and Humility, and Self-denial, and Patience, and Love to
Thee, be increased by this Dispensation of Thine toward him; and let the Issue
of all thy Dealings with him be the advancing of thy Glory, and the Good and
Welfare of thy Servant's Soul. All which we Humbly beg for the sake of our
Blessed Redeemer; who suffered that we might rejoice, and who dyed that we may
live. To Him with Thy Self, and the Holy Spirit of Grace and Comfort, be
ascribed of us, and of thy Afflicted Servant, all Honor, Glory and Praise, Now
and for Ever.

A Confession of Sins, to be used before we approach to the Lord's Table, or on
any other Solemn Occasion of Humbling our selves.
O Thou Great and Glorious Lord of Heaven and Earth! Enable us to lay our
selves in the Dust before Thee, in the most Humble and Lowest Manner; and to be
thoroughly sensible of our Unworthiness and Wretchedness. Convince us that we
are of the Rebellious Race of fallen Man, that as our Natures are stained with
Sin, even from our Birth, so our Lives are much more defiled with manifold
Transgressions. Assist us to reflect upon our Ways, and to ask our selves what
we have done. Let us be sensible how we have neglected our Duty to Thee, the
Great GOD, Father, Son and Holy Ghost; how we have not rendered that Love and
Honor, that Obedience and Submission which are due to Thee, our Sovereign, our
Creator, our Preserver, our Gracious Benefactor: How little our Hearts have
been moved, with all that Christ has done and suffered for us; and how often
we have resisted and grieved thy Holy Spirit, slighted and neglected the
Invitations of the Gospel, and have hearkened to the Temptations of Satan, and
done his Work, and have been drawn away from our Duty by the Allurements of the
World, and by our own Carnal Inclinations. We have lived by Sense more than by
Faith, and have minded the Things which concern this perishing Life, but have
disregarded the Welfare of our precious Souls. How seldom are our Minds
employed in the serious Consideration of thy Infinite Perfections, and of all
thy Works of Wonder and Love? Though we always live upon thy Providence, and
are maintained by thy Bounty, yet how frequently do we live as without Thee in
the World, without that due sense which we ought to have of thy continual
Presence with us, of thine Authority over us, and of thy Goodness to us? How
little do we feel in our Hearts of those Holy Affections, which all thy
Glorious Attributes and Perfections call for? We have not had that fervent Love
to Thee, that Delight in Thee, that Dependence upon Thee, which we cannot but
acknowledge to be most due to Thee the Great and Good God. Our Hearts have been
often enticed away from Thee by those very Comforts and Enjoyments, which Thou
have given us to draw us nearer to Thee. We have over-loved the Gift, and in
the mean time have been forgetful of Thee the Giver. Convince us, and make us
heartily sorry, that we have so often distrusted thy good Providence, not.
withstanding all the Experience we have had of it; that we have murmured and
repined at thy Afflicting Hand, and have impatiently born the Cross Thou
layd'st upon us. We have not been strict in our Observance of the Rules of
Righteousness, and doing to others as we would they should do to us. We have
been too easily provoked to Anger, and two often have vented it in bitter Words
and unseemly Actions. We have not had a due Compassion for those that are in
Misery, nor showed that Kindness to their Souls and Bodies which their
Conditions required. We have not grieved as we ought for the Sins of others,
nor endeavored to instruct and reclaim those that are out of the Way; yea, too
often have we hardened them in their Sins by our Evil Examples. O LORD, make us
sensible of the hainousness of our Transgressions how they have been committed
against great Knowledge and abundant Mercy; that we have persisted in them
notwithstanding all thy Threatenings and Judgments against Sinners. Thou have
assured us that Wrath and Vengeance will be the Portion of the Ungodly and
Imp^^^tent, and yet have we not been persuaded, by this Terror of the Lord, to
forsake our Evil Ways. We have been persuaded of thy Tender Mercies and Love to
Mankind, and of the Endless Bliss and Joy, which thy Dear Son has purchased
for true Believers, and yet this marvelous Grace and Love have had but little
effect upon us, nor have prevailed with us to give up our selves seriously to
Thee, and to be Religious in good earnest. How little diligence have we used
for the making sure of Eternal Life? How cold and slothful have we been in
those Works and Duties, which concern thy Glory and our own Salvation? as if is
deserved little or no Pains to obtain thy Favor, and to escape thy Wrath for
Ever. How eastly and frequently have we been drawn to dishonor Thee by willful
sinning against Thee? Yea, with Shame and Confusion of Face, we must
acknowledge, that notwithstanding thy Grace has striven with us, we have
rej^cted and opposed it. Our Consciences have checked and accused us, and yet
we have not hearkened unto them, We have confessed and acknowledged our sins
before Thee, and yet have proceeded to multiply our Transgressions and increase
our Guilt, and more and more to expose our selves to thy Wrath. We stand
amazed, that this Wrath has not been poured out upon us long since. It is of
thy Mercy alone that we are not consumed. To this Mercy and Grace do we fly for
Refuge. Nothing but Infinite Mercy can pardon and save us, and nothing but
Almighty Grace can make us fit for Pardon and Salvation. O GOD, Let us feel the
Power of this thy Grace working in us that True Contrition, that bitter Sorrow
and Humiliation which may bear some Proportion to the Hainousness of our Sins,
and which may be a Forerunner of Mercy and Comfort. LORD, Show us what we have
been doing, convince us of the Vileness of our Ways, that we may apprehend how
grievous a Thing it is to rebel against Thee, to reject the Offers of Grace, to
despise the Promises of Life and Salvation, merely for the Satisfaction of our
own Lusts, and in Compliance with the Temptations of Satan, the most malicious
Opposer of our own Happiness, as well as of thy Glory. O LORD, We are
confounded with the Sense of our most Vile Behavior, and we judge and condemn
our selves before Thee. We deserve to be cast out of thy Presence into utter
Darkness. Should Thou deal with us after this manner, we could not but
justify thy Proceedings, and acknowledge that our Destruction is of our
selves. But, O thou Father of Mercies, Thou Lover of Souls, look down from
Heaven in Mercy upon us, who are not worthy to lift up our Eyes or our Voice
toward that Place. We have nothing of our own that we dare plead before Thee.
All that we depend upon is thy Mercy and Freegrace, the Merits and Intercession
of thy Son Jesus Christ, and the Rich and Precious Promises of thy Gospel,
which in Him are Yea and Amen; most firm and certain, being sealed by that most
precious Blood, which he shed upon the Cross as an Atonement for the Sins of
the World. O let this Blood wash us thoroughly from our Iniquities, and cleanse
us from all our Sins. Thou have declared thy Self to be a God full of
Compassion, Gracious, Long suffering, and Plenteous in Goodness and Truth; Thou
have promised Mercy and Forgiveness to all those who unseignedly repent of
their Sins, and believe in thy Son Jesus Christ, and obey his Laws. Be it unto
thy Servants, O LORD, according to thy Word, on which Thou have caused us to
hope. We desire unfeignedly to repent of all our Iniquities, beseeching Thee to
increase our Repentance yet more and more. LORD, We believe; Help Thou our
Unbelief. We desire most entirely to resign up our selves to Thee, utterly
renouncing every evil Way; and resolving, through thy Grace, to be obedient
unto Thee in all Things. O let us have the continual Supplies of thy Holy
Spirit, that we may effectually do this, and that we may walk acceptably in thy
Sight. Hear us, O LORD, and answer us, and let these and all our Services be
acceptable and well pleasing to Thee, through our Great High Priest, the Lord
Jesus; who offered up himself for us. To Him with Thy Self, and the Holy Spirit
of Grace, be all Honor and Glory, Now and Ever. Amen.

A Prayer before the Receiving of the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper.
O Gracious GOD, who have in thy great Goodness prepared this Spiritual Feast
for me, make my Desires after it answerable to my Want of it. And though I have,
often broken my part of the Covenant, whereof this Sacrament is a Seal, yet do
Thou be Graciously pleased to forgive my past Miscarriages, and to receive me
into thy Favor, and to suffer me to approach thy Holy Table, and to partake of
the Benefits of this Sacred Ordinance, which is of this town (...) ^ointment.
Put thy La^ (...) ^o my Heart, and write them in my M^ and by the Power of thy
Grace dispose my Soul to such a sincere and constant cleaving unto Thee, that I
may never again revolt from Thee, LORD, Grant that in these Holy Mysteries I
may Commemorate and Receive Christ Jesus my Lord, and have a share in all the
Benefits of his Passion. To which End, O LORD, give me a deep Sense of all my
Sins and Unworthiness, that being weary and heavy laden. I may be capable of
Rest and Refreshment from Thee. Raise up my Thoughts and Affections, that they
may in some measure be suitable to the Great Work, which I am now to be engaged
in. Let me draw nigh unto Thee with Humility and Contrition, with Faith and
Repentance, with Love and Hearty Longings after Thee. Cloth me with thy
Wedding Garment, and make me, though of my self unworthy, by thy Mercy and Grace
an acceptable Guest at thy Table. Grant O Gracious Father, that in the Use of
this Holy Ordinance, I may have my Weaknesses repaired, my Corruptions subdued,
the Pardon of my Sins sealed, my Graces increased, and my Soul so inseparably
united to Thee, that no Temptations may be ever able to dissolve the Union, but
that it being begun here in Grace, it may be consummated in Glory, for the sake
of Christ Jesus, my only Savior and Redeemer.

A Prayer after the Receiving the Sacrament.
O Thou God of all Mercy, make me thoroughly sensible of the Great and
Inestimable Favor, which Thou have been pleased to vouchsafe unto me at this
Time. LORD, what am I, the worst and vilest of Creatures, that Thou should
show thy Self so Gracious and Merciful to me? O the Height and Depth of this
Goodness of Thine, that Thou have been pleased to admit me to the Renewing of
that Covenant with Thee which I have so frequently violated; that I, who am not
worthy of that Daily Bread whereby my Body is sustained, have been made
Partaker of the Bread of Life which nourishes the Soul. O my GOD, Suffer me no
more to turn thy Grace into Wantonness, to make thy Mercy an Occasion of
Security; but let this thy unspeakable Love, constrain me to Obedience; that
since my Blessed Lord has dyed for me, I may no longer live unto my self, but
unto Him. Let my Savior's Sufferings for my Sins, and the Vows and Promises
which I have now made unto Thee, never depart out of my Mind; but do Thou, by
thy Special Grace and Assistance, so enable me to call them to Remembrance,
that they may have a powerful Influence on my whole Life, and cause me to
adhere unto Thee with full purpose of Heart. Grant, O LORD, that I may continue
steadfast in thy Covenant, that not one good Purpose or Resolution which thy
Spirit has raised in me this Day, may vanish, but that they may all prove
effectual, and bring forth Fruit unto Eternal Life. Establish thy Throne and
Rule for ever in my Heart, and Expel thence all those Rebellious Thoughts and
Imaginations which exale themselves against Thee. I have, of my self, no
Strength against that multitude of Spiritual Enemies which Daily assault me,
only my Eyes are upon Thee; be Thou pleased to assist me, and not suffer me to
be tempted above what I am able, but in all my Temptations make me a way to
escape, that I may not be overcome by them. Whatever good Work Thou have
wrought in me, Vouchsafe, O LORD, to bring to Perfection. Let nothing be able
to draw me from my Obedience to Thee, but Grant, that I may continue steadfast
and unmovable, always abounding in the Work of the Lord. Strengthen and
Confi^m me by thy Almighty Power, and so Sanctifi^ me throughout, in my whole
Spirit,-Soul and Body, that I may persevere in all Holiness and Righteousness,
and be preserved blameless unto the Coming of our Lord Jesus Christ; to Whom
with Thee, and the Holy Spirit, be all Honor and Glory for Ever. Amen.

FINIS.
The Table.
A
ATtributes of God. 50 Adoption. 89 Ambition 115 Anger 11^ Apparel. 125
Adultery. 230 Afflictions. 106
B
BAptism. 303 Bargains and Contracts 220 Behavior. 125 Blessing and Privileges
in this Life. 88 Blessings in the other Life. 91 Blasphemy. 267 Benefits of
early Instruction. 167 Blessings that follow a pious Education. 177 Blessings
on the Religious Care of Servants. 206
C
Creation. 56 Christ's Incarnation. 63 Christ our Surely. 66 Christ God Man. 67
Christ's Exaltation. 68 Catychizing. 301 Charity. 230 to Men's Souls. ibid to
the outward Man. 241 must be free. 240 with a good Intention 247 full and
Liberal. 249 prudent. 250 makes peace. 253 with respect to Lawsuits. 254
begets humility 255 avoids giving offense 256 conceals other faults 257
forgives offenses. 258 returns good for evil. ibid excites Kindness 259
Chastity. 121. 232 Childrens Duty to Parents. 194 Reverence. ibid Love. ibid
actual Obedience. 195 Succor in Want etc. 196 to pray for them. 197 Cursing.
268 Covenant. 57 Consideration 103 Confession. 295 Contentment. 115
Covetousness. 114 Company. 128
D
Debts. 221 Defrauding. 227 Duelling. 229 Despair. 278 Disobedience to Parents.
199 Drinking. 117 Duty toward God. 164 to our selves. 100 to others. 132
Dying well. 321 Rules for it. 322 etc brevity of Life. 326 nature of Death.
329 happiness of dying well. 331 pure Conscience the means of it. 333

E
EAting. 117 Election. 87 Education partly the woman's Care. 188 Example of
Parents. 157 Examples of Pious Education. 189
F
FAll of Man. 58 it' ^niserable Of. facts. 60 Forgiveness of Sin. 90 Fear. 110
Flattery. 223 Fornication. 230 Faith. 273 Fasting. 311 Fear of God. 28^
G
Gods Existence. 37 Unity. 42 God the only God. 42 Godliness 265 Graces and
Duties not Justifying Righteousness. 83 Grace no Product of our own Power. 85
Grief and Joy. 112
H
HEaven. 92 Hell. 96 Honesty. 219 Humility. 102 Husbands and Wives. 212 Duties
proper to the Man. 213 to the Woman 214 mutual Fidelity etc. 215 mutual Love
216 care of each others Souls. 217
Hope. 276 Hearing the word Preached. 301
I
INtercession. 295 Judgment it is certainty. 96 Ignorance it is danger. 27
Justice of God. 52 Immutability of God 55 Justification. 90 Justice to our
Neighbors. 224 Incest. 232 Just thoughts of God. 206 Impartial compliance with
God's Will the Tossed of Christi^nity. 34^ Judgments on the neglect of pious
Education. 171
K.
KNowledge the Excellency of it. 33 the Necessity of it. 25 Knowledge of God.
35 Knowledge of Christ as Mediator, only Saving 71 Knowledge that is Saving not
difficult. 98
L
LOve to God 287 Signs of it 289 Love to Christ a most powerful motive to
Charity. 245 Loyalty. 137 Lying. 222 Law Suits. 253
M
MInistry, it is Divine Right ^ Ministers ^ Meekness ^ (...) ^
O
ORiginal Sin 61 Office of a Prince 33 Office of a Magistrate 135 Oath. 271
P
PErsonal Injuries 228 Prosperity it is danger 108 Power of God 51 Providence
265 Preaching 301 Peace making 253 Passions 110 People's Duty to Ministers 143
Parents Duty to Children 149, 161, etc by Instruction 149 Education 150, 184 in
praying for them 152 by Rep (...) 153 (...) ^ Providence of God 55 Peace with
God, etc. 91 Petition 295
R
REligion, the Sum of it 21 partiality therein, its Sin and Danger 335
Redemption 63 Regeneration 75 Religion Duties made necessary by Command 79
Resurrection 92 Resolution 105 Recreations 126 Redeeming Time 128 Restitution
221 Reverence to God 267 Redemption by Christ the greatest Instance of God's
Love. 288 Repentance 290 it is Nature, and the (...) 291 (...) ^ in danger from
the world 8 it is excelling worth 11 it is Faculties 11 the Image of God 11 Price
of Redemption 12 it is Enemies Attempts 12
Salvation of pure Grace 68 Spirit, it is Graces necessary to Eternal Life 77
Sanctification 89 Sobriety with Respect to the World 105 as to worldly
Enjoyments 107 in Love and Hatred 1^3 in Desires and Wishes 114 as to outward
Behavior 116
Subjects 137 Servants 208 etc. Sacrilege ^^5 Swearing 267 remedies against it
269 Self preservation. 130 (...) 303 (...) ibid (...) ^ (...) ^6 (...) ^
T
THanksgiving 297 Temperance 117 Thoughts 101 Theft 225 Trinity 45 Tr^^h in
Speaking. 222
V
Vows 271 Usury 226 Unbelievers Misery in this Life 94 at Judgment 95

W
WIsdom of God 50 Watchfulness 128 Worship of God. 295
Z.
ZEal. 319
A Table of the Prayers.
A Morning Prayer for the Lords Day 1 A Morning Prayer on any other Day of the
Week 4 Another Morning Prayer 7 An Evening Prayer on the Lords Day 11 Another
Evening or Night Prayer 16 Another Prayer to be used at Night 19 Another Prayer
at Night 23 A Private Prayer to be used in the Morning 27 Another Private
Prayer for the Morning 29 A Private Prayer to be used in the Evening or at
Night 32 Another Private Prayer to be used at Night 33 A P^ayer in time of
Public Calamity, especially of War or Invasion. ^ Another Prayer in time of
Public Da^ (...) ^ A Thanksgiv^ng and Prayer for Dei^ (...) ^ A Church (...) ^
A Prayer (...) ^
BOOKS Sold by Joseph Edwards at the Corner Shop on the North-side of the
Townhouse.
THE Doctrines Controverted between? (...) and Protestants Particularly and
Distinctly Considered: and those which are held by the ^ormer Confuted, with an
Introduction, giv^ an Account of the Rise and Gradual Progress of Popery: and
of the Decay of it at the Reformation, the (...) is concluded with full and
Entire Answers to ^ome Cavils of the Church of Rome against the Protestant
Religion and the Professors of it, etc.

VEritas Redux. Evangelical Truths Rest^r^d: Namely, those concerning Gods
Etern^^ Decrees. The Liberty of Man's Will, Grace and Conversion. The Extent
and Efficacy of Christ's Redemption, and Perseverance in Grace, etc.

THE Doctrine of Faith and Justification, S^t in a True Light, in Three Parts.
1 O^ the Nature of Faith. 2 Of Justification by Faith (...). 3 Of the Way how
to Reconcile the Two Ap^stles about the Doctrine of Justification, etc.

(...) Critical, Philosophical. (...) ^logical. On several Impor^ant (...)
New-Testa^


