ACCOUNT Of some of the late SUFFERINGS Of several Baptists inhabiting in
New-(...)don County in Connecticut Colony New England: Who for no other (...)
than going to a Meeting of their Society, were taken up on the K(...) Highway,
and cruelly whipped at Nor(...) July 26th. 1725.

Being also a REPLY To a small Pamphlet lately put out by Joseph Backus, Esquire as
he calls himself. In which Pamphlet the Author has industriously labored to
deceive the World, and hide the Cruelty of that matter; as also to promote
Persecution etc.

All which Deceit and false Covering is here discovered, and a true and
impartial Relation of that matter given.

By JOHN ROGERS.

Joh. 3.20. For every one that does evil hates the Light, etc.

A brief Account, etc.
THE Occasion of this Meeting, was upon the Request of Mary Man of Lebanon, who
sent us Word that she desired to be Baptized by our Society according to the
Rule given in Scripture, by Burying in the Water; and upon our receiving this
Message, and considering that Christ's Ordinances ought to be Publicly
Administered, we drew up a Paper Signed by several of us, Signifying the time
when we designed to Administer the Ordinance; which Paper was publicly set up
in Lebanon, some Weeks before the time appointed; and though we ordered our
Meeting there, (viz.) at Lebanon to begin on the first day of the Week, the day
which we usually meet on as well as the rest of our Neighbors, yet we
appointed the second day of the Week for the Administration of the Ordinance,
designing thereby to give the greater opportunity to any to be present, that
otherwise might be prevented by their own Meetings. And accordingly when the
day came, we set out from our several Habitations in order to attend our
appointed Meeting; and as we were passing through Norwich, we were stopped by the
Constable and a rude Company of young Men, who offered great abuse to some of
(...) Company, ^^rticularly dragging a Woman (...) Company by the Arm along on
the Ground, and violently twitching her over the Door-Cill and throwing her on
the Floor, whereby she was much hurt. The next day we were very cruelly whipped
with an unmerciful Instrument, and then sent back to New London and committed
to Prison, etc.

In the next place I shall proceed to make Reply to the aforesaid Pamphlet, etc.

In page first he calls the Sufferers Notorious Offenders.

In his 2d. page he signifies, that the Offense which these Offenders gave, was
with notorious aggravating Circumstances. In his 3d. page he declares, that the
Person here named, (viz.) Andrew Davis, was one of John Rogers's Brethren in
Iniquity and Transgression, and that they were Traveling from New London and
Groton, with a design for Lebanon, and all this as perniciously as needlessly
shall be made evident, (Says he.)

In his 4th. page he signifies, that we were equally concerned in the
Administration of Baptism, and that we knew not who should be immediately
called to do it when we came there, and that there was not any of us that
pretended to be an Officer more than the rest. Whereupon he argues, that we
were very ignorant or unbelieving of that Text. Heb. 5.4. And no Man takes the
Honor unto himself, but he that is called of God, as was Aaron.

To which I answer, That by this Account which he here gives, it is very
manifest that none of us w^^^ ^^^ward to take the Honor to our selves, but
^^^e waiting on God to know his Mind and Will in the matter, and who he would
call to the Work, like as did those Servants of the Lord that were in the
Church of Antioch, Acts 13.1, 2, 3. verses; who not presuming to take the
Honor to themselves, were in like manner waiting for a Call from God. By which
it is manifest that they knew not who the Lord would Call to that Work, until
he made it manifest to them, by commanding them to separate Barnabas and Saul,
and so when they were called of God as was Aaron, they immediately attended on
the Work.

Now the false Teachers and Hirelings which the World heaps up to themselves,
spoken of 2 Timothy 4.3. are not Called of God as was Aaron, but have their Call
and Authority from Men, and by human Art prepare themselves for their Trade as
other Crafts-Men do, and then through Covetousness with feigned or studied
words, make Merchandise of the People, as it is written 2 Pet. 2. Chap. 1, and
3. verses. Now these false Teachers here described, are they who are not called
of God as was Aaron, but for the lucre of great Sums of Money, presume to take
the Honor to themselves of being called Ministers of the Gospel, etc. By all
which it is manifest that he greatly wrests this Scripture through his own
darkness. Now in the latter part of this 4th. page he begins to set forth, what
was the Notorious aggravating Circumstance of these Notorious Offenders
Offense. And first he seems to Insinuate, as if we ordere'd our coming into
Town on purpose to meet ^^em first returning from their Meeting, (...) our
other Company to meet them returning from their Sacramental Solemnity. Yet in
the beginning of his 5th. Page he seems to yield that this coming might be
purely accidental, and so answers himself; and saves me the trouble of
answering him to this matter. For most certain our coming into Town at that
time, was purely accidental as he allows, nor did we know what business they
were upon; being only designed to pass along the Country-Road to our own
Meeting. Now let the Reader judge, whether our passing along the Road to our
own Meeting, was any more just ground of Offense to them, than their doing the
like was to us, or whether it was not so far wide of the Golden Rule, to do to
all Men, as ye would they should do to you; that it bears the plain Image of
Persecution.

In the next place he adds, that we might have gone another way. To which I
answer, that I never knew or understood that there was any way to Lebanon from
New London or Groton, but that Road, except we had crossed a multitude of
Fields and Enclosures, whereby we should have given just grounds of Offense to
our Neighbors, by trespassing upon their Fences and Lands, and unaccountable
Difficulty to our selves, and might justly have been punished for Trespassers;
and it is mavelous that even Envy it self should so much blind any Person, as
to cause them to desire to put their Neighbors upon such an unreasonable and
unlawful Action.

He proceeds also to inform the Reader, that the first Company brought a Chair
with them, to aggravate the Offense.

Reply. That there was a small Child's Chair brought for the Relief of a poor
distressed Child, which the Grandfather, Grandmother and Uncle were carrying
to its Mother at Lebanon, (I grant) which distressed Child was attended with a
sore Malady, whereby the Bowels oftentimes fell out of the Body in great
quantities, to the wonderful Anguish and Distress of the Child; and there being
no way to help or move the Child many times but in the Chair, so that the
necessity of the Chair was so apparent to all the Spectators, that not one of
them blamed us on that account; nor did the Justice make it any Article against
us: And therefore it is very unfair for him to endeavor to deceive the World,
by giving so unintelligible an Account of that matter.

He also adds, That some of the other Company called out to the People, Did ye
not hear there is a solemn Ordinance to be administered to morrow upon a Person
at Lebanon, according to Christ's Institution?

Reply. This is another of the notorious aggravating Circumstances which he
charges the Sufferers to be guilty of. And indeed it is matter of great
Lamentation to consider, that such who call themselves Christians, should so
long practice the Ordinances contrary to Christ's Institution: That they should
be so hardened therein, as not to endure to be told that they are like to be
administered according to Christ's Institution.

He farther adds as follows, And though it cannot be justly thought a matter of
Conscience in them, to come to us in such Time and Manner, when they knew it
was contrary to the Law of the Government.

To the first of these Assertions, (viz.) That we came to them, I utterly deny;
for we were only passing along the Country Road toward our own Meeting, and
was got onward of our way beyond their Meeting House, I suppose the best part
of a Mile, where they came to us, and with Violence stopped us, and made
Prisoners of us, etc. by which it is manifest that it was they that came to us,
and not we to them, as he has wrongly asserted.

He also asserts, That we knew it was contrary to the Law of the Government.

Reply. Here I think he does the Government no Honor by informing the World,
that they have made Laws to debar such as differ from them in matters of
Religion, the liberty of the Kings High way to pass to their own Meetings,
since our Lord the King has granted equal Liberty of Conscience to all
dissenters to hold their Meetings, and serve God according to their Consciences.

In his 7th. page he asserts, that we knew not who or whether any of us was to
Baptize, or whether any Person would be Baptized, and so (says he) it proved
the next time when they actually went to Lebanon, under the same Pretense,
Baptism was not administered, etc.

Reply. Here again I must deny his assertions; for the very next time that we
went up pretending to Administer the Ordinance, it was actually done, and
another Person who was convinced by our means, (viz.) Elisha Man, was also
Baptized at the same time. Indeed there was before this three of us that went
up to visit our Friends, and hold a Meeting among them, but with no pretense of
Baptising any Person at that time.

However he makes these false assertions a foundation to build some of his
Mocks and Scoffs on, for he immediately adds, that our Infallible Spirit does
sometimes deceive us, as it did our great Apostle the late John Rogers, who
pretended from the Inspiration of it, that he was proof against all Infection
of Body, etc. And to put the matter upon Trial, daringly ventured into Boston
in the time of the Small Pox, but received the Infection and dyed of it, with
several of his Family taking it from him, etc.

Reply. Here I think he plainly discovers his unchristianlike and unmanly
spirit, by Raking a Man out of his Grave to be the Subject of his Game; and it
is great Presumptuousness in him, to take upon him to judge one that is gone
into the Hands of a Righteous Judge. For in the first place he asserts, That
our Infallible Spirit deceives us as it did John Rogers, who pretended from the
Inspiration of it, that he was proof against all Infection of Body, etc. Now I
am fully persuaded that J. R. never spoke those words but that J. Backus is
highly guilty of slandering him in his Grave concerning this matter. He also
adds, That to put the matter upon trial, daringly ventured into Boston, in the
time of the Small Pox, but received the Infection and ayed of it, with several
of his Family. Now how presumptuous and sensorious a Judgment is it for him to
assert, that his going to Boston was daringly to put the matter upon Trial,
when it is well known that it had been his Practice for more than forty years
past, to visit all sick Persons as often as he had opportunity, and
particularly those who had the Smallpox, when in the height of their Distemper
he has sat on their Bedside several hours at a time, discoursing of the things
of God; so that his going to Boston the last time, was no other than his
constant Practice had been ever since he made a profession of Religion. Now it
is certain that J. Rogers in his life time, and all his Society to this day, do
firmly believe from the testimony of the Scripture, that God's Protection is
with his faithful Children through the Course of this Life, to continue them to
old Age, (notwithstanding the Calamities which he sends on the Earth,) except
when he Calls them to lay down their Lives for his Truth by way of Martyrdom,
as may be seen abundantly in Scripture. Job. 6.26. Thou shall come to thy Grace
in a full Age, like as a shock of Corn comes in in his Season. Psalm. 91.16.
With long life will I satisfy him, etc. Now the Age of Man is set forth in
Scripture to be seventy years, as is to be seen Psalm. 90.10. The days of our
years are three score years and ten, etc.

Now although we have the Scripture plentifully to confirm us in this Principle
of God's protecting his faithful Children to old age, etc. Yet we know it is
appointed for all Men once to die, according to what is written Heb. 9.27. and
by what manner of Death it may please God to take them to himself, after he
has preserved them to old age, he has not revealed to us, and therefore
neither J. Rogers in his life time, nor any of his Society since his Death has
undertaken to decide the matter; judging it to be one of those secret things
which God has not revealed to us, and therefore is not our Business to meddle
with, according to what is written Deuteronomy. 29.29. The secret things belong unto
the Lord our God; but those things which are revealed belong unto us, etc.

Now let every unprejudiced Reader take notice how little cause J. Backus has
to reflect John Rogers's manner of Death upon him, who lived to the age of
seventy three years, and then died in his own House, and on his own Bed, having
his Reason continued to the last, and manifesting his Peace with God, and
perfect assurance of a better Life. He had also a very easy Death, without any
struggling or striving, as is common to many People.

He farther adds, That several of his Family also died, taking the distemper
from him. To which I answer, That this is another mistake, for not one of his
Family died of the Smallpox, though several of my Family did.

He also adds, That more Instances of their deception might be mentioned, etc.
To which I answer, That hitherto he has mentioned no deception at all, and
therefore very improper to say, more might be mentioned.

In his 8th. page he says, we wilfully chose the Corporal Punishment, etc.

And in the 9th. page he adds, That by our Resolute Choice we constrained him
to order this Punishment, or disregard the Law, and that in a moral sense we
whipped our own Backs, and may thank our selves for it.

Reply. Here I cannot but take notice how exactly he speaks the Language of the
Papist against the Martyrs, who always informed the World, that they chose the
Flames and were guilty of their own Deaths, and were Self-murtherers, and might
escape if they would, and that the Authority were compelled to Punish them, or
disregard the Laws, etc.

By which it appears, that Persecutors are not only of one spirit, out
naturally speak one Language: And indeed I must confess, that according to my
Judgment, the Papist spoke as much Truth as J. Backus.

For the Martyrs chose the Flames as much as we chose the Whip; for neither
they nor we chose either the Flames or the Whip, but as we were compelled
thereto by our cruel Persecutors.

In the next place he labors to hide the Cruelty of the Whip, he signifies
that the Whip was but a single Cord, without a knot in it.

All which I allow to be true, for that the Cord was so large that it would not
admit of a knot, but instead of a knot it was firmly whipped with a waxed thread
at least four Inches at the end, and then soaked in Liquor.

He also adds in his 10th page, That he stood by and saw every stroke, and
discovered not a drop of Blood, save only from some strokes with the end of the
Whip, under the Arms of some of them, etc.

Here I can but marvel at his Confidence in rendering the Effects of the Whip
so small. However since he produces no better Proof for his assertion than his
own bare Word, which to disprove I shall Produce two sufficient Testimonies;
the first is the multitude of Spectators, whose Eyes saw the terrible Wounds
which every stroke gave, excepting a few strokes which accidentally took the
Clothing of one or two of the Sufferers.

The second Testimony which I shall produce, is the Wounds in the Bodies of
every one of the Sufferers, which till the Grave shall hide, will remain as a
sufficient Testimony to discover the deceit of his Assertion.

In the same page he adds, That he saw no Person insult them or triumph in
their Correction, but the whole multitude of Spectators with a becoming aspect
of Grief, etc.

To which I answer, That although the whole Body of People (some few sober
Persons only excepted) had spent the greatest part of the day in as great
Revilings, Mocks, Scoffs, Flouts and Derisions perhaps as has been seen in any
age of the World, by Persecutors against God's Children, which is a manifest
Token of the Enmity that is between the seed of the Woman and the seed of the
Serpent, yet it was very observable, that in the time of the Execution of the
Sentence, it was acted with such Barbarity, that it seemed to strike a d^mp
upon the whole Assembly; in so much that I never heard of any Person triumphing
in their Suffering so much as J. Backus himself, who was observed by the
Spectators to smile at the Anguish of the tortured Sufferers: By which it is
manifest, that he had no ground to take any Honor to himself of the Peoples
not insulting or triumphing over the Sufferers, since himself was the most
forward to have moved them to it.

In the same Page he speaks deridingly of the Sufferers for calling upon God
and Christ for Assistance and Support in the time of their Torment, etc.

To which I answer, That this is no new thing either for God's Children to call
to their Heavenly Father for Help, when under the hands of their cruel
Persecutors, or for their Persecutors to mock and deride them for it, as the
History of Persecutions will fully prove; as also our Narative of the Wars in
New England with the Indians informs us, that some of the first English Words
which the Natives learned of the English, was Lord Jesus Christ help me; which
Words they had learned of their distressed Prisoners, when under the Hands of
their cruel Tormentors: Which Words those Salvages would often repeat by way of
Derision to the English; perhaps too much in the same Spirit which J. B. here
derides these Sufferers, where he calls them, Creatures in Human Shapes; and
calls their Prayers wild and unscriptural Zeal, and clamorous Invocations of
the Name of God and Christ for Assistance and Support, etc. However, that he
may not remain so ignorant in the Scripture any longer, I desire him to read
Acts 7.59, 60. And they stoned Stephen, calling upon God and saying, Lord Jesus
receive my Spirit: And he kneeled down and cried with a loud voice, etc. Here
he may see that it is not unscriptural for God's Children to call to their
Heavenly Father when they are under the Hands of their cruel Persecutors, as we
were at that time.

In his 13th Page he gives a Record (of his own making) relating to John
Bolles, which Record declares that J. Bolles acknowledged that he came from
New London, and was going to Lebanon, and that he knew it was contrary to our
Law, and that they did it in defiance to the Law.

To which I answer, That God's three Children were cast into the fiery Furnace
for declaring their defiance to the King's Law, which was made to force Men's
Consciences in matters of Religion; and all the Prophets and Apostles suffered
for opposing those Laws which was set up to force Peoples Consciences in
matters of worshipping God: And all the Martyrs which have suffered the Flames
and other Tortures ever since, it has been for manifesting their defiance to
such Laws as have been set up by the worldly Government to uphold false
Worship, or to restrain them from worshipping God according to their
Consciences. Now for as much as God has justified all those Sufferers
abovementioned, for their bold defiance of such Laws as were set up by Man to
prevent People serving God according to their Consciences, well may we have
Confidence that God will justify us for the same thing. We have also farther to
plead in our own Justification in this matter than those Sufferers above
mentioned had, in as much as our Lord the King has granted us the same liberty
to meet together and worship God according to our Consciences, as he has given
to our Persecutors: So that in the consideration of what is here expressed, I
think J. Bolles and his Brethren are highly commendable for their faithfulness
to God, in manifesting their defiance against such Laws as would restrain them
from worshipping God according to their Consciences.

In his 14th. page he charges the Sufferers to be most daring and malicious
Offenders, utterly disregarding those Scriptures, Romans 13. Tit. 3. 1 Pet. etc.

Reply. My Answer to these last Charges will consist chiefly in opening these
Scriptures which he has here wrested, and restoring them to their natural
Sense; by which it will appear, that he is one of those unlearned and unstable
Souls spoken of 2 Pet. 3.16. who wrest the Scripture to their own Destruction.

In the first place I shall fully grant from those Scriptures, and many more
that might be mentioned, that the worldly Government is set up of God, and are
God's Ministers to act in worldly matters between Man and Man, and that the Law
which God has put into their Hands is good, if they use it lawfully; that is
to Punish Murderers of Fathers and Murderers of Mothers, and Man-slayers,
Whoremongers, and them that defile themselves with Mankind; for Men-stealers,
for Liars, for perjured Persons, etc. According to what is written 1 Timothy 1.8,
9, 10.

And while the worldly Government act within their Commission, God is with
them, and has put such Carnal Weapons in their Hands, as is sufficient to rule
all Carnal Persons, which are Stocks, Fines, Prisons, Whips and Gallows: Which
abovenamed Weapons are sufficient to conquer and subdue all carnal and guilty
Persons, so that Rulers are a Terror to evil doers. And for as much as we
acknowledge the worldly Government to be set up of God, we have always paid all
public Demands for the upholding of the same; as Town-Rates, County-Rates and
Country-Rates, and all other Demands, excepting such as are for the upholding
of Hireling Ministers and false Teachers, which God has called us to testify
against. Now when the worldly Rulers take upon themselves to make Laws relating
to God's Worship, and thereby to force and command Men's Consciences, and so
turn their Sword against God's Children, they then act beyond their Commission,
and out of their Jurisdiction; and are so far from being God's Ministers, that
they are fighters against God and his Church; and God is so far from making
them a Terror to his Church, that he gives his Church and People Faith and
Boldness to withstand them to their Faces; Nor are their carnal Weapons able to
overcome God's Children, whose Weapons are not carnal but mighty, to the
pulling down of strong holds, etc. 2 Cor. 10.4 And that this is a right
Exposition of all those Scriptures quoted by him, I shall prove by these
following Texts of Scripture; Dan. 5.18, 19. O thou King, the most high God
gave Nebuchadnezzer thy Father a Kingdom, and Majesty, and Glory, and Honor,
and for the Majesty that he gave him, all People Nations and Languages trembled
and feared before him, etc. Thus it appears that Nebuchadnezzer was set up of
God to act in the worldly Government, and that God laid a Terror upon all his
subjects to fear and tremble at his Presence so long as he acted within the
Bounds of his Commission; but when he exceeded the Bounds of his Commission, by
acting in matters of Worship which was out of his Jurisdiction, God's Children
publicly withstood him, and openly to his Face manifested their defiance to
his Laws: And God was so far from laying his Terror on them, that he gave them
Faith publicly to oppose him; nor was his Carnal Weapons able to compel them
to attend his false Worship, as may be seen Dan. 3.16, 17, 18. Also says
Christ in that 10th of Mat. 27, 28. What I tell you in darkness, that speak ye
in light, etc. And fear not them which kill the Body, etc. Here Christ commands
his Children to be faithful to him, and not to fear them that kill the Body.
Now we know that those which kill the Bodies of God's Children are the worldly
Powers, when they exceed their Commission, (which is only to judge in worldly
matters) then they turn fighter* against God, and persecute his Children; for
the worldly Government is the Kingdoms of this World, but Christ's Kingdom is
not of this World. Joh. 18.36. And when the Man in the Gospel desired Christ to
speak to his Brother to divide the Inheritance, he refused to do it, signifying
it was not his Business to judge in such matters. Luke 12.13, 14. Nor would he
condemn the Woman taken in Adultery, Joh. 8. because such Judgment did properly
belong to the worldly Government, and not to Christ's Kingdom: For Christ's
Church is his Kingdom, and they are not of this World, for he has chosen them
out of the World. Joh. 15.19.

And now though I might go on to multiply Scriptures to prove this great Truth,
(viz) That the worldly Rulers are not empowered by God to act in matters of
Worship to God, but only in worldly Affairs; yet I must desist at present, for
that I only intended Brevity in this small Volume; but do boldly affirm, that
Christ's Church since his coming in the Flesh, are no where commanded to be
subject to the worldly Powers relating to God's Worship, and so shall forbear
at present to enlarge upon this Subject, desiring Joseph Backus (if he be able)
to produce Scripture to the contrary.

In the next place it may be needful for the satisfaction of the Reader, to
look back and observe what are the Crimes which he charges the Sufferers to be
guilty of, and which are to be seen in his fifth page. The first is our passing
along the Country Road toward our own Meeting.

The next Crime which he charges us with, is the merciful act in carrying the
small Chair for the Relief of the distressed Child, of which I have already
given a particular Account.

The third Crime he charges us with is, That some of our Company asked some
People if they did not hear that there was a solemn Ordinance to be Administered
to Morrow on a Person at Lebanon, according to Christ's Institution? Now how
Criminal these three Articles will appear in the Eyes of indifferent Persons I
know not, but doubtless they seem very great to J. Backus, otherwise he would
not have made use of so much foul and Railing Language against the Sufferers as
he has done throughout his Book; as in page first he calls them Notorious
Offenders. Pape 2d. he charges them to be guilty of Notorious aggravating
Circumstances. Page 3d. he says, The Person here named, was one of John Rogers
's Brethren in Iniquity and Transgression, and that our design for Lebanon was
needlessly and perniciously. Page 9th. he calls them Notorious Malefactors. Page
10. he calls them Creatures in human shapes. Page 19. he calls them Miscreants,
or Infidels, and charges them with transgressing the Laws of God, but does not
mention what Law of God they were found in the Transgression of. Surely passing
along the Road to our Meeting, could be no Transgression of the Laws of God,
neither could the merciful Deed done to the Child be contrary to any Law of
God, neither could our informing our Neighbors concerning Christ's Ordinance
be a breach of God's Laws. Now I desire him to consider, whether all this evil
Communication abovementioned does not prove him to be guilty of corrupting
good Manners, according to what is written 1 Cor. 15.33. Be not deceived, evil
Communications corrupt good Manners. Or whether such Railing does not prove him
to be a Railer, or whether such Reviling of his Neighbors does not prove him
to be a Reviler, which if he be such a Person he may see 1 Cor. 6.10. that no
such Person shall inherit the Kingdom of God.

In his 24th Page he signifies, that some of the People at Norwich offered
freely to pay the fine for some of us, and that we refused the Kindness, etc.

And that the Week after being sentenced at Lebanon to undergo the same
Punishment; that our Courage failed so as to accept a Discharge by other Men's
Money, etc.

To which I answer, That if he had said that some at Norwich talked of paying
the Fine and did not do it, but at Lebanon they actually did pay it, he had
then said Truth; for we were no more active in that matter at Lebanon, than we
were at Norwich.

In the latter end of the same Page, and beginning of the 25th. he adds, That
we challenged a Dispute on those Articles, the Sabbath and Baptism, and had a
public Confutation by the Reverend Mr. Wells and Williams, etc.

Reply. Here he boldly asserts, that we had a public Confutation on those
Articles the Sabbath and Baptism; but he produces no better Proof for his
Assertion, than his own bare Word, which I think is not a sufficient Proof to
satisfy the World that it was really so. However, for the better satisfaction
of all Persons in that matter, we do here freely offer him to manage those two
Points against any two Ministers which he shall make choice of in New England;
either those which he has here named, or any other, if he knows any more
capable than they. And farther, that we will give him his choice to do it
either in Writing or public Dispute; and that we will be at the one half of
the Charge to print and publish it to the World; whereby every one may judge
for themselves, and not be confined to his Judgment in that matter. And that he
may be at no loss in the matter, we will here state the Points to be debated.

First, We deny that the Name Sabbath is any where in Scripture imposed on the
first Day of the Week.

Secondly, We deny that Christ or any of his Disciples have left any Command,
Precedent or Example for the keeping the first day of the Week as a Sabbath or
Holy time throughout the New Testament, or given it any Name superior to any
other day of the Week.

Thirdly, We affirm from the Scripture, that Water Baptism was and ought to be
Administered by Burying in the Water.

And we utterly deny that there is either Command or Example in Scripture for
sprinkling of Infants.

And these great Truths we are ready to defend as abovesaid.

In his 24th. page he says, That as much of Cruelty as there was in this, (viz.
our whipping,) some of them did notwithstanding their sore Backs, zealously
expose themselves by the like Crime, to the like Punishment the Week after at
Lebanon*

Reply, Here he plainly makes it manifest, that his cruel Persecution wrought
no effect upon the Sufferers; but even as it has always been observed, that
when Persecutors have acted with the most Tyranical Cruelty against God's
Children, that God has at such times in a special manner appeared, by giving
Faith and boldness to his Children to oppose them in their Delusions, so that
they have never been able to stop their Testimony, or hinder God's Work.

Here likewise it is observable how contrary he is to himself, and how much he
thwarts diverse Passages in the foregoing part of his Book; particularly in the
6th. page where he argues, That if they had not punished us for this
Transgression, they might have had just Reason to conclude that we would have
soon proceeded to give them disturbance in the Public Worship of the Sabbath,
etc.

So that his argument in the 6th. page is as if their punishing us had
prevented our farther proceedings of that nature: yet in his 24th. page he
plainly confesses, that we did proceed the Week after in the same nature,
notwithstanding our sore Backs, etc. Also in the 10th. page where he is
laboring to hide the Cruelty of the Whipping, he says he stood by and saw
every Stroke, and discovered not a drop of Blood, save only from some strokes
with the end of the Whip, under the Arm of some of them. But in this 24th. page
he confesses, that notwithstanding their sore Backs, they did zealously expose
themselves by the like Crime the Week after. Now it is certain that what he
calls the like Crime was our going the next first day to hold our Meeting with
our Brethren at Lebanon, which was seven days after. Now let any one judge,
whether it is likely that our Backs could remain sore seven days if there had
been no Blood drawn, but only by some strokes under the Arms of some of us.

But I am willing to put the most Charitable Construction upon these gross
Contradictions, and that is to suppose that they are occasioned by the weakness
of his Memory.

Page 26th. he says that the word Persecute signifies to follow hard after, and
when used in such a sense as is here intended, it signifies to pursue Men with
wild and ungoverned Zeal for malicious designs upon them for the sake of their
Religion, etc.

Reply. Here I allow his Exposition of the word to be right, and then how fully
has he proved their proceeding against us to be Persecution, who when they
first took us up it was I suppose near a Mile beyond their Meeting House,
onward of the Road toward our own Meeting. And several times since at Lebanon,
when we have passed by their Meeting House along the Road toward our own
Meeting, their Constable has Pressed a considerable number of Men out of their
Meeting House, who with Horses have followed hard after us with an ungoverned
zeal, and have stopped us and made Prisoners of us for the sake of our Religion,
etc. So that by his own Confession their proceeding against us is Persecution.
In the latter end of the 26th. and beginning of the 27th. page he falls to
heaping up a great number of charges against us, in a very confused manner
without any proof at all; some of which I suppose to be only the false Reports
which our Enemies have scattered about the World. However, at the end of these
charges he adds, That to persuade us to forbear, our late honorable Governor
has assured us, that if we would be quiet and worship God in our own way
according to our Consciences, he would punish any of their People that should
disturb us in our Worship. Now for as much as he concludes all his charges with
this Article of the Governor, I shall particularly give the Reader an Account
of that matter, which is as follows, etc.

And first, I grant that the Governor did actually make this Promise, as fully
as J. Backus has given it, and that it was in a Public Court before a
multitude of Hearers.

Now some time after this, John Rogers, since deceased, and several of his
Society (having as good a Right to New London Meeting House as any in the Town)
did propose to hold our Meeting there at Noon-time, between the Meetings of the
other Congregation, so as not to disturb them in either of their Meetings. And
accordingly we met there, and finding their Meeting not ended, we stood without
Door until their Forenoon Meeting was ended and the People come out, and then
John Rogers told them that our design was to make no disturbance, but to hold
our Meeting while they were at Dinner, and when they were ready for their
Afternoon Meeting we would desist and go away. Whereupon I heard no Person
manifest any dislike of our proceedings. Whereupon J. Rogers went into the Seat
which the Town Officers seated him in, after the Meeting House was built, and
proceeded to Expound a Chapter in the Bible. But in the time of our Meeting,
the Constable was sent with a Warrant to break up our Meeting, and was attended
with a Rude Company of Men, who began to haul Men and Women out of the Meeting,
committing some to Prison, as did Paul in his unconverted state, as may be seen
Acts 8.3. And when Sarah Bolles, one of our Society, saw the Constable and his
attendance carrying her Husband to Prison by his Legs and Arms, with his Belly
downward, in a very Cruel manner, she and Josiah Gates, another of our Society,
went to the Governor, minding him of his late Promise to defend us in our
Meetings from any that should disturb us, and desired him that her Husband
might not be so abused, but all the Relief they had, Josiah Gates received a
Box on the Ear from the Governor's own Hand, and were both turned out of Doors
by the Governor, and the next day the Governor sat Judge himself of the
matter, and Bound over J. Rogers to the County Court, charging him with a Riot,
though all that he did was to Expound a Chapter as aforesaid, and all that his
People did, was to attend to his Exposition, in as quiet a manner as was ever
in any Meeting in the Kings Dominions, till the Constable with his rude
Attendance made the desturbance. However the Court fined J. Rogers Ten
Shillings, for which ten shillings and the Charges, Execution was given out,
and the Shereff first took ten Sheep, and then complained that they were not
sufficient to answer the Fine and Charges, and came a second time and took a
milch Cow out of the Pasture on the same account, and so we heard no more about
it; by which I suppose that the Cow and ten Sheep satisfied them for the ten
Shillings and Charges. And though for brevity I here omit to make any Proof of
this matter, yet if Joseph Backus shall presume to deny any part thereof, in my
next Reply I shall prove every Article that I have here asserted. And I do
farther add, that I know of no Protection that we have met with from the
Authority relating to our Worship, but what has been of the same nature; and I
desire J. Backus (if he be able) to make the contrary appear. By which it is
manifest, that his end in mentioning this Article of the Governor was to
deceive the World, and to mock us.

In his 27th Page he adds as follows, But if it were Persecution, how strangely
have they forgot that Advice, When they persecute you in one City, flee into
another.

Reply, Here he greatly wrests and abuses the Scripture, for want of a right
understanding thereof: For this Text which he mentions a small part of, has
only reference to a particular Commission given by Christ to his Apostles, as
may be seen Mat. 10.5, 6. These twelve Jesus sent forth, and commanded them,
saying, Go not into the way of the Gentiles, and into any city of the
Samaritans enter ye not. But go rather to the lost Sheep of the House of
Israel, etc.

Thus it appears, that under this Commission the Apostles were strictly
commanded to go to none but the House of Israel, and utterly forbidden to go to
any other Nation. In the 9th and 10th Verses he commands them to provide
neither Gold nor Silver, and (...) Coats, nor Shoes, etc. By which it (...)
under this Commission they (...) act with all the speed (...) allowing them
time to provide Money, not ^^^fering them to burden themselves with Clothing,
etc. And in the 23d Verse he charges them, that if they were persecuted in this
City, to flee to another: For verily says he, ye shall not have gone over the
Cities of Israel, till the Son of Man be come.

Thus it appears, that the Reason why Christ sent his Apostles in such great
haste at that time, was because it was the will of God first to proclaim the
coming of Christ, and the glad Tidings of the Gospel to the House of Israel,
before other Nations had the offer of it.

And the Reason why he did not allow them time to provide Money, nor suffer
them to burden themselves with Clothing, and commanded them not to be stopped
by Persecution, but to flee to the next City with their Message, was because
the time that Christ would publish himself to be the Savior of the World was
so near at hand, that there was not time for the Apostles first to publish it
in all the Cities of Israel, and therefore the Lord soon after this, sends
other Seventy under the same Commission, and with greater Injunctions to make
speed than the first, for they were forbidden to salute any Man by the way,
Luke 10.4.

Thus it plainly appears, that this Text of (...) has only Reference to that
particular (...) on given to the Apostles at that (...)

And there can be no greater abuse of Scripture, than to apply it to wrong
cases; and Christ is so far from Countenancing his Children in shuning
Persecution for his sake, that he has commanded them not to fear them that
Kill the Body, etc.

FINIS.

