TRIALS Of Thirty-Six Persons for PIRACY.

Twenty-Eight of them upon full Evidence were found Guilty, and the Rest
Acquitted.

At a Court of Admiralty for Trial of Pirates, Held at Newport within His
Majesty's Colony of Rhode Island and Providence-Plantations in America, on the
Tenth, Eleventh and Twelfth Days of July, Anno Dom. 1723. Pursuant to His
Majesty's Commission. Founded on an Act of Parliament, made in the Eleventh and
Twelfth Years of King WILLIAM the Third, Entitled, (...) for the more
Effectual Suppression of Piracy, (...) by an Act of the Sixth of King (...)

BOSTON: Printed and Sold by Samuel Kneeland, in Queen Street, below the
Prison. 1723.

At a Court of Admiralty for the Trial of Pirates held at the Townhouse in
New-Port in the Colony of Rhode Island and Providence-Plantations, the Tenth
Day of July, In the Ninth Year of His Majesty's Reign. Annoque Domini 1723.
PRESENT.
THE Honorable William Dummer Esquire Lieut. Governor and Commander in Chief of
the Province of the Massachusetts Bay, President of the Court. The Honorable
Samuel Cranston Esquire, Governor of the Colony of Rhode Island, etc. Nathaniel
P^ine, Esqr. of the Council of the Massachusetts Bay. Addington D^venport,
Esqr. of the Council of the Massachusetts Bay. Thomas Fitch, Esqr. of the
Council of the Massachusetts Bay. Spencer Phipp^, Esqr. of the Council of the
Massachusetts Bay. Thomas (...) Esquire Surveyor-General of North America.
Nathaniel Kay Esquire Collector of the Colony of Rhode Island.
Commissioners appointed in His Majesty's Commission for the Trial of Pirates.

First, Proclamation was made commanding Silence upon pain of Imprisonment,
whilst the (...) and His Majesty's Commission for the Trial of Pirates were
r^^ding.

(...) said Court was Publicly and Solemnly Opened and Proclaimed.

And then the Hon. William Dummer Esquire* (...) took the Oath di^ected in said
(...) His Honor ^dministred (...) same (...) other Commissioners (...).

The Court appointed Richard Ward S^le Notary Public of His Majesty's Colony
of Rhode Island, Register of the said Court.

And (...) Brenton Jun. Esquire Provost-Marshal of said Court.

Then a Warrant ^ssued out to the Provost-Marshal to bring the Prisoners into
Court to (...) Morning at Eight of the Clock.

Then the Crier made Pr^clamation for all Persons that could give Evidence for
the King against the Prisoners to be Tried, to come into Court, and they should
be heard.

Then the Court Ad^^^r^ ^till to (...) of the Cloc^ (...), Jul. 11 th Day*
17^3. A.M*

The Co^rt (...) according to Ad^ournment and was Opened by three Proclamations.

PRESENT.
The Hon. William Dummer Esquire* etc. President. The Hon. Samuel Cranston, Esquire*
etc. Nathaniel Pain, E^qr. of the Council of the Massachusetts Bay. Addingt^n
Davenport, E^qr. of the Council of the Massachusetts Bay. Thomas Fitch, E^qr.
of the Council of the Massachusetts Bay. (...) Phipp^* E^qr. of the Council of
the Massachusetts Bay. John Me^^irs Esquire* Judge of the Vice-Admiralty, etc.
Thomas Lachme^e Esquire* Surveyor-Ge^eral. Nathaniel (...) Esquire Collector of
Rhode Island.
(...) Esquire being Appointed a Commissioner had the Oath Administered to him (...)
President.

(...) Charles Harris, Thomas Powell, John Wilson, Thomas Linnicar* D^niel
Hyde* Steph^n (...) Lacy, Edward Lawson, John Tomkins, Henry Berns, Francis
(...) Fitz Gerra^d* William Studfield, Owen Rice, William Read, Thomas Hugget,
Peter Cues, Thomas Jones, William Jones, Edward Eaton, John Brown, James
Sprinkly, John Brown, Joseph Sound, Charles Church, John Waters, Thomas Mumford
Indian, and John Kencate Doctor, were brought to the Bar: And Arraigned upon
the Articles Exhibited against them (and others) for Pyracy, Robbery, and
Felony.

The Register Read the Articles in these Words following.

At a Court of Admiralty for Trial of Pirates held at New port in the Colony of
Rhode Island, etc. the 10th Day of July, Anno Domini, 1723.
ARTICLES of Piracy, Robbery and Felony, Exhibited then and there against
Charles Harris, Thomas Powell, J^hn Wilson, Thomas Linnicar, William Blades,
Daniel Hyde, Stephen Mu^don, Abraham Lacy, Edward Lawson, John Tomkins, Henry
Barns, Francis Laughton* John Fitz-Gerrald, William Studfield, Owen Rice,
William Read, Thomas Hugget, Peter Cues, Thomas Jones, William Jones, Edward
Eaton, J^seph Swe^ser, J^hn Brown, Joseph Sound, Charles Church, John Waters,
Thomas Mumford Indian, and John Kencate Doctor.

You stand here accused of Felony, Piracy, and Robbery.

First, For that you the said Charles Harris, with the other Prisoners, (and
diverse others,) on (...) about the Eighth Day of May last in the Lat. 22 D.
North, off Cape Antonio, by Force an^ Arms upon the High (...) a (within the
Jurisdiction of the Admiralty of Great Britain) Piratically and Feloniously did
surprise* (...) take the Ship Amsterdam Merchant, whereof John Welland was then
Commander or Ma^ter, of the Burden of One Hundred Tons, belonging to His
Majesty's Good Subjects. And out of her then and there within the Jurisdiction
aforesaid, Feloniously and Piratically did take and carry away three Barrels of
Beef, of the value of Seven Pounds, some Quantities of Gold and Silver of the
value of One Hundred and Fifty Pounds one Negro Man Slave named Dick of the
value of Fifty Pounds.

And also then and there did Piratically and Feloniously Sink the said Ship, of
the value of One Thousand Pounds, and cut off the said Wellands right ^ar.

Secondly. That you the said Charles Harris, Thomas Powell, John Wilson, Thomas
Linnica^ William B^^de^, Daniel Hyde, Stephen Mundon, Abraham Lacy, Edward
Lawson, John (...) Henry (...), Francis Laughton, John Fitz^(...), William
(...) Rice, (...) Thomas (...), Peter Cues, Thomas (...), Edward Eaton, Joseph
Swetser, John Brown, James Sprinkly, John ^rown, Joseph ^ound, Charles Church*
John Waters, Thomas Mum^or^ Indian, and John Kencate* (with diverse others*) on
or about the Tenth Day of June last, about Fourteen Leagues to the Southward of
the East End of Long Island, by Force and Arms upon the High Sea within the
Jurisdiction of the Admiralty aforesaid in a Hostile manner did Feloniously and
Piratically attack His Majesty's Ship the Greyhound, Capt. Peter So^^ard
Commander, and wounded Seven of his Men.

All which aforesaid Piracies, Robberies and Felonies were by you and each
(...) you done and committed in manner as aforesaid, contrary to the Statutes
and Laws in that Case made and provided.

John V^^entine, Advocate General for the King.

To which Articles the said Charles Harris, with the other Prisoners before
mentioned brought to the Bar, severally pleaded, Not Guilty. And Charles
Harris, Thomas Linnicar, Daniel Hyde, Stephen Mundon, Abraham Lacy, Edward
Lawson, John Tomkins, Francis Lawson, John Fitz^Gerrald, William Studfield,
Owen Rice, William Read, John Wilson and Henry Barns, were ordered to be Tried
this Forenoon. And Thomas Powell, Thomas Hugget, Peter Cues, Thomas Jones,
William Jones, Edward Eaton, John Brown, James Sprinkly, John Brown, J^seph
Sound, Charles Church, John Waters, Thomas Mumford Indian, and John Kencate
Doctor, were remanded (by the (...) to Prison to be brought on to Trial as they
should order.

Then the Advocate^General proceeded,

May it please Your Honor, and the rest of the Honorable Judges of this Court.

THE Prisoners (...) the Bar stand Articled against, and are Prosecuted for*
several Felonies, Piracies, and Robberies by them committed upon the High Sea.
To which they have severally pleased. Not Guilty.

The Crime of Pyracy is a Robbery (for Pyracy is a Sea Term for Robbery)
Committed within the Jurisdiction of the Admiralty.

And a Pirate is described to be, One (...) enrich himself either by surpri^e
or open force, (...) upon Merchants, and others, Trading by Sea, to spoil them
of their Goods and Treasure, often times by Sinking their Vessels, as the Case
will come out before You.

This sort of Criminals are engaged in a perpetual War with every Individual,
with every State* Christian or Infidel; they have no Country, but by the nature
of their Guilt, separate themselves, renouncing the benefit of all lawful
Society, to commit these heinous Offenses: The Romans therefore just^y ^tal'd
can, Ho^^es humani Gen^ris, Enemies of Mankind, and indeed they are Enemies,
and Arm^d, against themselves, a kind of Felons de se -- * Importing something
more, then a natural Death.

These unhappy Men satiated with the Number and ^^toriety of their Crimes, had
filled up the measure of their Guilt, when, by the Providence of Almighty God,
and through the Valor and Condu^^ of Capt. Solgard, they were delivered up to
the Sword of Justice.

The Roman Emperors in their Edicts made this piece of Service, so Eminent for
the Public Good, as Meritorious as any Act of Piety, or Religious Worship
whatsoever.

And 'twill doubtless ^e said for the Honor and Reputation of this Colony
(though of late scandalously repro^^'d to have favour^^, or combined with
Pirates;) and be evinced by the Process and Event of this Affair, that such
Flagitious Persons, (...) as little Countenance and Shelter, and as much
Justice (...) Rhode Island, as in any other Part of His Majesty's Dominions.

But Your Time is more precious th^^ my Words, I will (...) mispend i^ in
attempting to set forth the Aggravations of this Complex Crime big (...) every
(...), nor in declaring the Mischie^^* and evil Tendencies of it; for you
better know those Things before I mention them; and I consider to Whom I speak,
and that the Judgment is Your Honors.

I shall therefore call the Kings Evidences to prove the several Facts, as so
(...) distinct Acts of (...) the Prisoners (...) by light Circumstances and
Presumptions, (...) Conjectures, (...) and positive Evidence: And then I doubt
not, (...) it is for (...) of Mankind, this (...)* Your Honors will do justice
(...) them Guilty* and (...)*

The King's Evidences being Sworn and Examined, deposed as follow^,

John Welland of B^st^n Mariner, to the first Article, charged, deposed, That
upon the Eighth Day of May 1723. being in the aforesaid Sh^p the Amsterdam
Merchant, and Master of her (...) of Cape Antonio, (...) was Cha^ed by two
Sloops, whereof one of them came up with him, and hoisted a New (...), and took
him. And was called the Ranger, a Pirate under the Command of Edward Low, who
was in the other Sloop that chased him; and that the Deponant was ordered
aboard the Ranger, where he went aboard with Four of his Men; and the Quar^er
Master Examined him how much Money he had aboard, and he told him about 150 l.
in Gold and Silver, which they took out of the Vessel: and after he had been
aboard the Ranger Sloop three Hours, he was carried on Board the Sloop Fortune
where Low was, where (...) was very much abused, having several Wounds with a
Cut^a^s, and at last they cut off his right ^ar; and the next Day following,
after they had taken out of his Ship one Negro, some Beef, and other things
they Sunk the Ship. And the Day after he was taken the said Pirate took one
Capt. Eastwick of Pi^cataqu^, on board of whom they afterward put this
Depon^nt and dismissed him; the Pirates were all harnessed with Weapons, except
Thomas Jones.

And also further deposed, that Henry Barns now one of the Prisoners at the
Bar, was forced out of his Ship at the (...) Time, and was very low and weak,
and that the said Barns being ordered by the Pirates to go from Vessel to
Vessel with them, (that is, their Prizes) when he got on board of Capt.
Eastwick, he endeavored to get away and hid himself, and the Pirates threatened
to burn the Ship unless they discovered the said Barns, whereupon the said
Barns was compelled to go on Board the Pirate Sloop.

John A^kin (...) and late Ma^e of the Ship Amsterdam-Merchant, deposed, that
he (...) Ship taken as aforesaid by (...) the Pirate and his Crew in (...) was
Mate of the abovesaid Ship taken as aforesaid by Low the Pirate and his Crew in
the Two Sloops Fortune and Ranger; and that the said Pirate forced from out of
the said Ship Amsterdam-Merchant, one Henry Barns now a Prisoner at the Bar,
who cried and took on very much: and desired this Deponant to acquaint his
three Sisters living in Barbados that he was a (...) Man, and also very sick
and weak at the said time.

John Mudd Ship Carpenter, and late Carpenter on board the aforesaid Ship
Amsterdam-Merchant, being Sworn and Examined, deposes, that he was Carpenter
on board the said Ship when she was taken by Low's Company in the Sloops
Fortune and Ranger off of Cape Antonio, and that he was carried on board the
Sloop Ranger; and most of the Pirates were harnessed, that is, Armed with Guns,
etc.

Capt. Peter Solgard, Commander of His Majesty's Ship the Greyhound, deposed,
that being Cruizing in the said Ship Gray hound, in or near the Lat. 39 D. N.
on the seventh Day of June last, he spoke with the Master of a Virginia Ship,
who informed him, that the day before he had been taken by two Pirate Sloops,
that ri^^ed his Ship, in the Evening they left him and steered to the Northward
as he believed for Block Island; whereupon Capt. Solgard immediately pursued
them, and on the Tenth being about Fourteen Leagues to the Southward of the
East End of Long Island, saw two Sloops which he concluded to be the Pirates,
and seemed for some time to stand from them to encourage them to give him
Chase, which they did with Sails and Oars; when they came near they hoisted
black Flags, and fired each a Shot, and soon afterward they haul'd down their
Black and hoisted Red Flags; then he hoisted His Majesty's Colors, and they
began the Engagement; the Fire continued on both sides near an Hour, when they
perceiving themselves overpowered put away before the Wind, and endeavored by
rowing to make their escape, and there being but little Wind, he got out his
(...) and pursued them, about Three of the Clock in the Afternoon he came near
them again, (...) they renewed the Engagement, about Four he go^ between them,
and shot (...) Main^ai^, which obliged them soon after to call for Quarter; he
then (...) the Lieut. and took out the Prison^^ now at the (...), several of
which were (...) the exact number of their slain is yet (...) the whole Action
they (...) to a^ their ^^most endeavors to annoy His (...) and wounded seven
of (...), and did much damage in her Rigging and Sails.

(...) Lieut. of His Majesty's Ship Greyhound, deposed the same that Capt.
Solgard did.

Archibald Fisher Surgeon of the Greyhound Man of War deposed, that there
were Seven of the Grey-hound's Men wounded in the Fight by the two Pirate
Sloops Companies in the Engagement between the Greyhound Man of War and them,
but none Mortal.

William Marsh Mariner, being duly Sworn, deposed and said, that some time last
January, he was taken in the West Indies by Low's Company in a Schooner and
Sloop near Bonaire, and that he saw on board of the Schooner Francis Laughton
and William Reed, and on board of the Sloop he saw Charles Harris, Edward
Lawson, Daniel Hyde, and John Fitz Gerrald, all Prisoners at the Bar; and that
Gerrald asked him whether he would seek his Fortune with him.

After the Witnesses had been severally Examined, the Prisoners at the Bar were
asked, whether they had any thing to say in their own defense? whereto they
answered and said, they were forced Men on board of Low, and did nothing
voluntarily, but as they were compelled.

Advocate-General.
YOur Honors, I doubt not have observed the weakness* and vanity of the defense
which has been made by the Prisoners at the Bar, and that the Articles
(containing indisputable (...) Acts of Piracy) are supp^^ted against each of
them: Their Impudence and unfortunate Mistake, in Attacking his Majesty's Ship,
though to us fortunate, and of great Service to the Neighboring Governments:
Their malicious and cruel Assault upon Capt. Welland, not only in the spoiling
of his Goods, but what is much more, the cutting off his (...) Ear, a Crime of
that nature and barbarity which can never be repaired: Their Plea of
constraint, or force, (in the (...) of every Pirate) can be of no avail to
them, for if that could Justify (...) Excuse! No Pirate would (...) Convicted,
nor (...) any (...) Person in his own account ^ffend against the Moral (...)
were asked, it would be hard to answer* Who offered the Violence? (...) or
persuaded one another, or rather the Compulsion proceeded of their own (...)
Inclinations: But if there was the least semblance of truth in the Plea; it
might (...) out in Proof, That the Prisoners or some of them did manifest their
uneasiness and sorrow, to (...) of the Persons whom they had surpised and
Robbed; But the contrary of that is plain from (...). Mash's Evidence, That the
Prisoners were so far from a dislike, or regretting their wicked (...) of Life,
that they were for increasing their Number by inviting him to join with them,
and so seemed resolved to live and dye by their Calling, or for it, as their
fate is like to be. And now seeing that the Facts are as evident as Proof by
Testimony can make 'em, I doubt not Your Honors will declare the Prisoners to
be Guilty.

Then the Prisoners were taken away from the Bar, and the Court was Cleared,
and in Private.

Then the Court having duly and maturely weighed and considered the Evidences
against the Prisoners, unanimously agreed and Voted, That Charles Harris,
Thomas Linnic^r, Daniel Hyde, Stephen Mundon, Abraham Lacy, Edward Lawson, John
Tomkins, Francis Laughton, John Fitz-Gerrald, William Studfield, Owen Rice, and
William Read were Guilty of the Piracies, Robberies and Felonies Exhibited
against them at this Court; and that John Wilson and Henry Barns were not
Guilty.

And then the Court Adjourned to two of the Clock in the afternoon of said Day.

The Court Met and Opened by Proclamation, according to Adjournment, and the
aforesaid Prisoners that were Tried the Forenoon, were brought to the Bar again.

And the President acquainted them that the Court by an Unanimous (...) had
found the aforesaid Charles H^rris, Thomas Linnicar, Daniel Hyde, Stephen
(...), Abraham Lacy, Edward Lawson, John Tomkins, Francis Laughton, John
Fitz-Gerrald, William Studfield, Owen Rice, and (...) Guilty of Piracies,
Robberies and Felonies, according to the Articles ^xhibited against (...). And
(...) them, whether any of them had any thing to say, why Sentence of Death
should (...) upon them for their said Offenses.

And the Prisoners offering nothing Material, (...) President pronounced (...)
in the following Words,

YOU Charles Harris, Thomas Linnicar, Daniel (...), Stephen Mundon, Abraham
(...), John Tomkins, Francis Laughton, John Fitz-Gerrald* William Studfield,
Owen Rice, and William Reed, are to go from hence to the place from whence you
come, and from thence to the place of Execution, and there you and each of you
are to be hanged by the Neck (...) you are Dead, And the LORD have Mercy upon
your Souls.

And the President then Pronounced the said John Wilson, and Henry Barns, not
Guilty*

Then the Court ordered Thomas Hugges, Peter Cues, Thomas Jones, William Jones,
(...) ^aton, John Brown, James Sprinkly, John Brown, Joseph Sound, Charles
Church, John Waters, and Thomas Mumford Indian, who was Arraigned in the
Morning, and had severally pleaded not Guilty, to be brought to the Bar, and
they were brought accordingly, and William Blades was also brought, and
Articles of Piracies, Robberies and Felonies exhibited against him read to him
in the same Words as before mentioned; whereunto he pleaded, Not Guilty.

Advocate-General.
May it please Your Honors,

THE Prisoners before the Court are a part of that Miserable Crew of Men
already under Sentence of Death.

The Articles, the Crimes, and Evidences being the same with those of their
Brethren, and their Guilt Equal, I doubt not they will (...) with the like
Condemnation.

The Kings Evidences being called and Sworn, deposed as follows,

John Welland deposes, That he was Master of the Ship Amsterdam-Merchant, in
the Month of May last past, and that on the Eighth of May he was taken by Low
and Company, Pirates in two Sloops off of Capt. Antonio, who used him as before
swo^n, and that he saw Charles Church, John Waters, Edward Eaton, William
Blades, Thomas Mumford Indian, and Thomas Jones (...) board the Ranger; that
the Day after he was taken, the said Pirate took one Capt Eastwick of (...)*
The Pirates were all harnessed (as they called it, (...). Armed,) except Thomas
(...), who was a Lad on bo^rd.

John Ackin late Mate of the Ship Amsterdam-Merchant, deposed, that he was
taken in the Ship Am^terdam-Merchant by Low and Crew as aforesaid, and that
John Waters and Thomas Jones a (...), Prisoners at the Bar were then on Board
one of the Pirate Sloops called the Ranger, That Waters demanded what Rum they
had, and that Thomas Jones was not Armed as he (...) of.

John Mudd late Carpenter of the Ship Amsterdam-Merchant, deposed, That the
Ship aforesaid was taken in manner as aforesaid by the aforesaid Low and Crew
of Pirates, and that he well remembers Joseph Sound, Thomas Jones and Thomas
Mumford Indian, on board the Ranger where the said Joseph Sound, and most of
the Company were harnessed, viz. Armed; and said Sound took his Buttons out of
his Sleeves, but that Thomas Jones was not in Arms as he knew of.

Benjamin Weekham of Newport Mariner, deposed, That on the Tenth of March last
he was in the Bay of Hondoras on Board of a Sloop, Jeremiah Clark Master, Low
and Lowders Companies being Pirates, took the aforesaid Sloop, and that this
Deponent then having the Small Pox was by John Waters one of the Prisoners at
the Bar carried on board another Vessel; and that he begged of some of the
Company two Shirts to shirt himself, the said Waters said Damn him* he would
beg the Vessel too, but at other times he was very evil; and the Deponent
further says, he saw William Blades now Prisoner at the Bar amongst them.

William Marsh deposed, That he was taken in manner as aforesaid, and that John
Brown the Tallest was on board (...) ^chooner, and the said Brown told him he
had rather be in a right Vessel tha^ a leaky (...) that he was not forced.

Capt. Solgard and (...) deposed, that they took the Sloop Ranger at Time,
Place and manner (...) aforesaid* and that the Prisoners at the Bar were taken
from on board her.

Henry Barns Master, being duly Sworn, deposed, that he being on Board the
Sloop Ranger during her Engagement with ^he Greyhound Man of War, saw all the
Prisoners at the Bar on board the said Sloop Ranger, and that he saw John Brown
the shortest in Arms, (...) Mumford Indian, was only as a servant on board.

(...) Wilson being duly Sworn and interrogated; deposed, that the major part
of the Prisoners (...) were active on board the (...) Ranger in Attacking and
Engaging the (...) War, and that Edward Eaton was hurt in the ^nee by a Great
Gun, and (...) John (...) the shortest in Arms, that Thomas Mumford Indian was
only as a servant on B^ard.

After the Witnesses had been severally Examined, the Prisoners at the Bar were
asked, whether they had any thing to say in their own Defense.

William Blades said he was forced on board of L^w about Eleven Months ago, and
never signed to their Articles, and that he had when taken about Ten or Twelve
Pounds, and that he never shared with them, but only took what they gave him.

Thomas Hugget said he was one of Capt. Mercy's Men o^ the Coast of Guinea, and
in the West Indies was put on board Low, but never shared with them and they
gave him about 21 Pounds.

Peter Cues says, that on the Twenty Third or Twenty Fourth of January last he
belonged to one (...) a Sloop of Antigua, and was then taken by Low and
detained ever si^ce, but never shared with them, and had about Ten or Twelve
Pounds when taken, which they gave him.

Thomas Jones says, he is a Lad of about Seventeen Years of Age, and was by Low
and Company taken out of Capt. Edwards at Newfoundland, and kept by Low ever
since.

William Jones says, he was taken out of Capt. Ever at the Bay of Hond^ras the
beginning of April last by Low and Louder, and that he has been forced by L^w
to be with him ever since; that he never shared wi^h them, nor signed the
Articles till compelled three Weeks after he was taken, and the sa^d Jones
owned he had Eleven Pounds of the Quartermaster at one time, and Eight Pounds
at another.

(...) Eaton says, that he was taken by Low in the Bay of Hond^ras, about the
beginning of March, and kept with him by force ever since.

John Brown the tallest says, that on the Ninth of October last he was taken
out of the Liverpool-Merchant at the Cape De Verde by Capt. Low who beat him
black and blue to make him (...) the Articles, and from Cape De Verde they
Cruiz'd upon the Coast of Brazil about ^even Weeks, and from thence to the
West Indies, and he was on board of the Ranger (...) the (...) of (...).

James Sprinkly says, he was forced out of a Ship a^ the Ca^e de Verd^ by Low
in (...) last, and by him compelled to sign the Articles, but never shared with
them.

John Brown the shortest says, he is about Seventeen Years old, and was in
October last at the Cape De Verdes taken out of a ship by Low, and kept there
ever since, and that the Quartermaster gave him about Forty Shillings, and the
People aboard Three Pounds.

Joseph Sound says, he was taken from Provid^^^^, about three Months ago, by
Low and Company and detained by force ever since.

Charles Church says, he was taken (...) of the (...) Galley at the Cape de
Verd^ Capt. Scot Commander, about seven or eight Months ago, by Capt. Low,
never shared, but the Quartermaster gave him a^out Fourteen Pounds.

John Waters says, he was taken by L^w on the Twenty-ninth of June last, out of
--, and they compelled him to take charge of a Watch, and that he had Thirteen
Pistoles when taken, (...) was given him, and that he said in the time of the
Engagement with His Majesty's Ship they had better strike, for they would have
the better Quarter.

Thomas Mumford Indian says, he was a Servant a Fishing the last Year, and was
taken out of a Fishing Sloop with Five other Indians off of Nantucke^ by Low
and Company, and that they (...) two of the Indians at Cape (...), and that he
was kept (...) Low ever since, and had (...) ^ix Bitts when taken.

And then the Prisoners were taken from (...) the Court in Private.

THEN the Court maturely weighed and (...) the Evidences (...) Prisoners Case,
and Unanimously found William Blades, Thomas Hugget, Peter Cues, William (...),
Edward Eaton, John (...), James Sprinkly, John Brown, Joseph Sound, Charles
Church, and John Waters, all Guilty (...), Robbery and Felony, according to the
Articles Exhibited against them.

And by an Unanimous Voice found Thomas Jones and Thomas Mumford Indian, Not
Guilty. (...) said Prisoners were brought to the Bar, and the President
acquainted them that the Court (...) Unanimous Voice had found the aforesaid
Wm. Blades, Thomas Hugget, Peter (...)* William Jones, Edward Eaton, John
Brown, James Sprinkly, John Brown* Joseph Sound, Charles Church, and J^hn
Waters, all Guilty of the (...), Robberies and Felonies according (...)
Articles Exhibited against them; and asked them whether any of them had (...)
thing (...) say, why Sentence of Death should not pass upon them for their
Offenses.

And the Prisoners offering nothing material, the President pronounced Sentence
of Death against them in the following Words*

YOU William Blades, Thomas Hugget, Peter Cues, William Jones, Edward Eaton,
John Brown, James Sprinkly, J^hn Brown, Joseph Sound, Charles Church, and John
Waters, are to go from hence to the Place from whence you came, and from thence
to the Place of Execution, and there you and each of you shall be hanged by the
Neck until you are Dead, And the LORD have Mercy upon your Souls.

And the President pronounced the said Thomas Jones, and Thomas Mumford Indian,
Not G^ilty.

Then the Court Adjourned until to Morrow Morning, at Eight of the Clock in the
Forenoon,

July the Twelfth Day 1723.

The Court Met according to Adjournment and was Opened by Proclamation.

PRESENT.
The Hon. William Dummer Esquire Lieut. Governor and Commander in Chief of the
Massachusetts Bay. The Hon. Samuel Cranston, Esquire Governor of Rhode Island.
Nathaniel Pain, Esqr. of the Council of the M^ssachusetts-Bay. Ad^ington
Davenport, Esqr. of the Council of the M^ssachusetts-Bay. Thomas Fitch, Esqr.
of the Council of the M^ssachusetts-Bay. Spencer Phipp^, Esqr. of the Council
of the M^ssachusetts-Bay. John (...) Esquire Judge of the Vice* Admiralty, etc.
Thomas Lachmere Esquire Surveyor^General of North America. Nathaniel K^y Esquire
Collector of Rhode-(...).
Ordered that John Kencate Doctor, who was ^rraigned yesterday be brought to
the Bar, and he was brought to the Bar accordingly.

Advocate-General.
May it please Your Ho^ours,

THE next Person brought in Judgment before this Honorable Court is the Doctor
of the Piratical Crew; and although it may be said, be (...) was not Harnessed (
as they term it) but was a forced Man; yet if he recei^^d part of their
Plunder, was not under a constant durance, did at any time approve, or joined
in (...) Villainies, (...) least Equal to the rest; The Doctor being ad^r'd
among 'em as the Pirates God for in him they chieffe confide for their Cure and
Life, and in this Trust and Dependence it is* (...) Enterprise these H^rrid^d
praedations not to be b^ightned by aggravation, or lessened by any (...).

The ^^ings Evidences being called, Sworn and Interrogated, deposed as follows,

John Welland deposes, he was taken as aforesaid, and that he saw the Doctor
aboard the Ranger; he seemed not to rejoice when he was taken but solitary, and
he was informed on board he was a forced Man; and that he never signed the
Articles as he heard of, and was not on board the Deponants Ship.

John Ackin Mate and John Mudd Carpenter, Swear, they saw the Prisoner at the
Bar walking forwards and backwards disconsolately on board the Ranger.

Benjamin Wickham deposed, that he does not know the Prisoner at the Bar by
sight, but that while he was at the Bay under Confinement with said Crew of
Pirates, there came a Man on board the Vessel which they called the Doctor, who
drank and was merry with some of the Pirates then the^^, and told him the
Deponent he would send him something to take, but s^^t it not.

Capt. Peter Solgard Commander of His Majesty's Ship Greyhound and Edward
Smith Lieut. on Board said Ship deposed, that the Prisoner at the Bar was on
board the Sloop Ranger when taken by them in manner and Time as aforesaid.

Archibald Fisher Physician and Surgeon on board the said Greyhound Man of
War deposed, that when the Prisoner at the Bar was taken and brought aboard the
King's Ship he ^earched his Medicaments, and the Instruments, and found but
very few Medicaments, and the Instruments very mean and bad.

John Wilson, Henry Barns and Thomas Jones, severally deposed, that the
Prisoner at the Bar was forced on Board by Low, and that he never signed
Articles as they knew or heard, but used to spend great part of his Time in
reading, and was very courteous to the Prisoners taken by Low and Company, and
that he never shared with them, as they knew or heard of.

After the Witnesses were duly Interr^gated, the Court asked the Prisoner
whether he (...) any thing to say in his own defense, and if he had he might
speak.

John Kencate Doctor says, he was Surgeon of the Sycamore^Ga^ley* Andrew
Scot Master, and was taken out of the said Ship in September last at B^navista,
one of the Cape De Verde Island^ by Low and Company, who detained him ever
since, and that he never shared with them, nor signed their Articles.

The Prisoner was taken from the Bar, and the Court Cleared.

Then the Court Examined and Considered the Evidences and Pleas for the King,
and the Prisoners Case, with great Care, and by an Unanimous Voice found the
said John Kencate Doctor, Not Guilty.

Then the Court was again opened, and the said Prisoner John Kencate was
brought to the Bar, and the President pronounced him, Not Guilty.

Ordered, That Thomas Powell who was Arraigned, and Pleaded not Guilty
yesterday, and Joseph Sw^etser who was Articled against yesterday in the
aforesaid Articles but not Arraigned, and Joseph Libbey Articled against since
with others for Piracies, Robberies and Felonies be brought to the Bar, and
they were brought to the Bar accordingly.

Where the Register read the aforesaid Articles exhibited against Joseph
Swetser, in the Words aforesaid, to which he pleaded, Not Guilty.

Then the Register read the Articles exhibited against Joseph Libbey for
Piracies, Robberies and Felonies.

Then the Register asked the said Joseph Libbey, (...) ^^^hibited against him,
or not Guilty, and the Prisoner (...)

Whereupon the Register bid the said Thomas Powell, (...) to their Trial.

Advocate-General.
May it please Your Honors,

THE Three Prisoners at the Bar charged for the same (...) their desire, in
hopes to distinguish themselves by their (...) Condemnation, will I doubt find
their mistake in their Conviction, and i^ the (...) they may justly expect to
hear from this Honorable Court.

Then the Kings Evidences being called, Sworn and Interrogated, (...).

John Welland late Master of the Ship Amsterdam-Merchant, deposed, that (...)
he was taken as aforesaid by Low and Company he saw Joseph Swetser and Thomas
Powell aboard the Sloop Ranger, and that they were harnessed on board the Sloop.

John Ackin late Mate of the said Ship deposed, that he saw Joseph ^^etser
harnessed on board the Sloop Ranger at the taking of Capt. Welland (...) Low,
and (...) saw Thomas Powell on board, but not harnessed.

John M^dd late Carpenter of the Ship Amsterdam-Merchant (...) the same as
Ackin.

William Marsh deposed that Thomas Powell a (...) on board Low the Pirate some
time in January last, when this (...) taken by Low, and that Powell seemed to
be a brisk, stirring, active Man among^^ them, and told the ^eponent they
always kept a Barrel of Powder ready to blow up the Sloop rather than (...)
taken, and that the said Powell searched the Deponants Pockets for Gold and
Silver, in (...) great Cabin on board of Low.

John Kencate deposed, that during his being on board of Low the Pirate, he
well knew Thomas Powell, J^seph Swetser, and Joseph Libbey now Prisoners at the
Bar, and that Thomas Powell acted as Gunner on board the Ranger, and that he
went on board several Vesse^^ taken by Low and Company, and Plundered, and
(...) Joseph Libbey was an Acti^e Man aboard the Ranger, and used to go on
board Vessels they took, and Plundered, and that he (...) him fire several
Times, and the Deponent further deposed, that Joseph Swetser now Prisoner at
the Bar was on board the Pirate Low, and that he has seen him armed, but never
see him use them, and that the said Swetser used often to get alone by himself
from amongst the rest of the Crew* he was melancholy and refused to go on
board any Vessels by them taken, and got out of their Way. And the Deponent
further says, That on that Day, ^s they engaged the Man of War, Low proposed
to attack the Man of War, first by firing his great Guns, then a Volley of
Small Arms, heave in their Powder Flasks, and board her in his Sloop, and the
Ranger to board over the Fortune, and that (...) one on board the Ranger
disagreed to it as he knows of, for most approved of it by Words, and the
others were silent.

Thomas Jones deposed that he well knows the Prisoners a^ the Bar, and that
Thomas Powell acted as Gunner on board the Ranger, and Joseph Libbey was a
stirring active Man among them, and used to go aboard Vessels to Plunder, and
that Joseph Swetser was very d^ll aboard, and at Cape Antonio he cried to
D^nwell to let him go ashore, who refused, and asked him (...) drink a Drum,
but Swetser went down into the Hold and cried good part of the Day, and that
Low refused to let him go, but brought him and tied him to the Mast and
threatened to Whip him; And he saw him Armed, but never use his Arms as he knows
of: And that Swetser was Sick when they engaged the Man of War, though he
assisted in rowing the Vessel.

John Wilson deposed, he knows the Prisoners at the Bar to be all on Board the
Ranger, and Thomas Powell was Gunner of her; and the Sabbath Day before they
were taken the said Powell told the Deponent he wished he was ashore at Long
Island, and they two went to the Head of the Mast, and Powell said to him, I
wish you and I were both ashore here stark naked; And he deposed that he never
saw Joseph Swetser in Arms whilst he was aboard, but he and Powell ^^ceived
about Twenty Five Pounds from the Quartermaster. That the next Day after the
Deponant was taken by Low, Joseph Swetser told him that he was a forced Man,
and wished he had his Liberty as he had about Fourteen Months ago, and was
resolved to run away from Low the first Opportunity he had.

Henry Barns deposed, that J^seph Swetser was very civil on board the Sloop
Ranger to such Prisoners (...) was taken, and that they had no Engagement after
the Deponant was on board, and th^^ Joseph Libbey was Armed, and went on board
several Vessels taken by them, and plundered.

Thomas Mumford Indian (not speaking good English, Abisha^ F^lger was Sworn
Interpreter) deposed, that Thomas Powell, Joseph Libbey and Joseph Swetser were
all on board of Low the Pirate, that he saw Powell have a Gun when they took
Vessels, but never saw him Fire, he saw him go on board of a Vessel once, but
brought nothing from her as he saw, he see him once strike a Negro but never a
White Man. And he saw Joseph Libbey once go on board a Vessel by them taken
(...) brought away from her one pair of Stocki^gs. And that Joseph Swetser
cook^d it on (...) with him some time, and sometime they made him (...) the
Sails; once he saw (...) clean a Gun, but not fire it: and Swetser once told
him that he wanted to get (...) them, and said if the Man of War should take
them they would hang him, (...) of the (...) War Swetser sat unarmed in the
Range of the Sloops (...) before the said Engagement he asked Low to let him
have his (...) and go ashore, (...) refused.

Capt. Peter (...) of the Greyhound Man of War deposed, that all the Prisoners
now at (...) him taken on board the Ranger on the Tenth of June last, in (...)
as afore^^^d, and that he had seven Men Wounded i^ the Engagement.

(...) Smith Lieut. of the said Man of War deposed the same.

After the Witnesses were severally examined as aforesaid, the Court told the
Prisoners (...) had any thing to say in their defen^^ they might speak.

Thomas Powell said, he was taken by (...) in the Bay of Hond^ras in the Winter
1721, ^* (...) by (...) turned on board of Low, and (...) by force ever since.

Joseph Libbey said, he was a (...) Man, and was detained (...), and produced
an Advertisement of it.

Joseph Swetser says he was taken by (...) about a Year ago, and forced on
board of Low, and detained there aga^^st his Will ever since, that he never
(...) with them, but had of the Quarter Master (...), and to prove his being
forced pr^duced an Advertisement.

Advocate-General.
May it please your Honors,

THE (...) Plea of not Guilty ^on't deny the Facts, but (...) upon (...) their
(...) will and (...), but by (...) and necesi^^*

But it is evident. That Powell and Libbey (...) first Rate (...), the (...)
Gunner on board the Sloop* And though Swetser (...) before (...) is forced by
(...) any of his (...) Deeds. Probably at the (...) some reluctan^y, 'till by
the Repetition (...) Crimes he became harden^d (...) pessimus:) And, it is in
proof, that (...) the Sloop engaged the Man of War, all, or any of (...) to the
main end, in (...) in the same Guilt ((...), quos inquinat (...) Majesty's
(...) a Notorious Piracy, though the Pirates were overcome, and taken by the
Captain, who might have d^ne Just^ce upon them himself, by hanging them all up
at the ^ard A^m.

The plea ^f Necessity is dangerous in the Latitude used by the Prisoners: and
may after this (...), ^e extended to p^lit^te the breach of the Ten
Commandments.

Then the Prisoners being taken away and all withdrawn but the Register.

The Court maturely weighed and considered the Evidences and the Cases of the
Prisoners, and by an Unanimous Voice found the said Thomas Powell and Joseph
Libbey guilty of the Piracies, Robberies and Felonies exhibited against them,
and by a considerable Plurality of Voices found the said J^seph Swetser, not
guilty.

Then the Prisoners were brought to the Bar, and the President acquainted
Thomas Powell and Joseph Libbey that they were by an Unanimous Voice found
guilty of the Piracies, Robberies and Felonies exhibited against them, and
asked them if they had any thing to say, why Sentence of Death should not pass
upon them for their Offenses.

And the Prisoners offering nothing material, the President pronounced Sentence
against them in the following Words,

YOU Thomas Powell and Joseph Libbey are to go from hence to the Place from
whence you came, and from thence to the Place of Execution, and there you and
each of you, are to be hanged by the Neck until you are Dead. And the LORD have
Mercy (...) your Souls.

And the President Pronounced the said Joseph Swetser, not guilty.

Adjourned to Two of the Clock (...)

The Court Met and Opened (...), and Ordered Thomas Hazel, John Br^ght, John
Fletcher, Thomas (...) to be brought to the Bar, who were (...) to attend to
the Article (...) against them (...), Robberies, and Felonies.

Which were (...) by the (...) Words as to Joseph (...)

To which the said Prisoners severally (...) Not Guilty.

Advocate-General
(...) it please your Honors,

THE Prisoners before you have been A^^aigned, have pleaded not (...) are the
last of the miserable Crew to be (...) -- If I make (...) I shall not Question
your Justice.

King's Evidences being called, Sworn and Interrogated, deposed as follows.

John Welland late Master of the Ship Amsterdam Merchant, deposed, that on the
Eighth Day of May last he was taken off of Cape Antonio by Low and Company,
Pirates in two Sloops, the Fortune and Ranger, and after he had been some time
on board the Ranger, he was sent on (...) the Fortune where L^w was, where he
had his right Ear cut off, and was wounded very much with a Cu^lass, and turned
down the Hatches, where he lay bleeding for two or three Hours with a Sentinel
over him, at last he asked Patrick Cunningham (who he though it was the means of
saving his Life) a Prisoner now at the Bar for to get him a Dr^m, for he was
(...) spent, and Patrick Cunningham got him some Water; then he asked him for
the Doctor, and Cunningham went and brought the Doctor to him, and helped the
Doctor dress him, and said, they were so cruel they could not subsist long. And
said Welland also deposed, that he saw John Bright and Thomas Hazel on board
the Ranger, and Thomas Hazel was harnessed (...).

John Ackin late Mate of the said Ship Amsterdam-Merchant deposed, he saw
Thomas Hazel, now a Prisoner at the Bar on board the Ranger at the Time and
Place aforesaid.

John Mudd late Carpenter of said Ship deposed, that while he was Prisoner on
board the Ranger, ^e saw Thomas Hazeal, John Bright and John Fletcher, and that
Thomas Hazel was harnessed.

William Marsh deposes, that when he was on board the Pirate L^w by whom he
was taken (...) before deposed) he saw Thomas Hazeal on board the Schooner, and
John Fletcher now (...) at the Bar a Boy.

John Kencate deposed, that Thomas Hazeal, John Bright and Patrick Cunningham
Prisoners at the Bar received Sh^res on board the Pirate Sloop, and Haz^al and
Bright went on board several Prizes and Plundered, that Thomas Child was in
Arms with the rest in the Engagement with the Greyhound Man of War, but that
John Fletcher was as a Boy on Board, and no otherwise.

Henry Barns deposed, that Thomas Hazeal was harnessed in the Engagement with
the Grey*hound Man of War, and John Bright was the Drumm^r, and beat upon his
Drum on the Round-House in the Engagement, and that Patrick Cunningham had a
Pistol in his hands at the said Time.

John Wilson deposed, that John Bright was as brisk as any of them on board the
Ranger, and beat the Drum on the Round House the Day they engaged the Man of
War, and that John Fletcher was as a Boy on Board the Sloop* and no otherwise.

Joseph (...) deposed, that John Bright was Drummer, and beat upon the
Round-House in the Engagement* with the Man of War; that Thomas Hazeal had a
Pistol at that time, and that Thomas Child (...) board the Ranger from the
Fortune but about three or four Days before the said Engageme^^ and rowed in
the time of the Engagement.

Thomas Jones (...)* that on that Day they engaged the Gray hound Man of War,
he saw Thomas Hazel bring (...), and saw and heard John Bright the Drummer beat
the Drum (...) and Thomas (...) ^^ployed at an Oar in Rowing.

Capt. Peter (...) Greyhound deposed, that all (...) Prisoners now (...) were
(...) on board the Sloop Ranger on the Tenth of June last after (...)
Engagement (...) manner as aforesaid, and that he had seven Men wounded in
(...).

Edward (...) the Greyhound Man of War deposed the same that Capt. Solgard
(...).

After (...) were severally Examined as aforesaid, the Court told the (...)
thing (...) say in their (...) they might speak, and they should be heard.

(...) he was taken (...) Bay of Hond^ras about Twelve Months ago (...) ^oard,
that he had got from one and another whilst aboard about (...), and that he had
never been in the Bay since.

John Bright said he was a Servant to one (...) at the Bay and there taken by
Low an^ Company about Three or Four Months ago, and forced away to be their
Dru^mer.

Patrick Cunningham said that about Twelve Months ago he was taken in a F^shing
Schoone^ (...) Low and Company, and forced away by them, and that at
Newfoundland he endeavored to get away from them but was stopped and detained
by them ever since.

(...) Fletcher says, that he was a Boy on Board the Sycam^re Galley one Scot
Commander, (...) he was taken out of her by Low and Company at B^navist,
because he could play upon a Violin, and forced to be with them.

Thomas Child said that the beginning of March last he was taken out (...)
Capt. Gilbert at the (...) of Hondoras by Low and Company, and was forced to go
with them, they gave him a Gun (which he never used) and about Fourteen or
Fifteen Pounds as near as he can remember* and one double*double Loon

Advocate-General.
May it please your Honors,

I Will not detain you with any particular reflections on the Evidence, or upon
the Prisoners Cases differently Circumstanc'd. The Court I doubt not will duly
(...), and consider them, tempering Justice with Mercy, which sometimes is the
true way to Justice.

Then the Prisoners were taken away from the Bar, and all Persons withdrawn
from the Court say^ the Register.

The Court having deliberately and maturely weighed and considered the
Evidences given against the Prisoners, by an Unanimous Voice found the
aforesaid Thomas Hazel, John Bright, and Patrick Cunningham Guilty of the
Piracies, Robberies and Felonies Exhibited against them at this Court.

And John Fletcher and Thomas Chil^, not Guilty.

Then the Prisoners being brought to the (...)* the President told Thomas
Hazel, John Bright and Patrick Cunningham, ^h^t they were by an Unanimous Voic^
found Guilty of the Piracies* Robberies and Felonies Exhibited against them;
(...) asked them if they had any thing to say, why Sentence of Death should not
pass upon them for their Offenses.

And the Prisoners offering nothin^ Material, the President pronounced Sentence
against them ^n these followi^g Words,

YOU Thomas Hazeal, John Bright, and Patrick Cunningham, are to go from hence
to the place from whence you came, and from thence to the place of Execution,
and there you (...) of (...) are to be hanged by the Neck until you are Dead.
And GOD ^f His Infinite Mercy Save your Souls.

And (...) the President pronounced John Fletcher and (...) not Guilty.

The Articles of Agreement between Capt. Low and his Company.
I THE Captain shall have Two full Shares, the Master a Share and a half, the
Doctor, Mate, Gunner, Carpenter, and Boatswain a Share and quarter.

II. He that shall be found Guilty of Striking or taking up any unlawful Weapon
^ither aboard of a Prize, or aboard the Privateer, shall suffer what Punishment
the Captain and majority of (...) Company shall think fit.

III. He that shall be found Guilty of Cowardice in the Time of Engagement,
shall (...) what Punishment the Captain and the majority of the Company shall
think fit.

IV. If any Jewels* Gold or Silver is found on board of a Prize to the Value of
a (...) of Eight, and the finder do not deliver it to the Quartermaster (...)
Time, shall suffer what Punishment the Captain and majority of the Company
shall think fit.

V. He that shall be found Guilty of Gaming, or playing at Cards, or Defrauding
or Cheating one another to the Value of a Royal of Plate, shall su^^er what
Punishment (...) Captain and majority of the Company shall ^hink (...).

VI. He that shall be Guilty of Drunkenness in the Time of an Engagement, shall
suffer what Punishment the Captain and majority of the Company shall think fit

VII. He that has the Misfortune to loose any of his Limbs in the Time of an
En^gagement in the Companies Service, shall have the Sum of Six Hundred Pieces
of Eight, and kept in the Company as long as he pleases.

VIII. Good Quarters to be given when Craved.

IX. He that sees a Sail first shall have the best Pistol, or Small Arm aboard
of her.

X. And lastly, No Snapping of Arms in the Hold.

John Kencate Declared, The above Articles to be the Articles agreed upon
between Low and Company; to the best of his remembrance, ^aving often seen them
whilst with Low.

Before Richard Ward, Register.

The Names, (...) Pirates that were Executed on Friday, July the 19th. 1723
(...) Rhode Island, at a Place called Bull-Point, (...) of the Sea.
Names Age Places of Birth CHarles (...) Thomas (...) 22 Lancaster Engl. Daniel
Hyde 2^ Virginia. Stephen (...) 29 London. Abraham (...) 21 Devonshire Engl
Edward (...) 20 Isle of (...) (...) 23 (...) Francis (...) 39 New York. John
Fitz-Gerrald 21 C. Limb. Ireland. William (...) 40 Lancaster Engl Owen R^^c 27
South Wales. William Read 35 Land derrry* E William Blades 28 Rhode Island.
Thomas Hugg^^ 24 London. Peter Cues 32 Exon in Devon. William Jones 28 London^
Edward Eaton 38 Wreaxha^ John Brown 29 Coun. De^ James Sprinkly 28 Suffolk
Joseph Sound 28 (...) Charles Church 21 Marg. Par. (...) John Waters 35 County
of Devo^ Thomas Powell 21 Wethersfield Con. Joseph Libbey Thomas Hazel John
Bright

FINIS.

