A LETTER FROM John Hammett TO John Wright: Giving an Account why John Hammett
turned from the Baptists to the Quakers; also why he turned back again. Wherein
are discovered the Devices and Temptations of the Devil. Published from his own
Handwriting, for a Caution and (...) to all unsteady (...).
^^^de-Island, December 29. 1721. Beloved Brother, JOHN WRIGHT.
HAVING seen a Letter signed by you, dated July 20. 1721, wherein you signify,
that it is reported amongst you where you dwell, that I am gone off to the
People called Quake^ and that I have renounced or called in Question (...)
former Principles: In which Letter you also ^sire a particular Information of
the Premises, s^ the Satisfaction of your self and others. And the I may be
faithful and just to my own Cons^ence, and it may be profitable now or
hereafter (...) some Persons under the same Difficulties, the may inform you
that some time past I was of^ contemplating on the Subjects following: viz.

That unless I really and experimentally d^covered the powerful Efficacy and
Virtue (...) the Death, Resurrection and Ascension of Je^^^ Christ applied to,
and operative in my Hea^ so as that from a feeling and sensible Knowled^^ I
could set to the Seal of my Faith and Amation, that God in his Word is true, it
wo^ be a sort of uncertain or traditional Faith (...) satisfy my self with the
bare literal Report (...) it, though really true. And also, that unless^ could be
assured of enjoying an inward and s^pitual Union and Fellowship both with t^
Father and (...) the Communica^on of the Ho^ (...) declares (...) had. And
also, that (...) my Soul be as really baptized (...) Christ by t^ Holy Spirit,
as my Bo^ was baptized in t^ Element of Water, according to Romans 6. 3, Gal. 3.
27. Col. 2. 12, 13. the outward Fig^ would be insignificant. And also, that all
^^ceptable Worship and Service must be perfor^ (...) with a divine Faith and by
the Power of ^^sus Christ. These and such like Thoughts ^ing much upon my Mind,
Satan the grand ^emy taking an Advantage, tempted my unwary ^ind to call in
question some of the Principles (...) external Obedience contained in the
Gospel (...) Jesus Christ; as, Whether they were origi^ly intended to continue
longer than to in^duce a more spiritual Understanding and ^ligion, and then to
terminate, like the Fi^res in the former Dispensation; and, Whe^r they had any
powerful Influence upon the ^ul to make it spiritual, with other such im^oper
Questions; by which Means I was easi^ persuaded to undervalue them: And also
^om the Observation of so many carnal or for^l Professors who believe and
practice them, questioned whether their practicing of them ^s not a great
Reason of their Carnality; and ^erefore, Whether the way to become more
^iritual, was not to reject them. Satan having ^us far by Degrees prevailed
upon my Un^rstanding, I must ingeniously ^fess, that my ^igious Affection was
(...) inclined after ^ose who (...) a Pretense of a strict Regard ^or the
inward ^wer, but despise and destroy, (...) much as in them lies, the outward
and real^y necessary Form of Godliness and Religion, ^somuch that I seemed to
be like a drunken ^an, ^aggering sometimes this Way, and some^mes that, being
incapable for any length o^ Time to fix any solid Resolution either Way^ But as
Solomon informs us, that notwithstandin^ all his Extravagancies and Vanities;
yet h^ Wisdom remained with him, so I can truly i^ form you, that through the
wonderful and undeserved Grace of God, my former Faith i^ other Respects still
remained with me, with this most notable Exception, That during those Troubles
the Doctrine of Personal Perfection came crowding into my Thoughts, and soon
begat a Resolution in me to attain to an Estate of absolute Personal
Perfection, my weakened and shattered Understanding being too easily prevailed
upon t^believe it practicable, and that I could not be saved or justified
without it. Whereupon (...) bent my Mind very intently and with diligent
Watchfulness and Circumspection, to attain to that Estate. But notwithstanding
all which, upon a curious and strict Search and Examination, I found my self to
be so far from being a God, that I was still a poor, frail and imperfect Man.
Then I began to look about, to see if I could find any such Thing as a perfect
Man, and more especially amongst those who most pretend to that Doctrine, and
could find no Person to make the Subject of my Enq^ that I could with a due
Regard to the Rule of Charity, seriously exempt from the just Imputation of
humane Weakness, Frailty, and visible Imperfections: At which I was much
startled, and ^egan to question thus: If this be the absolute Terms of
Justification, I must draw this Conclusion, (with the Man to whom Christ
rendered the Salvation of the rich as impossible) Who then can be saved? Then I
saw my self led blindfold in the dark and pathless Wilderness of Confusion, at
the End of which I could see nothing but Confusion and Destruction; until ^t
length it pleased God to open my Eyes, and ^ring me to a renewed Sight of my
former Understanding and Faith again; viz. That in order to our Justification
in the Sight of a pure and perfect God, by his pure, just and perfect Law we
must be absolutely pure and perfect, as the Apostle says, without Spot or
Wrinkle, or any such Thing; that is to say, in Jesus Christ, by his imputing,
reckoning, or accounting his perfect and spotless Righteousness, which he
wrought out in his own Person, to be and belong to the faithful People of God;
not for any Righteousness done by them, but of his pure Grace and Favor, and
to be received and laid hold of by the Hand of a divine, purifying, and
fruitful Faith of Credence, Reliance, and absolute Dependence.

And thus it pleased God to bring me out of this dark, and really dangerous
Error, of venturing my Justification and Salvation on the groundless Dependence
upon a perfect Righteousness, to be wrought out in me, contrary to the Doctrine
and Promises of God in Christ, and to set my feet once more in that safe and
sure Way of Justification through the Righteousness of God, by Faith in Jesus
Christ. But as to my unstable and undetermined Thoughts and Scruples concerning
some of the necessary Parts of external Duty aforementioned, it still at Times
remained with me, until it pleased God to excite me to ask my self this
Question, That inasmuch as I could not but own that those external Performances
of Baptism, the Lord's Supper, etc. were appointed and commanded by Jesus
Christ in his last Will and Testament, how could I expect to be justified by
him, when he shall come to judge the World, by the Rule of his own Gospel, if I
persisted and continued thus to slight, undervalue, and contemn as unnecessary
and unprofitable, several particular Commands required in that Gospel. By this
Means I was happily and timely cast before the final Trial, and my Conscience
filled with guilt and Condemnation, as a just Punishment for my unadvised
Rashness. Then my Understanding came to me rectifyed again to see that those
outward Figures were commanded by the infinitely wise Jesus, in order partly to
try our Obedience to his divine Authority, and partly to correspond and
cooperate with the holy Scriptures, instrumentally to direct and guide our
Faith and Understanding; the one doctrinally, and the other figuratively, to
comprehend, propagate, and maintain that pure Sanctification, obedient and
spiritual Life, to be ^tained by Jesus Christ. So that through the wonderful
and undeserved Grace of God I am ^e-established and confirmed upon a solid and
tried Understanding in, and Affection for, both the blessed Instrument the
sacred Scriptures, and also those external Figures which the Holy Ghost, by
their divine Voice, requires us to perform in an humble, dutiful, just and
reasonable Obedience and Submission to our dear Savior Jesus Christ, our
Lawgiver, our King, and our Judge; and am experimentally taught to understand
that if Satan cannot prevail with the Professors of Religion to lead them into
one Extreme, that is, to settle down upon a carnal Dependence on the
Performance of the formal and external Parts of Religion, so but that he finds
their Minds will be examining into, and contemplating upon the mysterious and
spiritual Parts of it, then he often strives to lead them into an Extreme on
the contrary Hand, by suggesting low, mean, diminutive Thoughts in them
concerning the outward and formal Parts of the Gospel Religion, under the
delusive and specious Pretense of magnifying the spiritual Parts of it, and
thereby, if he can possibly prevail upon us, make us to be justly guilty of
dividing and separating that which Jesus Christ would have inseparably joined
together; I mean, the inward Power, and outward Form of God^iness. So that upon
a serious Experience of (...) Contrivances of Satan to rul^ and destroy me,
together, with my own Weakness and Inability to withstand him on the one and,
and the wonderful and plain Discovery of the grace and power of God to deliver
me out of his devouring Hands on the other Hand, I am brought to an humble and
serious Purpose ^d Resolution for the future Part of my Life, ^at as the
Providence of God shall call o^^equite ^e, and his alsufficient grace shall
from ^e to time enable me, to be so much the ^ore ready, industrious and
faithful in improv^g my Talents for the building up and propa^ating of the
glorious Religion, contained in the blessed gospel of my beloved Jesus, both
^respect of the internal and external parts of (...). Having thus given you an
Account of the ^ef Particulars of my late Troubles, how I came to be introduced
into them, and how I came to be delivered out of them, I subscribe my self,

Your Friend and Brother, In the Gospel of Jesus Christ, John Hammett.

NEW PORT, Rhode Island: Printed by J. FRANKLIN. 1727.


