SANOS TS LTHEAS OR THE TOUCHSTONE OF TRUTH. WHEREIN VERITY by Scripture and
Antiquity is plainly confirmed, and ERROR confuted.

Delivered in certain SERMONS Preached in English by JAMES Le FRANC B.D. and
Minister of the French Church in Norwich.

(...). Origin. cont. Cells. lib. 1. Qui veritatem occultat and qui mendacium
prodit, uterque reus est, ille quia prodesse non vult; Iste quia nocere
desiderat: August. lib. de Agon. Christian. Ephesians. 4.25. Putting away lying,
let every man speak truth.

CAMBRIDGE, Printed by John Field, Printer to the University. 1662.

TO THE Right Honorable and truly Noble HORATIO Lord TOWNSHEND Baron of Linn
Regis, Lord Lieutenant of the County of Norfolk, etc. All Prosperity and Peace.
My Lord,
HAving not long since undertook to vindicate the eminent and glorious Church
of England, from the Errors and Superstitions of the Church of Rome, to blot
out the false aspersions which the Enemies of the Church and Nation put upon
the Liturgy and Rights which she observes in the public and sacred Worship of
God; I could not choose among the Nobility of this Country, a fitter Person
then your Honor to patronise that Work: I know (though unknown to you) the
rare qualities and commendable virtues of your Honor; they being scattered
abroad by your glorious fame; I am not ignorant what a Noble and Loyal Subject,
the Great though Exiled Monarch of England had in your most generous Person,
when all things were in confusion amongst us, and Subjects rebellious to their
King; I have often heard that the Sequestered Clergy found a Protection and
Refuge under your eminent goodness, as your Ancestors, as well as your
Honorable Person, received with all affection strangers, nay, all those that
were faithful to his Majesty our Gracious Monarch, whom God preserve, were
welcome to your Honor: Your Lordship was not afraid to venture both life and
Estate, to serve so excellent and incomparable a Prince, because it was your
glory, nay, more then that, the glorious fame of your merits tells me, that your
care was to preserve the Church as well as the State; you did strengthen the
afflicted members of the Church of England, that they might keep close to their
Mother; and now the chiefest of your Lordships Enterprises clearly appears to
be the bringing of the discontented people of this Nation to a better
understanding; that they may be united with those that do sincerely honor the
King, and acknowledge their mother the Church of England under the government
of their pious and most reverend Bishops; pardon me then (my Lord) if I have
assumed the boldness to present your Honor with a Vindication of the Church
our Mother, whom to protect was your great ambition, from the errors and
superstitions of the Church of Rome, where I have had my Education; for as I am
not the first who have adventured a Dedication to so Noble a Person to whom the
Author is unknown, so I thought I might do this, and perhaps without offense
to your Lordship; seeing the incomparable goodness of your most Honorable
Person assures me of your kind acceptance, and makes me confident that you
will not reject a stranger, who wishes you all prosperity and happiness, and
further demands that favor, to be,

My Lord, Your Honors most humble Servant, James Le Franc.

A Preparatory Advertisement to the READER.
Courteous Reader,
WHen I made these Sermons, I had no thought to print them; not only because I
am a stranger, and not well versed in the English tongue, but because I did
judge them not worthy to appear to the public, seeing that my young capacity
is but weak, and not fit to appear to the eyes of so ingenious and learned a
Nation; but the urgent request of some of my friends, and specially the calumny
which some enemies of the truth cast upon the first Sermon (which is in
vindication of the Church of England from the errors and superstitions of the
Church of Rome) prevailed so much upon me, that I could not but give them to
the Press.

Indeed having such enemies that openly and secretly vilify my Ministry by
reason of that Sermon which I gave to bring the contentious to union; I cannot
but vindicate my self from their false aspersions, for I had no other intention
in the Preaching of it then to take away the errors of the common people; to
bring them to a better understanding and make them leave their blind and proud
leaders, that they may come to their mother the Church of England, which their
divisions had spoiled and most shamefully defiled.

As for the other Sermons which I caused with the first to be printed by the
request of my friends; I give them to inform not the learned men, but the
common people, that they may see the spiritual silence by which the sons of God
cease from the works of the Prince of darkness; the real presence of Christ in
the holy Sacrament against the Transubstantiation of the Church of Rome, and
Consubstantiation of the Lutherans; the spiritual reign of our Savior against
the Millenaries Monarchical Kingdom; and the Celestial meat of God; that they
may seriously consider the great mystery of our Redemption, by which their and
our sins are blotted out through the precious blood of Jesus Christ.

And if any contentious man will critically question, or enviously quarrel at
my undertaking, be you (Courteous Reader) so far my Advocate as to plead in my
behalf; that it is not my ambition to be exposed public to the world, being of
a mean capacity, but to be accepted of my friends, and especially as much as
lay in my power to procure some good to the Church and Nation of England, which
I am so much engaged to: I know that in this present conjuncture of time the
matter treated of in the Sermons I give you is necessary to be known; and
specially the first, which I hope will make many confess their errors, that
caused divisions in the most eminent Church of England, whom I wish to stand
for ever safe upon the ground and foundation of the Apostles, Christ our
blessed Lord and Savior,

James Le Franc.

S. Paul's Reproof, OR A Vindication of the Church of England from the Errors
and Superstitions of the Church of Rome. Delivered in a Sermon preached at
Great S. Peter's Church in Norwich.
1 COR. 11.18. I hear that there be divisions among you.


WHen I did consider the hard usages and tedious alterations of this Nation,
where all things were in confusion, the right being perverted, injustice
erected, and the Church persecuted, I could not but lament such a deplorable
condition; but when I look upon that happy change which gives a new face unto
this people, and brings all things to its order, I must sincerely confess, that
it is Gods admirable work: for brethren, you see that which to me and many
others seemed impossible; you see our gracious Prince set upon his Throne,
which his Majesty by the space of many years could not approach,
notwithstanding the affection and good will of his faithful subjects; you see
the glorious Charles the great Monarch of England in possession of his own
Kingdoms, and with him peace and quietness for the good of the persecuted
Church, that after a silence of persecution where she was not seen by the eyes
of her afflicted Children, she may enjoy the silence of prosperity in all
godliness.

But that great favor of our God is not regarded by many of this Kingdom, who
so envy its happiness, that they seek with their unquiet mind to ruin it;
they are divided from the rest of their brethren, when as they may be united
together to the glory of the great God of heaven, the God of union, the
advancing of the Kingdom of Jesus Christ, and salvation of their souls.

Perhaps there are many present that will be offended at my discourse, but I
will have them know, that my intention is not to please some, nor offend any;
for it is only to show you what I with orthodox Learned men, conceive by the
Scripture and Antiquity to be true; therefore I exhort you all in the Name of
the Almighty God, whom you adore and fear, that you hear me with attention,
humility and charity, and above all, if there be any in this Congregation that
are contentious, I desire them to hear me without partiality and prejudice,
that I with the grace of our blessed Savior may remove the spirit of
contention which our grand Apostle Paul blames in the Corinthians, for in the
16, ver. speaking to the contentious, he says (if they would remain in that
humor) if any man seem to be contentious, we have no such custom, neither the
Churches of God; after which he reproves the Corinthians for their
irregularities by which they did profane the Lords Supper, and caused
divisions in the Church, saying, I praise you not that you come together, not
for the better but for the worse, for when you come together in the Church (I
hear that there be divisions among you) which last words I have chosen to
entertain you with, by the special assistance of the blessed Spirit; but that
you may have a clear intelligence of them, I shall divide my Text into two
parts, where in the first I shall speak of the divisions, and in the second
part I shall show you the causes and ocasions of them as you may see in my
Text, I hear that there be divisions among you,

The first part.
If oppression be a monster with many heads, so is division which you cannot
look upon without fear and horror, in Kingdoms, Families and Churches, for
you know that there is a civil or political division which ruineth all things
in Kingdoms, Cities, and Villages, for by that division Kingdoms are
destroyed, men slain, Virgins defloured, women abused, children corrupted,
Cities everted, Villages ruined, houses by fire consumed, Palaces demolished,
and the most pleasant dwellings wasted, nay, more then that Emperors and
glorious Kings dethroniz'd; so that nothing but desolation and ruin appears
before our eyes, as you your selves lately have seen in this Kingdom; but this
monster of division is not satisfied to spoil the glorious Kingdoms of the
earth; it reaches further unto private families to confound them, for there is
a domestical division which everteth all oeconomical order and government, and
procreates confusion and disorder in families, for in that fatal division the
Father is against the Son, the Son against the Father, the mother against the
daughter, the daughter against the mother, the husband hates his wife, and the
wife despises her husband; nay, you see that monster of division go up and
down in the house to the ruin and destruction of all things in families, for
in that division Parents neglect their children, with their employments, and
spend all that they have by profusion and carelessness.

But me thinks, I see this monster of division go yet further, and by a
damnable presumption endeavor to enter into the Church of God to spoil and
defile it; me thinks it prevails so far that the Church seems rather a chaos
or confusion then a distinct fabric, and if that Ecclesiastical monster be not
stayed that it go no further, it will spoil and ruin the sacred house of the
Almighty God; which the Apostle Paul did well know, for hearing of the
Ecclesiastical division among the Corinthians, he writes unto them to
extinguish it, saying I hear that there be divisions among you: I hear says
the Apostle, not by a special revelation (as if God should have revealed him
that which the Corinthians would not have him know) but by letters, or rather
by some that came from Corinth, who informed S. Paul of the disorders of the
Corinthians, and so writing unto them says, I hear that there be divisions
among you, as he had told them in the 2. verse of the first Chapter, concerning
their contentions about Paul, Apollo, and Cephas; it has bean declared unto me
that there are contentions among you;

But for a clear intelligence of the Ecclesiastical division of which the
Apostle here speaks, you must observe that it is vel circa doctrinam vel circa
disciplinam vel circa ceremonias; Either about the doctrine, or about the
discipline, or about ceremonies where the Ecclesiastical division about the
doctrine, is that by which the true principles and fundamental points of
Religion are everted, which is such a pernicious division that from thence
comes her pestilent daughter heresy; the division about discipline is that by
which the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction established for the correction of
Christian sinners, and preservation of the Church is destroyed, which is that
division which most shamefully brings forth licentiousness; the Ecclesiastical
division about Ceremonies, is that by which the rights of the Church observed
in the outward service of God, are most irreverently despised and abolished,
which is a division from which comes schism, which the Apostle speaks of when
he says, I hear that there be divisions among you; for the word of my Text in
the Original is (...) schisms, which nevertheless may be extended to the
division about doctrine and discipline, by which the Church is rent as well as
by that of Ceremonies and much more.

Indeed all these divisions were to be found among the Corinthians; for among
them some there were who would corrupt the doctrine by their erroneous
opinions, some among the Corinthians did condemn the marriage, not as if it
were instituted by a wicked God or by the devil (as Simon and Saturninus said)
but as a thing somerhing impure which was not fit for a Christian, whose life
was to be every way most pure, which obliged the Corinthians to write unto the
Apostle Paul to have his judgment about it, which was, that marriage was
lawful for every man, as you may see in the 7. Chapter of our Epistle, nay,
honorable in all, and the bed undefiled; some among the Corinthians being
infected with the Sadduces heresy, denied the resurrection of the bodies, as
you may observe in the 15. Chapter: some would defile the Christian doctrine
with Judaicall Superstitions, which some false Doctors would introduce in the
Church as necessary to salvation; moreover they would infect the doctrine of
the Gospel with the prophanations of the Gentiles, as it appears by the 8. and
10. Chapter; Concerning the Discipline and government of the Church some there
were among the Corinthians who would not have any, desiring to live according
to their own minds, that they might give themselves to all licentiousness
without any reprehension or correction; which prevailed so far, that the Church
of Corinth did bear with the whoremongers, drunkards, and contentious; which
gave our Apostle occasion to write the 5. and 6. Chapters of our Epistle to
extinguish that monster of licentiousness.

As for the Ceremonies, there was division in the Church; for among the
Corinthians some would not submit themselves unto the performance of them, as
you may see in our Chapter; where you must observe that the divisions of the
Corinthians, were not about the saving knowledge of Jesus Christ, nor about
heresy which everteth the doctrine; but about the manner of preaching and
praying, and about the manner of receiving the holy Sacrament: Concerning the
first, the contention was about the covering of the head, as if we should now
dispute about a hat and a coife, for men and women had engaged themselves in
that division: According to the custom of the Corinthians, as well as to that
of the Church of England the men were to be uncovered as well during the Sermon
as during the prayers, and women as now they are, were to be covered, as you
may see by the 4. and 5. verses of our Chapter, where we may very well take
praying and prophesying actively and passively; actively, for those that pray
and preach, and passively for those that join their vows and prayers with him
that prays, as those that are present at the hearing of him that preaches;
so that not only he that did preach according to the custom of the Church of
Corinth, was to be uncovered, but those also that were present at the hearing
of the Sermon, but some lovers of divisions would not submit to that custom;
Some men covered themselves in the holy Assemblies, and some women were
uncovered, which S. Paul hearing of, endeavors to instruct them about these
things, showing them the lawfulness of that custom, which the Church had
thought fit to be observed by both Sexes in their public and holy meetings
from the 6. ver. to the 16. ver.

For the manner of receiving the holy Sacrament, be it standing or kneeling,
the Apostle leaves it to the custom and ordering of the Church, that such
things might be established not by the common people, but by the Ecclesiastical
Superiors; for these injunctions belong only to them, as being sub potestate
ordinis, under the power of order, which is insinuated in the 1 Corinthians. 14. at
the last verse; Let all things be done, (that is, by the Ecclesiastical
Superiors) decently and in order; but if these injunctions regard the
Ecclesiastical Superiors, know ye also that the Ecclesiastical corrections for
the profanation of the Lords Supper belong to their persons, as it appears
by our Text, I hear that there be divisions among you, which has relation to
the following verses, where the Apostle condemns the profanation of the
Corinthians against the holy Sacrament.

And indeed it was very sit for the Apostle to condemn their profanation which
was committed in their banquets of charity, which were kept in the Church
before the participation of the Sacrament; for it came to pass soon after the
institution of these banquets, that the rich men that were at the expenses of
them, would not tarry for the poor, and so the rich were drunk, and the poor
hungry, as the Apostle speaks in the 21 ver. of our Chapter; the rich man came
to the Sacrament without reverence, being in that sinful and shameful
condition, and the poor discontented; for (as I have said) these banquets were
kept in the Church before the reception of the holy Sacrament, although soon
after the Apostles time that custom was changed, and these banquets kept after
its celebration, as it appears by Tertul. Apolog. for the Christians; and
Chrysostom in moral. homil. 27. their profanation then caused divisions in
the Church, and disorder among the Christian Corinthians, which obliges the
Apostle Paul to write and say, I hear that there be divisions among you.

But brethren, if all these things which I have mentioned were among the
Corinthians, give me leave to tell you without offense, that the same things
are to be found among us who have desiled the glorious Church of England, as
the Corinthians did the eminent Church of Corinth: it was that Ecclesiastical
monster of division that spoiled it when it did appear against doctrine,
discipline and Ceremonies; and it is that monster that is yet ready to ruin
that glorious Church, which as a Phoenix is newly born of her ashes; consider I
beseech you the divisions which are yet entertained amongst us, and you shall
see that they regard the Doctrine, Discipline, and Ceremonies, for heresy
reigns yet in England; Socinians, Anabaptists, Quakers and Millenaries, with
others, appear in great number, and with a damnable considence endeavor to
corrupt and desile the Evangelical doctrine, that they may insinuate and
scatter their errors and heresies among the poor Christian people;
licentiousness appears too much in this Kingdom; we are willing to give our
selves to all the corruptions of the world; but we are not willing to be
reproved for our sins, we slatter our selves in our iniquities, and wickedly
make use of the Christian liberty to maintain our rebellion: as for Schism it
is too well known in this Country, and I wish (as my duty with my affection to
this Nation obliges me) that that monster might be hated of all, and that
those that have been contentious might quietly return into the Church; let them
consider that those things which they trouble the Church for, touch not the
substance and body of Religion, but only the circumstances of it, and they
shall learn of our Apostle to hate divisions; for (says he) speaking about
these things to the Corinthians, if any man seem to be contentious, we have no
such custom, neither the Churches of God; and to correct their irregularities
about the holy Sacrament, I hear that there be divisions among you, which shows
the contentious that schism about Ceremonies leads to profanation about other
things, and to heresy, if it be not stayed; but behold, there are some
monsters that appear unto me black and obscure, coming from the dark prison of
the prince of the air, the God of this world, and that is pride with many other
daughters of hell, which you shall see in the second part of my Text.

The second Part.
As pride made division between God and the Angels, that are now devils, and
ambition did alienate our first Parents from God, so pride and ambition makes a
division between the Church and her children; for you shall often see the
children of the Church to be so ambitious, that they will esteem themselves
above their mother, and indeed there is no schismatic, much more an heretic
but is ambitious, and so the Shoolmen speak when they say, that a Schismatic
is one who retaining the fundamental points of Religion rends impudently the
Church by reason of some Rights and Ceremonies which his ambition approves not
of; but me thinks that the next daughter of hell is envy, which seems sad by
reason of the union which she fears in this Kingdom, for envy loves nothing but
division, because that vice and immoderate affection of our soul, will never
permit us to like what is done by those that we do not like, or to consent unto
these things which we had no hand to in their Institution; for in the
injunction of such things we are persuaded by that fatal passion that our
advantage is hindered or diminished: but behold there is another which is
covered with a very black garment, where you can discern nothing, and that is
ignorance, which cannot inform us of the nature of those things which are
imposed upon us by our Superiors, for Ignorance makes us esteem the
circumstances and garments of Religion to be of as high a nature as the body
and substance thereof, and by that means we cannot agree, nor receive the
circumstantial things which our Superiors impose upon us for the good order of
the Christian Church: but further give me leave to let another monstrous
daughter of hell appear with the others, that we may eschew the fatal effects
thereof, in the knowledge of her nature, and that is obstinacy, which is not
content to cause division but will countenance it: for obstinacy (as every one
knows) will always have us to defend that which we once have maintained and
blame that which we once have declaimed against although we know not any reason
for it, and so the obstinate men will remain in their errors and entertain
division.

Now if you consider the causes of our divisions without partiality, you will
confess with me, that Pride, Envy, Ignorance, and Obstinacy, were those
monsters which would not permit, as now will not yet suffer the fomenters of
division to adhere to those things which their Superiors imposed upon them;
for otherwise I do verily believe, that they had not embroyled this Nation with
such a cruel war; neither had they upon their pretended occasions so violently
persecuted the Church; for these things which many (who agree in the substance
of Religion with their mother the Church) contended about, are harmless and
cannot offend moderate and prudent men, for not any of the authors of the
division of this Kingdom, I hope, will blame the moderation of the first
Reformers of the Church of England, who seriously examined the Church of Rome
in its Doctrine, Discipline, and Worship, to reject the Errors and Heresies of
the Doctrine, the Tyranny and oppression of the Discipline, and the
Superstitions of the Worship; and retain that which the Church of Rome had from
the Christian Primitive Church; nay, more then that, they took a way the abuse
of things indifferent in their nature, and reduced them to a lawful use.

But for all that, some contentious, like those that were in Corinth, of whom
the Apostle speaks when he says, I hear that there be divisions among you,
would not be satisfied, they blamed many things that could be easily passed by,
as now many of their imitatours do; for the white color of the garments of the
Church of England offend their sight, they say that these garments are
superstitiously used in the Church of Rome; as if in the Church of Rome the
Clergy regular and secular did not use garments of several other colors as
well as white; nay, more then that, those that know the Church of Rome, as I
have reason to know it (having lived among them, and in their communion 23 or
24 years) are not ignorant that she makes use of all sorts of colors, so that
if we would not use any of those she makes use of, we should go all naked, and
so we should prove very fit to be among the Adamites; but as S. Jerome says
very well against Pelagius what enmity is it against God if the Bishop, Priest
and Deacon, do go in white vestments when they are to officiate.

Moreover, they will not admit the singing of the Creed nor many pious Songs,
when other Protestants beyond the Sea, whom the contentious approve of, sing
the Lords Prayer in their temple, as the Dutch Churches and those of Hesson, or
the ten Commandments, with that which we call the Song of Simeon, as our French
Reformed Churches and others do; and if they tell me, that the Church of
England cannot produce any passage of Scripture for the singing of the Creed,
etc. I answer, that it is not necessary for circumstantial things, and that our
Protestants beyond the sea, whom the causers of division in this Kingdom do
approve of, cannot bring any passage of Scripture to prove the singing of the
Lords Prayer, and the ten Commandments.

But their contentious humor goes yet further, for they will not have the
people answer in the celebration of the Divine Service, and they are offended
at the repetitions which the Church of England makes use of; but

For the first, I say, that it is good according to the custom of the Church
of England, to join our selves with the Pastors in the Church, as you did this
day, in the celebration of the Divine Service, for it is nothing else but a
sacred conce^t in imitation of that which the sacred Angels make use of in
heaven in their praising of the Lord, as you may see in Isa. 6. and the Church
of England is not the only Church amongst the Reformed which makes use of
answers in the celebration of the Divine Service, for the Reformed Churches of
Hungaria, Transylvania and Lithuania, as I am credibly informed, make use of
some answers in their Divine Service; but I need not to plead in that manner;
for if in that the Church of England should be alone among the Protestant
Churches, I would hold it lawful, because it is not against Scripture but
rather conformable to it; when the blessed spirits and sacred Angels cry or
answer one to another, Holy, Holy, Holy, is the Lord of Hosts.

Concerning the repetitions of the Church, let me tell you that they are as so
many productions of a sacred and vehement affection like unto that of David,
Lord, have mercy upon me, Lord, have mercy upon me; and that of the Angels,
Holy, Holy, Holy; indeed if the Church of England should make use of her
repetitions by number, as the Church of Rome does, so that by the repeating of
so many times such a prayer she should think to merit something before God, as
the relaxation of some temporal punishment, or to obtain the pardon of her sins
for 40. 50. or a 100. years; I would account them vain and superstitious, but
it is clear that she does not do it, for all that the Church of England does
intend in her repetitions, as I conceive is to inflame our zeal and affection
toward God; as the Prophet David left us an example, that we might conform our
selves to it; repeating many times the wonderful favors of our God toward the
humane kind, and saying Psalm. 136. in every verse for his mercy endures for
ever.

But this is not all which the Authors of our divisions condemn, for the sign
of the Cross made upon the forehead of the baptized Infants, passes for a
superstition and a rest of Papism, as the commemoration of the principal
mysteries of our redemption, observed at certain days of the year, with the
Festival days of the Blessed Virgin, the Apostles, and Martyrs; nay, more then
that, they cannot endure to hear any thing about the bowing to the Name of
Jesus.

But for the sign of the Cross, those that have perused the antiquity know
that it was used in the Christian primitive Church for a sign of the Christian
profession, as it appears by Tertullian, Cyprian, and Augustine de verbis
Domini the eighth Sermon, and that is granted by our Learned Peter du Moulin in
his little Tractate of the Traditions, Chap. 25. and I will not omit our
judicious Bucer, who says, in his first Book De Regno Christi, cap. 12. I
think that the sign of the Cross is neither indecent nor unprofitable, non tam
quod est in Ecclesia usus antiquissimi, quam quod est admodum simplex and
praesentis admonitionis crucis Christi; not so much because it is of an ancient
use in the Church, as that it is very innocent, and of a present admonition of
the Cross of Christ.

I confess that the sign of the Cross is superstitiously used in the Church of
Rome, for they make use of it with their holy water for the expiation of their
venial sins, which are not to be found in the Scripture, nor in antiquity, nor
in nature; they make use of the sign of the Cross to drive away the devil and
scare him; they use it before a Cross, because it has been cause (as they say)
of great wonders, and occasion of the conversion of S. Christopher, who (as
some of them say) was before engaged in the service of the devil, although it
is very true, that there was never such a man as they imagine him to be: nay,
they make use of the sign of the Cross before and after their meat, some being
of that persuasion, that their meat and drink cannot profit them without that
sign; but the Church of England admits none of these Superstitions, for she
only makes use of the sign of the Cross for a mark and token of the Christian
profession as it was used in the Primitive Church.

And do not tell me, that it was upon occasions which are not now to be found
among us, for I will tell you, that now the occasions are as great if not
greater, being among those who under the profession of Christ endeavor to
ruin his Church; and if that were no sin to do it in the Primitive Church, as
I hope the contentious will confess, I may certainly say that it is none now to
do it; but those that condemn the sign of the Cross, should not at all speak
against it, for if they are persecuted as they say, let them according to the
custom of the Church Primitive, make the sign of the Cross among themselves.

As for the Festival days, or the commemoration of the principal mysteries of
our Redemption, and other special favors of God which gloriously shined in the
Blessed Virgin, the Apostles, and Martyrs, observed at certain days of the
year; it is well known to such as are but meanly read, that it was the custom
of the Christian Church before the Apostatick seat of Rome, as you may see by
Jerome in his Commentary upon the Epistle to the Galatians, cha. 4. adding
there further, that soon after the Apostles time the Histories of their lives
and deaths were read in the Church, and their godly examples commended to the
people; and although Antiquity is not sufficient of it self to justify this or
that Observation, yet next unto the Holy Scriptures it is to be reverenced
according to that of S. Austin, Epist. 118. tom. 2. post sacras Scriptur as ea
nobis sunt observanda quae vel ab Apostolis profecta esse per traditionem, vel
ab universalibus consiliis desinita esse judicantur; those things are by us to
be observed next unto the Holy Scriptures, which are judged to come from the
Apostles by tradition, or to have been desined by general Councils.

Indeed we must acknowledge, that many superstitions are used these days in the
Church of Rome; for in the Festival days of the blessed Virgin, and holy
Apostles, those of the Church of Rome pretend to merit before God in their
sinful devotions before such an Altar and no other, and in such a Chapel;
they offer unto them Vows, present them their prayers, and give them an honor
which is due unto God; which if these Saints had any knowledge of, they without
doubt would implore the Divine Majesty to punish their presumption; for if they
could not endure such an honor upon the earth, Act. 10.14. as being only
proper to God, much less will they suffer it in heaven, being endued with a
greater charity toward the God of glory, whom they must reverently adore;
therefore the Church of England admits not these Superstitions in her Festival
days; she does nothing but meditate these days on the wonderful graces of God,
which did appear in these Saints, of whom she celebrates the commemoration, and
desires of God, that she may imitate them in the holy life and pious
conversation which they did lead upon the earth, and so she says with S.
Austin lib. de vera relig. cap. 55. Sancti honorandi sunt propter imitationem,
sed non adorandi propter religionem, the Saints are to be honored for
imitation, but not worshipped for Religion, for although these days are kept
holy in Commemoration of the Saints, yet they are not kept holy to the Saints
but to God.

For the bowing at the Name of Jesus, I confess, that at first coming from the
Church of Rome I thought it was superstitious, but having seriously examined
the thing, I see that it can be done without superstition; for we owe to our
blessed Savior an outward and inward reverence, because Christ has redeemed
not only our souls but also our bodies from eternal corruption, and indeed we
may observe that in Phil. 2.10. where it is said, that at the Name of Jesus
every knee shall bow, of things in heaven, things in earth, and things under
the earth; for although the Apostle speaks immediately of the glory and
authority given our Savior, yet we must make it known inwardly and outwardly,
by an inward and outward reverence: and the famous Zanchius acknowledges the
lawfullness of the bowing at the Name of Jesus, in that verse of the Epistle to
the Philippians, saying, whereas before the Name of Jesus was blasphemed by
almost all the Jews, after his death his Divinity being manifested, he is
adored of all men, so that even at the mentioning of the Name of Jesus they all
how their knees to him: atque hinc non dubito quin profecta sit illa
antiquissima consuetudo in Ecclesus, ut cum nominatur Jesus omnes aperiant
caput in testimonium reverentiae and adorationis: and I doubt not but that from
thence came that ancient custom used in the Churches, that all should uncover
their heads at the naming of Jesus, in sign of reverence and adoration, and
that is used not only in the Reformed Churches of England, but also in those
of the Palatinate, as I have heard of those that came from that place.

Indeed I must confess, that to do it as the Church of Rome does, is a thing
superstitious, for they place some virtue in the Name of Jesus, qua nomen,
consisting of its two syllables; so that they superstitiously worship the word
it self; nay, more then that, they say, that the Name of Jesus, qua nomen, is
greater, holier, and more reverent, then the Name of God, as Cornel. a lapide
expresses; but the Church of England admits no such thing, she bows at the Name
of Jesus, to express a sign of the reverence which she owes not to the word it
self, but to Christ signified by the word; and there is no more superstition in
that, then there is in the kneeling at these words, Et verbum caro factum est,
and the Word was made flesh; but some of the Learned Protestant Doctors
conceive no Superstition at the kneeling at these words; for as Peter Martyr
Coc. com. Class. 4. cap. 10. sect. 50. says, many there be who piously kneel
and worship at the hearing of these words of the Gospel, [and the Word was made
flesh,] and yet it must not be said, that these words themselves are
worshipped, but that which is by them signified; then there is no Superstition
at the bowing at the Name of Jesus.

I could raise many other Objections, which those make who love division, but I
will not be tedious, it is enough to tell you, that that which our divided
people, enemy of the Episcopal Government, and of all the Rights which the
Church of England observes, blames, is approved of by all the Protestants
beyond the Seas as good or esteemed as indifferent; which may be enjoined and
made necessary necessitate convenientiae by the Ecclesiastical Superiors; and
I remember that I heard from a Polander with whom I was sometimes at Paris,
that in the Reformed Churches of Bohemia, and those of little Poland, the
people kneeling did receive the Sacrament, and that these Protestants did
celebrate the Feasts of our blessed Savior, of the Virgin Mary mother of
Christ, and of the Apostles; as in all these Churches and others, they bury the
dead with certain forms, which contain Lectures, Hymns, and Prayers, which as
in the Church of England show the desire we Christians ought to have for the
enjoying of the eternal felicity and glory both in body and soul, with those
that are departed this life in the faith of Jesus Christ; whereof the Church of
Rome superstitiously prays for the dead, that they may enjoy an eternal rest,
and that their souls may be delivered from the flames of Putgatory, which is a
place which they cannot find in the Scripture, nor in the Writings of the
Doctors of the Primitive Church, as it appears by some of the Learnedest of
our adversaries, for Fisher Bishop of Rochester in his Writings egainst Luther,
says, that in the ancient Writers there is little or no mention of Purgatory;
and Durand does ingeniously confess, that Ambrose, Austin, Hilary and Jerome do
not at all speak of Purgatory; as Marous as it is reported Bishop of Ephesus
declared in the Council of Florence, that Chrysostom denied it; by that then
you see that those things which the Church of England observes, are harmless,
and have nothing of Popery with them, which is so evident, that some of the
most eminent Ministers of the Reformed Churches of France, M. du Moulin, and
the Learned Bochart did in the English Churches follow their customs, which
they did approve of as good and lawful, as it appears by their letters to
several Bishops of England; for indeed I may say, if they had thought that
their customs and ceremonies had been sinful, they had not communicated with
the Church of England.

And if you tell me, why do not then the Churches of France and others beyond
the Seas, observe the same Ceremonies, I will answer with the Church of England
according to the 34. of her Articles, that it is not necessary, that ceremonies
be in all places one and utterly like, for at all times says the Article, they
have been diverse, and may be changed according to the diversity of countries,
times, and men's manners; let then those that will not submit to the order of
the Church consider these things, and I am sure that we shall not have occasion
to say with the Apostle, I hear that there be divisions among you: Indeed
brethren, not to submit our selves to the customs of the Churches in things
which are not contrary to Scripture, is a sign of a notable frowardness, and a
token of an humor which abhors tranquillity and concord, says the Learned
du Moulin, in his Book concerning traditions, chap. 24. page 346. for we ought
to conform our selves to such customs and ceremonies of the Church; as Jerome
in his Epistle to Lucinius, teaches us, saying, I think that I must tell you
that the Ecclesiastical Traditions, specially those that are not contrary to
faith ought to be observed, as we have received them from our ancestors, and so
speaks S. Ambrose to S. Austin, and S. Austin to Januarius, epist. 118. saying,
when I am at Rome I fast on Saturday, but when I am at Millan, I do not fast;
so when you come into some Church keep her custom, if you will not scandalize
any nor be scandalized of any; and indeed it is necessary for Christians to
submit to customs, not necessary in their natures, for if the evil be not so
great as touching the doctrine, it may be very great as touching the manners
and disorders which from thence come forth.

But give me leave to go yet further, to take away an error which is common in
this Nation, and among the enemies of the Church of England, who say, that the
Liturgy is taken from the Mass, nay, is nothing but the Mass in English,
celebrated in the same manner the Church of Rome does, which makes a great
impression in the common people.

To answer unto that; I say, that (although the Church of England had taken her
Liturgy out of the Mass Book, it would not follow that the Liturgy should not
be good except they show me, that all which is in the Mass is false and
erroneous, which cannot be: for if it were so, the Creed and the Lords Prayer,
which is said with the Mass, should not be good, nay, should be erroneous; but
let me tell you, that it is a false aspersion and calumny, which the
contentious of this Nation, put upon the Liturgy of the Church of England, when
they say, that it is drawn from the Mass, for in the Mass they shall not find
the manner of the confession and absolution of our sins, as it is inserted in
the Liturgy of the Church of England; they shall not find in the Mass the Te
Deum, or song of S. Ambrose, the Benedicite, or Song of the three Children, as
they are to be found in the English Liturgy; they shall not find in the Mass,
many prayers that are to be found in the Liturgy of the Church of England, nor
the Litany which she makes use of; they shall not find in the Mass the ten
Commandments, nor the Commination or threatening made unto those who persevere
in their iniquities, nor many other things, which are piously and truly set
down in the English Liturgy; but they shall find in the Mass the superstitious
invocation of creatures, of Angels, men and women; the prayers for the souls of
those who (as the Church of Rome says, are in Purgatory, grounded upon the
merits of the Saints, or on some bones which they call Relics; and above all
they shall find in the Mass a new sacrifice of Jesus Christ offered unto God
the Father for the living and the dead; but you shall not find these things in
the Liturgy of the Church of England, for the Church of England condemns all
these Superstitions and abominations in 22. and 31. of her Articles.

Moreover, the Liturgy of the Church of England is not only different from the
Mass in its matter and form, but also in the manner of its celebration, and use
of it; for the Mass is only celebrated in the morning, and after 12 of the
clock there is no Mass private nor soleninal to be said; in a Cathedral Roman
Church 20. or 30. Masses are sometimes celebrated at the same time in the
several Chapels thereof, and one Mass being said, a Priest comes in the place
of the other, that has finished his Mass to celebrate his, having before
confessed some of his sins to another Priest, and so sometimes about an hundred
Masses will be celebrated in a morning in the same Cathedral: In the Mass, the
Priest begins with a great sign of the Cross upon his forehead, his stomach
and his shoulders, and then joining his hands before his breast, he says,
Introibo ad altar Dei, etc. and after the ending of the Introite, after the
Consiteor, to God, to the Virgin Mary, to Michael the Archangel, to John the
Baptist, to the Apostles Peter and Paul, and to all the Saints; the Priest goes
up to the Altar to perform the Mass, speaking sometime in secret, sometime with
a low voice, and sometime with a loud one, except it be a solemn Mass, where
the voice is higher for the most part, and the Priest that celebrates it does
many things that are not observed in the private Mass, and speaks to the
Incense, and blesses it in that manner, saying, be blessed Incense through him,
in whose honor thou shall be burned, and that in Latin, as the rest of the
Mass: sometimes the Priest turns himself, and shows his face to the people to
say Orate fratres, Pray ye brethren, or Ite, missa est, go ye, this is the
leave or dismission; at that part of the Mass called the Offertory, the young
man or child who answers to the Priest, and serves him in a private Mass, or
the subdeacon which serves the Priest with a Deacon, in a solemn Mass, goes
up to the corner of the Altar, where he takes two little bottles, in one of
which there is wine, and the other water; he gives them to the Priest that came
to him; who takes them to pour into the Chalice or cup wine and water; after
that the Priest draws himself to the middle of the Altar right against an Image
of Christ upon the Cross, or of some Saint, where he makes the Sign of the
Cross with the Chalice, which he after puts upon the Altar, and covers with the
cloth called the Corporass: then the Priest comes again to him that serves at
the Mass, to wash his hands, saying, when the young man pours water upon his
fingers, Lovabo manus meas inter innocents, etc. I will wash my hands among
the innocents, etc. in the canon of the Mass before the consecration of the
Host, the Priest makes many signs of the Cross, and after the consecration
many more, that the assaults of the devil may not prevail against it, as
Innocent the third Pope teaches, lib. 2. de Myster. Missae, cap. 58. toward
the ending of the Mass, the Priest stretches out to the young man, or other
that serves him the empty Chalice, who pours wine into it where with the Priest
washes his mouth, because it is the wine of Purification; a little after he
washes his singers, wipes them, and drinks that washing, and then kissing the
Altar he bows and inclines his head toward the Cross, and turning himself to
the people, he finisheth the Mass, saying, Benedicat vos, etc. except it be a
Mass for the dead where the Priest says in lieu of it, Requiescant in pace,
let them rest in peace.

As for the Vestments which they use in the Mass, they are also different from
those of the Church of England; they make use of no Surplice in the Mass; for
when the Priest dresses himself, first he puts the Amice, which covers the
Priests head in the form of a hood, after the Amice the Priest puts the Albe,
which is like a white shirt, about the borders whereof there is some light work
with green or red silk, upon the Albe the Girdle is put, which is white, and
adorned with two tossels of the same color; the Stole comes after, which is
for the most part very glorious, and hangs on the right and on the left hand of
the Priest, who after the Stole puts the Maniple in the fashion of a napkin
upon the left arm, and for the last Vestment he takes the Chasuble, which is a
most rich Vestment that covers all the others that are upon him except the
Amice, which especially is seen when a Friar celebrates the Mass: besides these
Vestments, when a Bishop of the Church of Rome says a Mass, he has Sandals,
which they call Apostolic shoes, he has the Episcopal breeches, the Tunique,
and the Dalmatique; he has also the Episcopal Gloves, the Rings and the Cross,
etc. which are as many enigmatical ornaments, and of an abstruse intelligence,
which we shall leave to them; by that you see how the Church of England
differs from the Church of Rome, and the Liturgy from the service of the
Mass, in its matter, form and manner of its celebration.

But me thinks, that I hear some of the factious say, whatsoever you say there
is something of the Mass in the Liturgy of the Church of England, and much of
the Breviary (which is a Book different from that of the Mass; to which I
answer, that there is nothing of the corrupted service of the Mass; and if
there be something in the Liturgy which is observed and said with the Mass, and
read in the Breviary, I say that in is what is good and what was observed in
the Christian Primitive Church, leaving what was not good to the Church of Rome
and her superstitious inventions.

Conclusion and Application.
Now let us conclude with Application, and to remove the divisions which are
now in the Land, let us be of one mind, and of one persuasion, that we may see
this Kingdom flourish in peace and truth: for if divisions cause such disorders
and confusions in States, Families, and Churches, as you your selves by sad
experience know, you will confess with me, that union cannot but bring peace,
and procreate good order unto them; for union conserveth the kingdoms of the
earth, keeps families in awe, and preserves the Churches of God from schism,
licentiousness and heresy; you know that the God of heaven is a God of union,
who hates division which destroys his works of nature, and that of his
grace, in which appears an admirable and inexplicable union; for by the work
of his grace our blessed Savior united unto God those who were divided from
him by their iniquities, and by that gracious work, earth is united with
heaven, and men with Angels.

Then let us all that are here present embrace that virtue and daughter of
heaven, union, which leads us to the God of order: all the sacred Scripture
preaches nothing else but union, and as our Apostle Paul exhorts unto it the
Corinthians, so do I exhort you all unto union, and beseech you with him by the
name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye all speak the same things, and that
there be no divisions among you, but that you be perfectly joined together in
the same mind, and in the same judgment, 1 Cor. 1.10. and do not tell me,
that your conscience cannot bear with those things which are imposed upon you;
for if you seriously consider the occasions of our fatal divisions, you will
find them to be no sufficient occasions; examine without partiality, your
reasons, and I am sure that you will not find any sufficient argument for your
division; for all that you can plead, will appear to be under some of those
monsters, pride, envy, ignorance or obstinacy: do not say in your selves, I
have so much spoken against these circumstantial things, that I do not know how
I shall submit my self again to these orders and injunctions; for besides you
have the commandment of an August Parliament, which you must submit unto, let
me tell you that such considerations proceed from the devil, the god of this
world, and the Prince of division, who does what he can to hinder the glorious
union which we hope the great God of heaven, will give unto this Nation, to the
glory of his great Name, and the advancing of the spiritual kingdom of his Son
Jesus Christ.

Let us repent, brethren, in the consideration of our sins, which brought these
disorders in this kingdom; it is no shame before God, and angels, and men, but
rather a commendation and glory; let men say what they will, but regard not
what they say, obey God, the King, and the Church; but let your obedience be
sincere and without hypocrisy, otherwise you keep the divisions in your
hearts, which will break out at the first occasion.

Consider these things with an impartial eye, and I am sure that you will
endeavor to banish out of this Nation that horrible and bloody monster of
division, and that for the circumstances and the garments of Religion, you will
not embroil this glorious kingdom with new wars, and spoil the Church of God to
give way to all schismatics and heretics, who arise from the ruin of the
Church: I could go yet further in the representation of the disorders which are
caused by contentious persons, but I will not any longer trespass on your
patience, for I will finish my discourse at this time, desiring that the peace
of God which passes all understanding, may keep your hearts and mind from
schism, licentiousness, and heresy: Amen.

TO THE Right Honorable and Virtuous THOMAS Lord RICHARDSON Baron of Cramond,
etc. All happiness and Peace.
Right Honorable,
IF Presents ought to be worthy of those to whom we present them; I must
ingeniously confess, that it is in vain for me to offer your Lordship any
thing, being deprived of that eminent capacity; and indeed persons of quality
and eminency as your Honor is, must not expect such presents from their
inferiors; yet (Noble Sir) I hope you will receive that which I present here
to your Lordship: I confess, it is something presumptuous in me to make use of
your Name to ennoble my Sermon unto others, but I am persuaded that the most
excellent courtesy which shines in your most noble Person, will excuse a
stranger, nay, will suffer me to present you with a heavenly silence, where you
may see the fatal Eclipse of the Church of God, under the bloody persecutions
of its enemies, with her happiness and prosperity at the cessation of her
afflictions, but specially the great mystery of our redemption, that procures
unto angels and men a profound silence of admiration; for I am not ignorant
that your Lordship takes a singular pleasure at such celestial meditations,
your most virtuous person being persuaded, that not only the poor but the rich
also are redeemed by the precious blood of Jesus Christ, and obliged to give
silence to all the sinful motions of our corrupted nature; and indeed your
great charity toward the poor members of our blessed Savior, and singular
affection to the Clergy, is a sufficient token of that verity, nay, an example
to draw others to the imitation of the noble daughter of heaven, virtue, and
force the most profane to abandon vice, that monstrous child of hell; I could
say much more of the singular virtues which nature and grace have adorned your
Lordship with; nay, of your singular affection to the great Monarch of England,
and the Church, but that would prove needless, it being so manifest to all;
that therefore which I shall say for the present, if you will grant me that
liberty, is, that I am,

My Lord, Your Honors most humble Servant, James Le Franc.

The Churches Spiritual Silence: Delivered in a Sermon Preached at the
Cathedral in Norwich.
REVEL. 8.1. There was silence in heaven about the space of half an hour.


AS in difficult and obscure things we do not know which way to turn our
selves, so in the matter which I have now in hand, I do not know whether I
shall speak or keep silence; me thinks that S. John tells me, that I must stay
to contemplate the great wonders that are seen in heaven at the opening of the
seventh seal; it seems that I must keep silence, because the sacred Angels do
not speak themselves, and dare not sound their trumpets, lest they should
hinder the great agitations of heaven, which appear in this silence: indeed I
could speak at the opening of the first, second, third and fourth seals of the
book, in which is written, within, and on the backside the great mystery of
our redemption, the conservation of the Church, and the punishment of profane
and wicked men; for at the opening of these seals, there was no silence kept,
as you may evidently see in the 6. Chapter; the beasts be Angels or
Evangelists, as some learned men will have it, crying Come and see; I could
break silence at the opening of the fifth seal, because you may easily
perceive, that there was no silence at the opening of it; hearing under the
altar the souls of them that were slain for the Word of God, crying with a loud
voice and saying, How long, O Lord, holy and true, do thou not judge and
avenge our blood; Moreover, I could speak at the opening of the sixth seal, for
at the opening of it a great noise was heard, behold, there was an earthquake,
which learns us, that we must not keep silence; but at the opening of the
seventh seal, I do not see how I may speak; for at the opening of that seal
there was silence: I am at a stand, not knowing which is best for me to do,
whether to speak or keep silence; but seeing that I came to this place to
inform you about that heavenly silence, I must break it, and implore the
assistance not of angels, nor of men, but of our blessed Savior, who has
prevailed to open the book, and loose the seven seals thereof; for you know,
that the Lion of the tribe of Judah is he that can give me leave to speak in
this silence, which S. John speaks of, saying, there was silence in heaven
about the space of half an hour, which are the words that I have chosen to
entertain you with by the special assistance of the blessed Spirit: but for a
clear intelligence of them, I shall divide my text into two parts, where in the
first part, I shall speak of the silence which was kept in heaven in these
words, there was silence in heaven; and in the second part I will show you the
duration of it, about the space of half an hour.

The first Part.
To know well the silence which S. John speaks of, we must first enter into the
place where it was kept, heaven, there was silence in heaven; but as that place
is something obscure by reason of its several acceptions, we must observe that
here by heaven is not understood the air, which the Scripture calls heaven,
Genesis 8.2. the place of generation of many imperfect mixed bodies, ice, dew,
clouds, rain, hail, blazing stars, and other moist and siery impressions, as if
these productions should cease in its breast, or the air should rest from its
agitation; neither is it understood by heaven the sky, that shining and bright
heaven adorned with an insinite number of glorious stars, as if there were a
cessation of the motion of those shining bodies; nor is it meant the supreme or
highest heaven, the place of habitation of the sacred angels and blessed souls,
which the Scripture calls the third heaven, 2 Cor. 12.2. as if there should be
a suspension of the heavenly actions of the Citizens of that glorious palace;
nor is heaven to be understood in this place of the triumphant Church, a
glorious part of the mystical body of our dear Savior; which sometimes the
Scripture calls heaven, Ephesians. 1.10. Col. 1.20. as if these glorious natures
should cease to render their Hallelujahs and Thanks-givings unto the Almighty
God who is set upon his throne of majesty and glory.

For here we must understand by heaven the militant Church upon the earth, as
it clearly appears by the preceding Chapter where you hear an angel cry with a
loud voice to the four angels, which did represent the four illustrious
kingdoms of the earth, with their Monarchs, or the devils to whom it was given
to hurt the earth and the sea, saying, hurt not the earth, neither the sea, nor
the trees, till we have sealed the servants of our God in their foreheads;
after which S. John beheld a great multitude of men who were to suffer
martyrdom for Christ, and wash their robes white in the blood of the Lamb, nay,
whom Christ was to lead unto the living and eternal fountains of waters; and
immediately after the Church of God, admires the great mystery of our
redemption in Christ, for which she suffers: for it follows, and when he
had opened the seventh seal, there was silence in heaven, and indeed the
Scripture calls not seldom the militant Church heaven, as you may see, Dan.
8.10. where it is said, that the little horn which did represent the power of a
Potent but wicked King, intra and extra Ecclesiam, within and without the
Church, waxed great even to the host of heaven, that is, the militant Church:
so in the Revelation 12. chapter, 4. verse. we read that the great red dragon
the devil, with his well affected creatures, by his fraudulent allurements,
drew with his tail (the antichrist that follows the devils steps) the third
part of the stars of heaven, that is, the great persons of the militant Church,
which are eminent in learning, humane wisdom, nobility, and riches; and in my
text there was silence in heaven, the militant Church; which obliges me to
tell you, that there are three considerations, for which the militant Church is
called heaven.

First, because the birth of the militant Church is from heaven, for she is
born of God, 1 John 5.1. and so I may say with S. John, I saw the holy city,
the militant Church, coming down from God out of heaven.

She is so called, because the inheritance thereof is an inheritance of heaven,
and therefore it is called the inheritance of the Saints, Col. 1.12.

The militant Church is called heaven, because her conversation is in heaven,
as the great Apostle tells us; Phil. 3.20. and so our blessed Savior calls
often his visible Church the kingdom of heaven, which agrees with our assertion
of that word heaven, the militant Church, of which it is spoken, when S. John
says, there was silence in heaven.

But having seen the place where silence was kept, the militant Church; let us
now consider the silence, and give me leave to make a reslection upon it:
Silence (brethren) which the Hebrews call (...) cheresh, and the Greek (...),
if we consider it in general, is nothing else but a cessation of the external
and visible actions of the sensible, insensible, and reasonable creatures; and
so the learned men call the quietness of the water, silence, when the water
does not move its moist substance; nay, the conjunction of the moon with the
most bright sun, where she seems to be ravished in contemplation of so glorious
a Planet, is called silence; and the herbs and slowers which cease from
growing, are said to be silent, but it is not of that manner of silence which
is here spoken of; for in this place silence is taken for a suspension of the
outward actions of the intelligent creatures, but properly of men, as the place
where silence is kept, evidently shows, heaven the militant Church, of which
they only are members, not the angels.

But you must know, that there are several sorts of silence attributed unto
them, which I must declare unto you for the better illustration of the silence
which S. John speaks of.

First, there is silentium persecutionis, the silence of persecution.

Secondly, silentium pacis, the silence of peace and prosperity.

Thirdly, silentium admirationis, the silence of admiration.

The silence of the Church which is of persecution, is the cessation of the
public worship of God by reason of the persecutions, which the Church
suffers for Christ under the enemies of the Gospel, as it did appear in the
birth of the Christian Church, which was followed with a cruel silence; and I
suppose that you have heard of the great eclipse of the militant Church under
the ten persecutions, and specially the tenth bloody and most cruel persecution
under the Emperors Dioclesianus, Maximianus, Galienus, Maxentius, Maximinus,
and Licinius; and how the militant Church at that time was in a profound
silence; for you know that by the space of twenty years the Church was such,
that she could not be seen by the eyes of her afflicted children, nor by the
piercing sight of her persecutours who boasted to have utterly extinguished the
Christians; at that time there was silence in heaven, for the Church of God was
silent by reason of her persecutions; she was in her mourning apparel being
under the cross, the places of her resuge were the deserts, her palaces the
dens of the wild beasts, her most pleasant dwellings the habitation of
serpents and other most venomous creatures; her voice was not heard; and she
could not publicly entertain her self with her sweet and most amiable
bridegroom, and say, I will rise now and go about the city in the streets, and
in the broad ways, I will publicly seek him whom my soul loves, Cant. 3.2.
Now if we make reflection upon this Nation, we may truly say, that there was
silence in heaven, when the Usurpers of this Kingdom did sit upon the Throne of
our gracious Monarch Charles the Second; for at that time the Church of England
was in a deep silence; her sumptuous and magnificent buildings, erected to
offer to God our public but spiritual sacrifices, were demolished, the mother
and children persecuted, and all her public and holy meetings prohibited; so
that she could not with a loud voice call her afflicted children to give them
any consolation, or mollify the sorrows of their souls.

I know that some learned men take the silence of the Church, which S. John
here speaks of, according to that sense, by an allusion to the Angel who was to
perform the sacred function upon the altar of incense, as you may see in the
third verse of our Chapter; for you must know, that when the Levitical Priests
killed the beasts which were to be offered in sacrifice, there was a great
noise heard in the temple by the roaring of the beasts, which were tied fast to
the horns of the altar of the burntofferings, and from thence were called
victimae, victims, quia ammalia vincta ad altar immolabantur, because the
beasts were tied to the altar at their immolation; but when they burned incense
there was silence in the Church, every one did consult in their hearts with the
Almighty God of Israel, and as the pious Hannah, moved only their lips, but
did not open their mouths to cause any noise in the temple, as you may observe
Luke 1.10. where you read, that the whole multitude of the people were praying
without at the time of the incense; so by an allusion to the offering of the
sacred incense where silence was kept, they understand the silence of
persecution, wherein the Church is in a profound silence by reason of her
persecutours.

But leaving that opinion I pass unto the silence of peace and prosperity, to
tell you, that it is a cessation in regard of the Church, of her persecutions,
when she publicly rests from her cruel labors, begins to take breath, and
publicly receives a great and exceeding consolation from her dear Savior and
blessed Lord, where in that condition the Church of God remains in a profound
silence, considering with her self how God is careful of those that are in
affliction for his sake, and as he comforts them by his holy Spirit inwardly,
although under the burden of persecution, so he delivers them from their
calamities, and restores his people into a peaceable and sweet condition both
in body and soul, as it was done in the time of Constantine the great, where
the Church began to respire from her cruel persecutions, for at that time there
was silence in heaven, silence of prosperity and peace; and so we may say,
there is silence in heaven, when the Church of God is in a peaceable and quiet
condition, without schisms and divisions.

But we must go further, and evidently see that it is of the silence of
admiration that S. John speaks of when he says, there was silince in heaven,
because this silence tends to the present action, where angels and men are
ravished in the contemplation of it; for it was kept at the opening of the
seventh seal, as you may see in the beginning of the 1. ver. by the words that
immediately precede my Text; and therefore you must observe, that here is
question of a great and sublime mystery which was to cause unto the Jews and
Gentiles a profound silence, in the consideration of it; do you not see all the
court of heaven to be silent, the angels that are sent for the protection of
the militant Church, dare not sound their trumpets, lest any thing should
hinder the great and sublime actings which did appear in the Church, to teach
us, that we must keep silence, to contemplate with admiration what is acted in
heaven? me thinks I see the Church in a profound silence, she is admiring with
amazement that great mystery, the object of her contemplation, and let me tell
you, that it is not without cause, seeing it is the matter of the great mystery
of our redemption, which the militant Church upon the earth admireth in every
age with a profound silence; for at the opening of the seventh seal, Christ God
and man, the cause of this silence, appears, for the angel that came and
stood at the altar is our blessed Savior, as the best of interpreters teach
us, God manifested in the flesh, an object which angels and men are not used to
behold, Christ the angel of the great council, and the messenger of the
covenant, as the Prophet Malachy tells us, Mal. 3.1. Christ our High Priest who
offered a sacrifice not of beasts, but of himself upon the altar of the Cross,
and therefore at his coming into the world to assume our humane nature to
satisfy the divine justice for men's sins, he caused a great admiration unto
angels, and at his manifestation procured in heaven, the militant Church, a
profound silence.

But that you may have a greater satisfaction, I beseech you look upon the 3.
verse of our Chapter, and you will easily see the cause of this silence to be
Christ our Redeemer, for it is said in that verse, that another angel, Christ
our Priest and Mediator, came, having assumed our humane nature, and stood at
the altar, to show us, that he was offered in sacrifice for our sins; where you
must observe, that Christ is our Priest according to both his natures, our
altar according to his divine nature; for as the altar sanctified the oblation,
Mat. 23.19. so Christ as God sanctified himself in his humane nature, according
to which humane nature Christ properly is our sacrifice, as you may see in the
first Chapter of the Epistle to the Colossians, 22. ver. and in 1 Pet. 4.1.
although the principal virtue of his sacrifice did depend on his divine nature;
Moreover it is said, that the angel had a golden censer, to teach us, that
Christ gave God the Father a perfect and eternal satisfaction, that we might be
delivered from the eternal slavery of the prince of darkness, which our sins
had made us subject to; and further it says, that much incense was given him,
to show us, that the peculiar office of Christ, is to present God the Father
the prayers of the righteous, and make them acceptable unto him through his
intercession, which alone without the intercession of the departed Saints, is
sufficient for all those that he redeemed by his precious blood, as you may see
in the 4. verse, where it is said, that the smoke of the incense which came
with the prayers of the Saints, ascended up before God out of the angels hand;
all which things could not but cause silence in heaven, the militant Church,
and ravish with admiration all the intelligent creatures in the opening of so
great a mystery which the angels desire to look into, 1 Pet. 1.12.

Moreover, seeing that the angel Christ, took the censer, and filled it with
fire of the altar, as we read in the 5. verse, and cast it into the earth, to
prepare by that sacred sire the Ministers of the holy Gospel, to preach one
Jesus Christ and him crucified, as he did after his ascension into the glorious
palace of his Father, as we read Act. 2.3. the Church could not but keep
silence, and further hearing voices, thundrings, lightnings, and earthquakes at
the opening of the great and sublime mystery of our redemption, for the
confirmation of it she could not but admire with a profound silence such
prodigious effects, as many for certain do in this world at the hearing of this
great mystery, and I hope many in this company cannot but wonder at it, and
say, being ravished in admiration with S. John, at the opening of so great a
mystery, there was silence in heaven; but I am afraid of abusing of your
patience, seeing that this silence should continue but half an hour, there was
silence in heaven about the space of half an hour, which leads me to the second
part of my Text.

The second part.
As the intelligent creatures are limited and finite; so is their contemplation
which does not permit them to consider several things at once; for their
understandings present them the objects one after another, according to the
capacity of their natures, and indeed God alone is he who can at once
comprehend all things, because he alone compasses about all the creatures of
the Universe, and which is most admirable in the knowledge which God has of
all things, is, that to know them he does not look upon them, but upon himself*
for in his wisdom he sees the eternal models of all things, and in his will the
efficient cause of all the events, so that by the knowledge that God has of
himself he knows all things; but it is not so with the intelligent creatures,
for they must alternatively and by degrees consider several natures, whether
they look upon them Intuitive, intuitively as angels; or discursive,
discursively as men; or consider them with admiration, as both angels and men,
as you may see in our Text; there was silence in heaven for the space of half
an hour, because the sacred attendants of the militant Church could not at once
in a moment perceive all those wonders which we have told you were seen in
heaven during the celestial silence, of which S. John speaks, saying, there was
silence in heaven for the space of half an hour.

But this duration of time half an hour, has some difficulty in its
explication; for some learned men will have it to be the duration of the
external peace of the Church of God under Constantine the Great, which seemed
to have lasted but about the space of half an hour, for soon after that peace
heresies and schisms did spring up in the Church, as it did appear by the
Arians, against whom the great Council of Nice was held, being called by
Constantine the Emperor; Lyranus will have the space of half an hour to be the
duration of the persecution of Julian the Apostate, who imposed silence unto
the Church, and commanded her not to instruct her children, nor give them any
consolation grounded upon the merit of our blessed Savior, which continued but
a little while, about the space of half an hour, for soon after he died in the
wars, which he did undertake against the Persians, where this monstrous
Apostate vomited out a damnable blasphemy against our blessed Lord, whom he
used to call Galilean, for he dying took some of his blood, and cast it up in
the air, and said Vicisti Galilaee, vicisti; thou have overcome Galilean, thou
have overcome at last: but

Leaving those interpretations with many others give me leave to tell you, that
by the space of half an hour is understood all the time of the actings which S.
John saw in heaven, the militant Church, at the opening of the seventh seal,
from the 2. ver. of our Chapter to the 7. for the things which are represented
unto that verse, did seem to Saint John to have continued but a little while
about the space of half an hour; so short a time that S. John was nothing weary
in the contemplation of them; and indeed if you observe our Chapter, you will
easily perceive a perfect silence kept in the militant Church by the sacred
members of it unto the 7. verse, where the first angel by the sounding of his
trumpet did break that sacred silence; for you must observe that those voices,
thundrings, lightnings and earthquakes which are mentioned in the 5. verse, and
seem to break our sacred silence, do not at all break it; for you see that it
was the angel Christ our Redeemer, and not the Church that caused such things,
and these thundrings, voices, lightnings and earthquakes which follow after the
casting of the sire into the earth, signify and represent to us the effects of
the Evangelical doctrine, of which the sacred object is Christ and him
crucified.

For the Evangelical doctrine tells us with a sweet voice, that salvation comes
into the house of those that are in Christ Jesus; and with a thunder teaches
us what punishments attend the impenitent, and if the wicked do not repent,
they will be consumed by the thunder of the divine justice; this celestial
doctrine with lightnings declares unto us the purity of our conversation, the
holiness of our life, and integrity of our actions, which are as so many lights
shining before men to the glory of God, and sacred assurance of our salvation;
and with a kind of earthquake the doctrine of the Gospel reaches unto us,
because it makes us tremble when we hear, that we must give an account of all
our actions even of our idle words, Mat. 12.36. before the tribunal of the
Almighty God, which things did not break the silence, but rather confirmed and
caused it, for the Church could not but keep silence at the hearing and
considering of all these sacred and heavenly effects of the Evangelical
doctrine.

So then you will easily perceive, that silence was kept in the latter end of
the second vision, which appears in the 4. Chapt. (the beginning of the
prophetical revelation, and ends at the 7. verse of our chapter, in which
there was silence during all the time of the actings, that the preceding verses
represent unto us; which S. John expresses to have continued about the space
of half an hour, and not without cause; for these things are so agreeable unto
the sacred angels and holy members of the Church, that the continual
contemplation of them seems not long.

Moreover, you must observe, that S. John is very judicious, when he represents
unto us, our contemplation in this life, on the great mystery of our
redemption, with a profound silence under the space of half an hour; for he did
know that the life of the militant Church upon the earth is short, and passes
almost as soon as it appears in this world; nay, more then that, he was not
ignorant, that whilst we live in our mortal bodies, our contemplations upon
that great mystery continue not long; for soon after our divine meditations,
even in our contemplations, the devil, the world, and our flesh cause our
attention to be turned from them to look upon some terrestrial, vain and
corruptible objects, by the representing of several things which solicit us
to obey that cruel master, run after its ambition and follow the sinful motion
of our lust.

Conclusion and Application.
But let us conclude, and being here taught to admire with a profound silence
the great mystery of our Redemption, let us learn to look upon Christ the angel
of the great counsel of the almighty God, and the messenger of the covenant,
Mal. 3.1, 6. our Mediator who performed that incomparable work; for as himself
says, Joh. 4.34. My meat is to do the will of him that sent me, and to finish
his work, which was our redemption, and indeed as the world was erected by
Christ, so it was redeemed by him; let us consider that in the performance of
our redemption, the just did suffer for the unjust, as S. Peter teaches us, 1
Pet. 3.18. where God commends his love toward us, as S. Paul says, Romans
5.8. in that while we were yet sinners, Christ died for us; Christ a lamb
without blemish, and without spot, 1 Pet. 1.19. Christ our High Priest, holy,
harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners, and higher then the heavens, Heb.
7.26. but let us stay here to cast the eyes of our understanding on our blessed
Redeemer, that we may seriously consider the holiness and integrity of his life
and conversation, to imitate our Savior, for says S. Paul, Romans 8.29. whom
God did foreknow, he also did predestinate, to be conformed to the image of his
Son; Let us consider the punishments which Christ endured upon the Cross to
redeem us from our iniquities, which punishments were so great, that they drew
from his sacred mouth this complaint, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken
me, Matthew. 27.46. Let us look upon them, that we may impose silence to our
sins, which speak so loud in our mortal bodies, that the clamor of them
ascends up to heaven, and draws down upon our heads the punishing thunder of
the divine Justice.

Silence to our ambition the first and greatest of all sins which opposes Gods
independency and immensity, and fights against him for his crown of glory; that
vice and immoderate affection of our souls, the inheritance of our first
Parents, possesses all men from their infancy, and grows with them to the
grave, where in golden letters, upon a most rich Tomb, you see the rest of our
ambition, which should teach us to avoid such a monster; indeed the birth of
ambition is different from that of other vices; for other vices, as gluttony
and drunkenness, have vices for their parents; but ambition proceeds from
virtue as a base born child; for it was born in the highest heaven, when those
Angelical spirits, now devils, were pure, and in the estate of integrity; then
in the terrestrial Paradise, for that bastard daughter of virtue, ambition,
descended from heaven, and at the creation of our first Parents sho did
secretly enter into the garden of Eden, where she seduced them, when they were
in their most pure condition: for both angels and men desiring most ambitiously
to be like unto God, did become the most odious of all the creatures: angels
became devils, and men the slaves of the prince of darkness, the god of this
world, as the grand Apostle speaks, the chief of these apostate intelligences.

Silence to our vanity, for vanity is nothing else but a mortal folly, and the
object of it corruption and filthiness, as the wisest of kings teaches us: Let
us not then glory our selves in vain things, in corruptible riches, worldly
honors and sensual pleasures; let us not boast of our beauty, nor worship that
fatal idol of lasciviousness; for you know that the greatest beauty of the
world, is but a mortal beauty, the least distemper sometimes will change the
fairest face into a monstrous visage, as Cleopatra did well know; for seeing
that beauty decayed, she did think to have found a way to render hers immortal,
by causing her self to be engraved upon a most rich diamond, but she was
mistaken, for the diamond being corrupted and reduced into ashes, it could not
show any thing of her decayed beauty.

Silence to our lust and carnal affections; for you know that they destroy both
body and soul, and pollute the image of our God, that we are endued with; let
the monster of drunkenness be silent, for it renders us like beasts, being in
that horrible sin deprived of understanding and judgment, and fit to commit
any sin against God at the least occasion that is presented unto us; you know
the fatal events of these monstrous sins, how sometimes they solicit us to
kill our fathers and mothers, sometimes the object of our lascivious pleasures,
and sometimes our selves; how they induce us to go up and down to seek after a
prey, which spoils and ruins our bodies and souls, and often conducts us to a
public place to expire there most shamefully.

Silence to our illegitimate swearings, let us not call God witness to our
iniquities, nor blaspheme his holy name; know that it is not a small matter to
call upon the Name of our glorious God at any occasion; and if he suffer so
many swearers, it is an effect of his goodness, that they may repent and cease
to swear; otherwise know that the divine justice will make them feel its
eternal effects of vengeance; and indeed that sin is the sin of those that are
damned, who in hell being not able to steal, commit fornication, or kill, cease
not to blaspheme the holy Name of the Almighty God.

Silence to all our evil words, and all the motions of an ill tongue, which S.
James in the third Chapter of his Epistle so severely condemns, for you know
that they offend God and our Christ, our neighbors and our selves, they are
unworthy of a Christian, for as S. Paul says, Ephesians. 4.29. Let no corrupt
communication come or proceed out of your mouth, but that which is good, to the
glory of God, and salvation of our souls.

Silence to our covetousness, because it pulls down the throne of our God and
erecteth another in our hearts, to the profanation of the God of heaven whom
alone we must adore, for covetousness makes us worship the corruptible riches
of this world, and causes us to rob the poor members of our blessed Savior.

Silence to all our sins, for they make division between God and us, and
deprive us of the gracious presence of the blessed Spirit: you know brethren,
that such silence is required of those that are in the militant Church of our
God, where in the consideration of the mystery of our redemption we learn that
sacred lesson, that we must abstain from our iniquities: indeed such a silence
is our victory, and the greatness of our triumph; for in that silence of our
sins, our vices are overthrown, and our virtue shines as a most bright star;
nay, more then that, that silence is a triumph which excels that of Alexander
the Great, when he made his entrance into the noble and famous city of Babylon,
where he was seen set upon a chariot richer then the Indies, and brighter then
the Sun; that silence of our sins is a triumph which exceeds that of the Grand
Caesar, when he caused himself to be drawn by forty Elephants unto the Capitol,
(the glorious place of reception of the Roman Conquerours,) after he had
obtained the honor of 24. Battles; that silence is a triumph which excels that
of a famous Queen of Egypt, when she made her entrance into Cecilia, where she
was admired in a most glorious ship, which was so rich that no man could judge
of the price; for in these triumphs ambition did sit upon its throne, but in
our Christian triumph, humility, justice, and charity sit upon their thrones;
happy silence then, that fills men with grace! happy silence, that procures
us celestial honors, spiritual pleasures, and incorruptible riches! happy
silence that conducts us to eternal life! let us embrace it, while we are in
our mortal bodies, that we may hereafter enjoy the eternal Crown of glory, with
the scepter of immortality, which I wish you in Christ Jesus, To whom with the
Father, and the blessed Spirit, be ascribed all honor and glory, now and for
evermore, Amen.

TO THE Right Worshipful and my much Honored Friend Sir JOSEPH PAIN Knight
Justice of Peace in the County of Norfolk, and Colonel of the Foot Regiment in
Norwich, Health and Happiness.
Sir,
YOur great Civility to all, and in particular to my self, gives me an
assurance that you will kindly accept that which I here present your Worship;
even a Sermon in which I hope the meanness and lowness of the style, will not
any ways diminish the excellency of the matter, viz. our Saviors Body, which
you spiritually feed upon every Communion day, nay continually, seeing we feed
upon it in our Celestial Meditations of Christ; I desire therefore your Worship
to look upon the Matter not on the Work it self, being not worthy of your
Acceptance: Indeed Sir, I had not assumed the boldness to offer this Present
unto you, if I had not been sure of your singular Goodness; I have had of it so
much Experience, that it should be a kind of crime to question it; and indeed a
true Subject of the Glorious Monarch of England as your Worship is, and has
always been, will not disdain that which an inferior offers him, seeing that
the Great Charles refuses not such things from the most inferior Person
amongst his Subjects. Truly Sir, the Obligations which I owe you are so great,
that I am obliged to let others know the Civilities I have received from your
Noble and Generous Person, and by your means from your most worthy Family; for
I have nothing else to present you with, but the acknowledgement of your great
courtesy, which I being sensible of, cannot but present my Prayers to the
Almighty God of Heaven for your and your Families Prosperity, remaining with
all the sincerity of my heart,

Sir, Your Worships most humble Servant, James Le Frane.

Christ's Sacramental Presence, AGAINST Transubstantiation and
Consubstantiation; Delivered in a Sermon Preached at Great S. Peter's in Norwich.
S. MAT. 26.26. This is my body.


AS we cannot but see the effects of the divine Goodness, if we contemplate
this Universe, where God manifests himself unto us by the marks of his
Divinity and power, which there he engraved as the grand Apostle tells us, Romans
1.20. saying, that the invisible things of God, even his eternal power and
Godhead, are clearly seen from, or, by the creation of the world: so we cannot
but admire the great love of the Almighty God toward us, if we consider that
he made us the noblest of all his sensible creatures, having printed in man the
sacred image of himself, as Moses tells us, Genesis 1.26. and enclosed in him the
being of all the created natures; for man has a corporal being with the stars,
Elements and Metals; life with herbs, plants and trees; sense with birds,
beasts and fishes; and intelligence with angels; and so if the Philosophers
called justly man (...) a little world, me thinks they had much better said if
they had called him the great world; for what is in heaven or earth in
comparison of him, for whom they were created; they shall pass as S. Peter tells
us, 2 Pet. 3.10. but man that noble creature shall remain for ever: it is true,
that the consideration of the Universe gives us a sublime conception of our
Creator; but if we consider within our selves, we shall see that we are the
subject of all the mavelous effects of his providence; for in man his
admirable power, goodness, and wisdom did most gloriously appear, as the Royal
Prophet tells us in the 8. Psalm, saying, being ravished in admiration, thou
have crowned him with glory and honor.

But man in the estate of his integrity, considering himself so glorious, pride
appeared and solicited him to sit upon the throne of his master; and this
glorious creature being overcome by that monstrous solicitation, in his desire
to be like unto God, did become the most odious of all the creatures, and which
is the highest of all miseries, he became the slave of the Prince of darkness,
so that of himself he could not return into the favor of his God, if God had
not sent his blessed Son our only Redeemer into the world, to appease his
anger by the satisfaction he gave to his divine justice for our sins, which is
such a favor unto repenting sinners, that they must never be without a
sacrifice of thanksgiving.

Moreover, by another effect of his divine goodness, God presents unto us the
great benefit of our redemption, by the continual preaching of the Gospel; and
confirms and seals it by the administration of the holy Sacraments, and
especially that of the Lords Supper, which is a Sacrament of his death and
passion, as S. Paul speaks, 1 Cor. 11.26. saying, as often as you eat this
bread, and drink this cup, ye do show the Lords death till he come; which
Sacrament is mentioned in our Text, for the Evangelist speaking of its
institution, after the celebration of the Passover, says, as they (the
Apostles) were eating, Jesus took bread, and blessed it, broke it, and gave it
to his disciples, saying, Take and eat, this is my body; which words I have
chosen to entertain you with by the special assistance of the blessed Spirit,
and for a clear intelligence of them we shall consider three things in our Text.

First, the Subject of the proposition, this.

Secondly, the Attribute, My body.

Thirdly, the copula, is, which joyneth the Subject with the Attribute, This is
my body.

(...), this, which is a demonstrative pronoun, is taken in this place, not
adectively but substantively; and for its explanation, you must observe, that
this does not signify an uncertain individuum, or a substance indefinitely, as
Aquinas will have it; for if it were so this should demonstrate another
substance as well as that of the body of Christ; neither does this signify or
demonstrate the predicate, the body of Christ, as if (...) this, should be the
same with it, as Scotus speaks; for if it were so, the proposition should be
identical, and should signify nothing else, but this body of Christ is the
body of Christ, which is absurd; nor is (...) this to be understood of that
which had been bread, as if some body, speaking of that which Moses held with
his hand, which had been a rod, should say, this is a serpent, or that, which
was water at the marriage in Cana, is wine; for if it were so there should have
been a sensible conversion of the bread into the body of Christ, as there was
in the changing of the rod into a serpent, and of the water into wine: nor is
that Pronoun this taken adverbially for hic here, as those of the Church of
Rome will confess with us: for (...) this, is referred to the bread which
Christ took, broke, and gave to his disciples, and so demonstrates not a common
but sacramental bread, where the substance and quality remaining, the common
use is only changed into a sacred one, as S. Austin does teach us.

And it matters not that (...) bread is of the masculine gender, for by the
rule of the Grammar, when the substantive is understood, and not expressed, the
adjective must be the neuter gender, by way of a substantive, in those things
that are without life; and so we may say, hoc est terra, this thing is earth,
and that is used sometimes in the Scripture, as those that understand Greek may
see in 1 Pet. 2.19. where the Apostle says, (...), for this is grace, (...)
being neuter, and (...) feminine; but it is so clear, that (...) this
demonstrates the bread which our blessed Savior broke, and gave his disciples,
that the grand Apostle S. Paul calls it so, 1 Cor. 10.16. the bread which we
break, is it not the communion of the body of Christ? and in cha. 11. after he
had told the Corinthians, that he had delivered them that which he had received
from the Lord, that is, the manner of the administration of the Sacrament,
says, 26, 27, 28. as often as ye eat this bread and drink this cup, ye do show
the Lords death till he come; wherefore whosoever shall eat this bread and
drink this cup, etc. but let a man examine himself, and so let him eat of that
bread; and if we call antiquity to witness, Tertullian will tell us in his Book
against the Jews, Nos audiamus panem quem fregit Dominus esse corpus
Salvatoris; Let us hear that the bread which Christ broke is the body of our
Savior; which you must understand sacramentally; so S. Jerome ad Hebidiam,
moreover, in the same sense, Irenaeus lib. 4. cap. 57. says, that our Lord
taking bread, confessed it to be his body; and Theodoret. dial. 10. cap. 8.
teaches us, that in the exhibition of the mysteries, Christ called bread his
body (...).

The Councils also show us the verity of our assertion, for the 37. Canon of
the Code of the Canons of the Councils of Africa, tells us, that in holy places
where Divine Service is celebrated, nothing more is offered but the body and
blood of Christ, hoc est, panis and vinum aqua mixtum, that is, bread and wine
mingled with water, so the Council in Trullo at Constantinople, with the
Council of Neocaesarea, which forbids certain Priests to give the bread and cup
coram Episcopo before a Bishop.

And I wonder to hear those of the Church of Rome cavil so much at that word
(...) this, when they amongst themselves are not agreed upon it; for they
dispute among themselves about the consecration of the bread which Christ gave
his disciples; some say with the Greeks as those of the Council of Trent, and
other Doctors of the Church of Rome, till these last times of Cardinal
Cajetan, that the Consecration was made by the blessing of Christ upon the
bread, otherwise says Christophorus Archbishop of Caesarea, lib. de corr.
Theol. Shol. that Proposition, This is my body, had not been true, for if in
that time the bread had not been changed by the blessing of Christ upon the
bread, Christ had commanded his disciples to take and eat bread; others with
Cardinal Bellarmin. tom. 3. de Euchar. lib. 2. cap. 11. say, that these words,
This is my body, were as they are now the words of the Consecration; and if we
farther press them to tell us in what time the body of Christ is in the
Sacrament under the accidents as they speak, they will answer with their
angelical Doctor, Aqu. p. 3. qu. 75. ar. 7. ad 1. that it is when the last
syllable um, of those words hoc est enim corpus meum, is pronounced, toto
tempore praecedenti substantia panis existente, being only before the
substance of the bread; from whence it appears, that (...) this, demonstrates
the bread, because the last syllable was not yet pronounced, when Christ said
(...) this, as they confess with us; then let us say this bread is my body,
which obliges me to pass to the attribute, my body.

We need not to stay long upon the explication of Christ's body mentioned in my
Text, for you are not ignorant, that here by the body of Christ you must
understand not his mystical body, of which it is spoken, 1 Cor. 12.27. Ephesians.
1.23. for the mystical body of our Savior, which is, the Church, was not given
or broken for us, but the true and natural body of Christ which was broken and
given for her and her children, according to that of the Act. 20.28. where you
see, that Christ has purchased the Church with his own blood, out of every
kindred, and tongue, and people, and nation, Rev. 5.9. for you read in S. Luke
22.19. this is my body which is given for you, and 1 Cor. 11.24. this is my
body which is broken for you.

But for a better illustration of this our assertion, we must consider the
copula, which is the verb (...), is, which joyneth the subject (...) with the
attribute (...), and observe that here it is not taken (...) but (...), not
properly and in its native signification, but figuratively and
representatively, whatsoever Bellarmine does say to the contrary; for
disparatum de disparato proprie dici non potest sed sigurate, and therefore
when there is any proposition made of two diverse and disperate things, that
proposition must be improper and figurative, as our Proposition this is my
body, is; for the bread and body of Christ being two diverse and disperate
things, that Proposition must be tropical and figurative, where the cause of it
is in the verb (...), which is taken in this place, for to signify or to be
the sign, as it is taken often in the Scripture, as you may see Genesis 41.26,
27. where it is said, that seven kine are seven years, that is to say, signify
7. years, and so Rev. 17.12. we read that ten horns are ten kings, that is to
say signify ten Kings; but specially the verb to be is taken in that sense,
when it is question of a Sacrament, as you may see, Genesis 17.10. where we read
this, the Circumcision is my Covenant, thas is to say, the Circumcision does
signify or is the sign of my Covenant, and in Exodus 12. it is said that the
Lamb is the Lords Passover, it is the Lords Passover, that is, the sign of the
Lords Passover, for the Lamb could not be properly the Lords Passover, and so
amongst the Jews was called our Savior, as Justin Martyr relates in his
Dialogue, cum Thryp. for he says, that Esdras speaking to the people, said,
(...), this Passover is our Savior, and indeed that was made ready for Christ
by appropriation, for he was the lamb slain from the beginning of the world.

Moreover S. Paul 1 Cor. 10.4. tells us, that the rock was Christ, which was not
in substance, but in signification, says the Author of the quest. on Levit.
then, this is my body, is as much as to say, this is the sign of my body,
which is confirmed by S. Austin against the Manichee Adimantinus, for (says
he) Christ doubted not to say, this is my body, Cum daret siguram corporis sui
when he gave the sign of his body; nay, the Council of Constantinople held
anno 756. condemning the images, accidentally speaks of the Sacrament of the
Lords Supper, and says the substance of the bread is an image of our Savior,
and the gloss of the Roman decree upon the Canon, hoc est, did. 2. tells us,
that the celestial Sacrament which truly represents the flesh of our Savior is
called his body but improprie, improperly, for it is so called non in ret
veritate, sed in mysterii significatione, Christ being there represented and
signified.

Now brethren observe, that the bread is called the body of Christ by reason of
its analogy with it, for according to that of S. Austin, Ep. 23. ad Bonifacium,
if the Sacraments had not some likeness or resemblance with the things of which
they are Sacraments, omnino sacramenta non essent, they should not at all be
Sacraments, ex hac autem similitudine plerumque etiam ipsarum rerum nomina
accipiunt, and from that resemblance, they assume oftentimes the names of those
things which they do represent unto us; and indeed as the bread received in our
bodies nourishes them; so the body of Christ received by faith nourishes our
souls; as our bodies increase and have strength by the eating of the bread, so
have our souls their growing unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the
slature of the fullness of Christ, and receive their strength against all
temptations, by the spiritual eating of our Savior, the celestial bread which
is the true meat of our souls; as the bread preserves our corporal life, so
the body of Christ conserves in us the spiritual life, as our Savior teaches
us in the Gospel, Joh. 6.53. saying, Except ye eat the flesh of the Son of man,
and drink his blood, ye have no life in you; where you see, that the Union of
the Sacramental sign, with the thing signified, is not local but relative, in
regard the sign represents to us the things by it signified.

But although these things are so clear, nevertheless those of the Church of
Rome will not admit of that explication, for they understand by these words
this is my body, a proper and not figurative proposition, which shows us a real
Transubstantiation of the substance of the bread into the substance of the body
of Christ, remaining only the accidents, that is, what you see of the
consecrated bread, so that (...) this, demonstrates the body of Christ, sub
speciebus vel accidentibus panis, under the accidents of the bread; for (say
they) this Proposition, this is my body, is the Will and Testament of our
blessed Lord, where sigures are not admitted as being something obscure.

But first I have showed you, that this Proposition, this is my body, is not a
proper saying, but a figurative one, by the nature of all the Sacraments, which
are the same in signification and use in the New, as they were in the Old
Testament, as S. Paul evidently teaches us, 1 Cor. 10.23. for (says he) they
were all baptized in the cloud, and did all eat, not only among them, but also
with us, the same spiritual meat; and so S. Austin. lib. de utilit. poenit.
says, that whosoever apprehended ^ Christ in the Manna, cundem quem nos cibum
spiritualem comederunt, did eat the same spiritual meat, which we do eat, which
saying of Austin made such an impression on the Jesuit Maldonat, that he said,
if S. Austin had lived in his time he had changed his opinion, seeing that the
interpretation of the Protestants which he calls Calvinists, is almost the
same. Maldonat. on S. Job. 6.50. number. 80, 81.

As for what they say, that it is a Testament, we confess it with them, but we
say, that the expression of our blessed Saviors Will, is figurative and
tropical, as it does appear by what we have said, and by S. Luke 22.20. where
you read, after Christ had said, this is my body, this cup is the New Testament
in my blood, which is confirmed by S. Paul, 1 Cor. 11.25. for it is evident,
that the cup was not the testament; and it will not much serve them, to say,
that this passage has two expressions, where the first must be rendered so,
this is the cup, the new testament in mybloud, the second, this cup is the new
testament in my blood, because the verb (...) is, is expressed in 1 Cor. 11. and
omitted in S. Luke 22. for although in the first expression the verb (...), is,
is taken by them properly, because it was a cup that Christ presented to his
disciples, nevertheless they confess a sigure is in the 2d expression, for they
say, that in that expression the cup is taken for what was in it, and that the
testament is that by which we have right to the Covenant, but it is certain,
that that which they will have distinct, is but the same thing, and the same
Proposition in that passage of S. Luke and of the Corinthians; to signify that
the cup, or the wine in the cup, is the sign of the New Testament, confirmed
by the blood of Jesus Christ.

Concerning tropical locutions, which are not admitted (as they say) in
testaments, as being something obscure, I say, that it is not always so, seeing
that they themselves use them for illustration, and it is clear enough that
sigures have places in testaments; let them consider the testament of Jacob,
Genesis 49. that of Moses, Deuteronomy. 33. and that of David, 2 Samuel 23. and they shall
with us observe them to be allegorical; moreover, besides the Civilians
observe, that in men's Testaments there are oftentimes sigurative expressions,
for which they have some restrictions, which cause them to say, that in
Testaments they must not come to a proper or strict signification of words, Cum
plerumque abusive loquuntur testatores, seeing that the Testators oftentimes
speak improperly; I say if the humane Testaments should be so plain, that there
should be no figures, it would not follow, that there should be none in divine
and spiritual Testaments; for in a humane Testament there are nothing but
Legacies and express commands, which ought to be plainly understood; but in a
divine and spiritual Testament there are mysteries to exercise our
understandings, our faith, hope and patience, as the Learned men most
judiciously observe, there are some things for this life, and some things for
the life to come, some things are clearly seen, and some things darkly
perceived: Moreover, in humane Wills men ought to speak plainly, because they
can speak no more when they are dead, but in the spiritual Testament which is
here mentioned, the Testator can speak after his death, as you know that he
did, and does truly know it, for Christ after his ascension into the glorious
Palace of his Father, sp^ke unto S. Paul, who was the grand Persecutour of his
sacred members, Act. 9.4, 5. as now by his holy Spirit, he speaks unto us, and
makes the Church understand as much as he pleases, and as much as is necessary
for the glory of his Father, and her eternal salvation.

By this you may see, that our Proposition [this is my body] imports nothing
else, but this bread signifies or is the sign of my body; and indeed if the
body of Christ were corporally in the Sacrament under the accidents, it should
there be passible, that is, subject to alteration and sufferings; or
impassible, that is not subject to any alterations or sufferings; but the body
of Christ cannot be there passible or subject to any alteration; for if it were
so, he should be there with all his dimensions in order to a certain place
(otherwise he could not suffer as they will confess with us) and so the body of
Christ could be divided, which they will not grant in the Sacrament, saying,
that it is totum in tota hostia, and totum in qualibet part hostiae; wholly in
the host, and wholly in every part of it; and although Pope Nicholas forced
Berengarius to recant in those words) I Berengarius assirm, that Christ's slesh
is sensually handled and broken by the Priests hands in the Sacrament, and
grinded by the teeth of the saithfull;) nevertheless they will not admit of
that expression, and confess it is not so; insomuch that the gloss on the Canon
de Consecr. distinct. 2. cap. Ego Berengarius; affirms it to be a worse heresy
then that of Berengarius, unless it be soberly understood, for generally they
hold, that Christ's body is in the Sacrament sub speciebus panis, impassibly;
which yet cannot be, for if it were so, his body had been a glorious body
before his resurrection (impassibility being one of the chief qualities of a
glorious body, as they confess with us) for you know that Christ did celebrate
the holy Sacrament before his death; moreover if the body of Christ were
impassible under the accidents in the Sacrament I would ask them (the Apostles
having consecrated at his death) whether Christ's body had been alive or no in
the Sacrament; I suppose they will not say that it had been alive; for in the
same time it had been alive in the Sacrament under the accidents, and dead in
the grave, which is a manifest contradiction; nor dead I hope, for that should
be contrary to their assertion of Christ impassible in the Sacrament.

But give me leave to go yet further and say, that if Christ were corporally in
the Sacrament under the accidents, his body had been visible, although it had
been glorious; for Christ speaking to his disciples after his resurrection,
said, behold my hands and my feet, and see, for a spirit has not flesh and
bones as you see me have; but as you see nothing in the breaking of a
consecrated host but bread (besides you cannot discern a consecrated host from
another that is not, as I have observed when I was in the Church of Rome) it
follows, that the body of Christ is not in the Sacrament under the accidents,
passibly nor impassibly; moreover, if Christ were in the Sacrament corporally,
he had eaten himself, if (as some of the Church of Rome confess,) Christ did
communicate with his disciples which is very probable, as you may see by S.
Mat. 26.29. where Christ, after the exhibition of the bread and cup, says, I
say unto you, I will not drink henceforth of this fruit of the vine, till that
day when I drink it new with you in my Fathers Kingdom.

Lastly I say, that if Christ is in the Host corporally, his body which
according to them remains no longer in their bodies then the substance of the
bread (if there it were) should remain ceasing to be under the accidents, is
reduced to nothing, or changed into another substance, or remains wholly; but
is not reduced to nothing, nor changed into another substance, according to
them; for if it were so Christ's body should be corruptible, and could be
changed into any sensible and insensible substance, which cannot be said
without dishonor to our blessed Savior; to say that the body of Christ
remains wholly, that cannot be proved or maintained without absurdity; for I
ask whether that body remains in our bodies or goes to heaven? they will not
say, that it remains in our bodies, for some should have as many as they have
received the Sacrament; nor will they say, that it goes to heaven, for the
multiplication of so many millions of Christ's by the multiplication of their
consecrations, cannot be admitted in heaven, without absurdity and
contradiction to the holy Scripture, which tells us, that there is but one body,
and one Christ in heaven; it follows then that the body of Christ is not under
the accidents, which obliges me to say with Erasmus, that the Church of Rome
has too late determined the transubstantiation (the truth being known before,
as Scotus and their Learned Tonstal. lib. 1. de Euch. page 46. insinuates) and
indeed this Proposition this is my body, signifies nothing else, but this
Sacramental bread is the sign of my body.

But it seems, that some others will not yield to our assertion; for the
Lutherans say in defense of their Consubstantiation, that in this bread, under
this bread, and with this bread is the body of Christ; for they pretend by
their ubiquity, that the humane nature of Christ is every where, but me thinks
they should have better observed the words of our blessed Savior, who only
says this is my body, and not in this bread, with this bread, and under this
bread is my body; let us keep close to his words, Christ being the truth it
self; and indeed (...) this, does not signisie in, with, and under, but only
demonstrates the singular substance of the Sacramental bread, as being the
sign of his body, truly natural, visible, palpable, and in order to a certain
place sinite; which they understand to be not natural, not visible, not
palpable, and every where not sinite, although not infinite; which is such a
body that Christ never had, for after his resurrection, his body was palpable,
visible, and in one place at once as well as before; and that will not save
them to say he was but in one place at once visibly, but every where invisibly,
for Christ shows that a body is always visible of its nature, saying, S. Luke
24.39. after his resurrection handle me, and see me, for a spirit has not
slesh and bones, as you see me have: where you may observe, that Christ
distinguishes the humane body from the spirit by its visibleness and
palpability after its glorious resurrection; moreover, the ascension of Christ
into heaven diversely expressed by the Evangelists, teaches us, that the body of
Christ cannot be in two places at once visibly nor invisibly, for S. Mar.
16.19. says, that Christ after he had spoken unto his Disciples, (...) was
received up, which could not be according to his divine nature, which is every
where, but according to this humane nature, which cannot be in several places
at once; S. Luke tells us, 24.51. that Christ parted from them, (...) and was
carried up, that is, according to his humane nature, which only was capable of
local motion, by which we leave one place to go to another, Act. 10.9. it is
said, that while the apostles beheld (...) he was taken up, which is also said
in regard of his humane nature, and so the Greek Fathers judiciously speak,
when they say, that the ascension of our Savior is (...) his assumption in
slesh: Moreover we read in the 3. Chapter of the Acts 21. verse, that the
heavens must contain him until the rest^tution of all things, (...), which
evidently shows, that the humane nature of our Savior cannot be in two places
at once, for when Christ shall come upon the earth to judge the Universe, he
shall in regard of his humane nature leave heaven where he now is.

But let us go further, and give me leave to say, that if the humane nature of
Christ be every where; it was, or in the Estate of his humiliation, from the
very instant of his conception, as some Lutherans do affirm; or in his estate
of exaltation from the very instant of his resurrection, or that of his session
at the right hand of his Father, as some other Lutherans say; but I cannot
perceive, that it was in his estate of humiliation, from the very instant of
his conception, for if it were so, the body of Christ had not only been formed
in the womb of the blessed Virgin, but also in every woman's womb, even the most
wicked; for in that very instant, according to those of that opinion it was
every where, nay, more then that, Christ could not have been born of her, for
in the very instant of his conception he was in every part of the world, his
soul could not have been separated from his body, being every where; and so he
could not have died for us, for so long as the soul remains in the body, we
cannot say properly, a man is dead, but only we conceive a suspension of the
vital actions: moreover, Christ had been in heaven before his resurrection,
according to his humane nature, being every where in the very instant of his
conception, which agrees not with the Scripture, which shows us the ascension
of Christ into heaven to be after his death; nor can I conceive that it was
every where in the state of his exaltation from the very instant of his
resurrection, or that of his session at the right hand of his Father; for if it
were so, such an alteration in humane nature could not have been without a
wonderful sign (as being so prodigious) that it cannot be conceived without
the destruction of Christ's body; and indeed it is impossible to apprehend a
thing circumscribed in a place, when it is not in a certain place fully
contained, but every where in all the places of the superior and inferior
world, which is the manner of being in a place, that is attributed unto God,
privatively to all others, for in all the School Divinity, in the old
Philosophy, and in nature, there are but three natural proper ways of being in
a place, circumscriptive, desinitive, and repletive, where you must observe,
that all corporal substances are circumscriptively in a place, all the
spiritual but finite substances, as angels and souls of men separated from
their bodies definitively, and God alone is repletively in many places; for it
is that manner of being in a place by which God is distinguished from his
creatures, because God not his creatures, nec loco includitur, nec loco
excluditur, nec loco circumscribitur, nec loco definitur, is neither included
in a place, nor excluded from any.

Indeed I cannot imagine how it came to pass, that the body of Christ which was
before in order to a certain place circumscriptively, should be now every
where, and made ex finito non finitum, from finite not sinite; besides you must
know that Christ's body is not every where, because it is a glorified body, for
if it were so, all glorified bodies would be every where; nor because the
humane nature is united with the divine, to the person of the Son of God, for
it was so from the very instant of his conception, which teaches us, that the
body of Christ is not in the bread, with the bread, and under the bread; but if
you instance, and say, then follows the separation of the two natures of
Christ; I answer, that such a thing does not follow; for although the humane
nature of Christ be not every where, yet the divine nature is, and therefore it
cannot be separate from the humane nature; then it remains, that, this is my
body, is nothing else but this bread is the sign and sacrament of my body.

Now it may be that you will say, by all what you have said we cannot well
gather how Christ is present in the Sacrament, but rather it seems that you
deny the presence of our Lord in it: To which I answer, and say, that Christ is
present in the Sacrament; but you must observe, that by the Sacrament I
understand the Sacramental action in concreto, comprehending the sign and the
thing signified, according to which sense our Learned Doctors use to say, that
Christ is not present in the bread, but in the Sacrament, because in the
Sacramental action the thing signified Christ our blessed Savior is given
together with the sign to the believer; but observe that Christ is present in
the holy Sacrament, not locally but sacramentally, significative, spiritualiter
and virtualiter, signisicatively, spiritually, and virtually; for you must know
that besides the local presence of a thing, of which we have spoken, and which
we have said was threefold, there are also presences of 3. several sorts, which
are of another nature, for there is a symbolical and significative presence,
which is when a thing is present unto us by some mark or sign, as our brother
and sister is present unto us by their picture; the second presence is a
spiritual presence, which is when by faith things that are not present locally,
are made present spiritually, as the day of Christ was present to Abraham,
although it came to pass long after him, above 2000 years after, as we read S.
Joh. 8.36. where Christ says unto the Jews, Abraham rejoiced to see my day
(whether it was his birth or his death upon the Cross it matters not) he saw it
by says, and was glad, as now we see and touch Christ; for as S. Ambrose de
Sacrament. lib. 5. c. 4. says, fide lang^ur, side videtur, non langitur
corpore, non oculis comprehenditur; Christ the bread of life is touched by
says, and seen by faith, and that spiritually not corporally; which is
consirmed by Christ himself, S. Joh. 6. where you may observe against
Bellarmin. and others of the Church of Rome, that Christ speaks de re
Sacramenti, of the thing signified in the Sacrament, the slesh and blood of
Christ which we receive by says; not de ipsis signis, of the external signs
of it, which we corporally and materially receive; the third presence is a
presence of virtue, which is, when a thing which is far from a place is
nevertheless present by its virtue, as you may see in the Sun, which being far
distant from the Earth, yet is present unto it by its virtue.

Now you must know, that all these presences are to be found in the holy
Sacrament; for Christ with his body and blood is there present, first
symbolically and significatively, for he is represented unto us by the external
signs of bread and wine; secondly spiritually, because in the spiritual
reception of the Sacrament we apply unto our selves the body and blood of Jesus
Christ by faith, and so we are united unto him, and spiritually nourished with
his body and blood; thirdly, Christ is present in the Sacrament with his body
and blood virtually; for in the worthy participation of the Sacrament we
receive the fruit and virtue of his death and passion, but observe, that the
first presence of Christ which is symbolical, is given to the wicked, but the
spiritual and virtual presence to the faithful; although then the body of
Jesus Christ is as far from us as heaven is from the earth, yet the real
Sacramental presence remains, for you may know that presentia alicujus rei non
opponitur distantiaesed absentiae, the presence of a thing is not opposed to
distance but absence, and so you may see, that these presences do not
contradict our assertion, but do rather confirm it, and oblige us to say, that,
this is my body, signifies nothing else, but this bread is the sign and
Sacrament of my body.

Now let us conclude with Application, and learn from thence the great and
exceeding affection of our Lord toward us, who would not expire upon the
Cross, before he had given us the precious token of our redemption; was it not
enough for our blessed Savior to assume our humane nature, to manifest in it
his Father unto the corrupted world, and propose by it his sacred counsel to
sinners? Was it not enough for our blessed Savior to be made flesh with the
weaknesses and infirmities of a sensitive life, which makes us subject to
hunger, thirst, sorrow, and death, to redeem those who by their sins were made
a sinful flesh? was it not enough for our blessed Savior to accomplish the
law for the elected sinners, dye for their sins, and rise for their assurance?
yea, we must truly say, that it is enough to make us confess the insinite love
of our God toward us, and exclaim every one of us as the grand Apostle S. Paul
Romans 8. with a great affection toward him who loved us; I am persuaded that
neither death, nor lise, nor angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things
present, nor things to come, nor beight, nor depth, nor any other creature,
shall be able to separate us from the love of God which is in Christ Jesus our
Lord.

Nevertheless our blessed Redeemer, knowing that since the fall of Adam, in
which we have been all corrupted, our nature is so weak with its faculties,
that we cannot well remember those things which concern our salvation; has
showed us another effect of his sacred love; he gave us his Word that we may
have continually before our eyes Jesus Christ and him crucisied, and left us
the holy Sacraments, and specially that of the Lords Supper, to seal unto our
souls the great mystery of our redemption, that we might remember what Christ
did for us upon the Cross; for as Christ himself says, S. Luke 23.19. this
doin remembrance of me; and S. Paul 1 Cor. 11.26. as often as ye eat this bread
and drink this cup, ye do show the Lords death till he comes; remember then
dear brethren that great and sublime mystery of our redemption, that in the
reception of the holy Sacraments your souls may be sealed with the sacred seal
of the holy Ghost for your eternal salvation.

But before you come to the sacred banquet of our Lord (where his body and
blood is served for our celestial meat and spiritual drink) prepare your
selves, examine your life, and consider your inward and outward actions; to
abhor the sins and corruptions of them, that coming with a strong resolution,
to leave sin and embrace that noble daughter of heaven, virtue, you may
worthily participate of the Sacrament of the body and blood of Jesus Christ,
for as S Paul says, 1 Cor. 11.28. Let a man examine himself (not his neighbor
as many pretended Saints do) and so let him eat of that bread and drink of that
cup.

Remember that you go unto that sacred banquet with reverence, and in the
consideration of your sins go with humility, for Christ takes a singular
pleasure to dwell in the house of an humble Christian; if he comes unto Zacheus
his house, Zacheus must come down first, as you read S. Luke 19.5. Zacheus make
haste and come down, for to day I must abide at thy house; and so S. Jam. 4.6.
says, that God resists the proud, and gives grace unto the humble: Let us
come by faith, for it is the sacred mouth and spiritual hand with which we
apprehend the body and blood of Jesus Christ; as by faith we have a sacred
union with our blessed Savior, let us not be Capernaical but Apostolical,
prepare not your teeth, believe and thou have eaten it, says S. Austin; do you
not say how shall I send my hands and arms to heaven? send your faith.

Moreover, remember that you come with a sincere and not hypocritical
repentance, that you may not be like unto Judas who kissed his Master to betray
him; for you know that it is by that noble but sorrowful virtue, repentance,
that we must come unto that sacred banquet of the lamb slain for our sins, for
we do not come unto that sacred banquet as innocent unto the goodness of our
God, but as repenting sinners unto his grace; but brethren, you must be void of
envy, hatred, and malice, lest you should take the holy Sacrament to your own
condemnation, you know that it is a Sacrament of our union nor only with
Christ, but also amongst our selves; for as the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 10 We who
are many are one bread, and one body, for we are all partakers of that one
bread: do ye not absent your selves from that sacred banquet, lest you
entertain communion with the god of this world, and conserve in your selves
hatred and malice to your own destruction; indeed the more you absent your
selves from the Sacrament, the more will the devil keep you from it; so that at
last ye will despise the holy Sacrament and procure to your selves a kind of
hardness to sin.

But further give me leave to beseech you to look upon the meat and drink of
that blessed and sacred banquet, Christ himself, whose body and blood is
precious meat and drink, Christ the heavenly bread from whom we draw the
spiritual water of wisdom, righteousness, sanctification and redemption: for as
the Apostle speaks, 1 Cor. 1.30. Christ is made unto us wisdom, righteousness,
sanctisication and redemption: Consider those that serve at that mystical
Table, the holy Angels, they serve but they eat not, the meat of that sacred
Table is not for them, it is only for repenting sinners; which things if you
seriously look upon, I am sure that you will endeavor with the grace of our
God to prepare your selves for a worthy reception of the Lords Supper, that you
may be partakers not only of the external signs and Sacramental bread, but
also of Christ the thing signified by them, the heavenly bread, who will
preserve you from eternal death, and bring you into the glorious kingdom of his
Father, to enjoy after the sacred banquet of grace, the glorious banquet of
glory. Amen.

TO THE Right Worshipful, Right Virtuous, and truly Religious, my much
Honored Friend WILLIAM ADAMS Esquire Felicity and Peace.
Sir,
THE Merit and high Repute of your Civility is as a Voice that is heard not
only in all the places where you have been, but in many others also which were
not honored by your Presence; Fama volat: and indeed wheresoever I come, I
hear great Commendations of your Worship; The world says, and that with
Justice, that your Piety and Modesty is incomparable, and an Example to the
Nobility that lives far and near that Temple of Honor where you have your
Noble Habitation: But Sir, give me leave to say, that your Learning is not
obscure, and though you be young in years, yet you are old in Prudence; Nay, I
must confess, that your Worship is endued with such rare and eminent Qualities,
that there be few among Persons of Eminency who do enjoy them; It is not then
without Design that I am sollicitous to present the Spiritual Kingdom of our
Savior (against the Monarchical Reign of our Chiliastes) to your most piercing
sight; for having its Review and Approbation by so clear a Judgment, I shall
not fear what Eye it may be exposed to for its Censure; I hope, Sir, that you
will receive this Sermon although not worthy of your Acceptance, the which
indeed I dare not question, being fully persuaded of your Affection toward me,
which I shall ever acknowledge and highly esteem, remaining unto death,

Sir, Your Worships most humble and obliged Servant, James Le Franc.

Christ's and the Saints Reign: OR, The Millenaries Confuted. Delivered in a
Sermon Preached at S. Andrews in Norwich.
REV. 20.4. And they lived and reigned with Christ a thousand years.


IF any matter has ever required attention, I am persuaded that you will
confess, that this does require it; for the learned Interpreters have so
variously expounded it, that it is difficult to determine our selves upon this
Subject; Indeed I had not meddled with it, if I had not perceived the error of
some of the common people, which follow some blind leaders, whose ambition is
to extol themselves, and break asunder the Church of God to have some
followers; for amongst the Sectaries you see so many of them blinded by their
ignorance, that they will rather choose a worldly reign then a Spiritual
Kingdom, earth for heaven, and temporal delights for eternal pleasures; but
leaving them for a while upon their earthly Throne, give me leave to tell you,
that this Chapter contains three principal parts.

The first of which regards the space of a thousand years, under which Christ
with his Saints shall reign upon the earth.

The second includes the short time in which Satan after the expiration of the
thousand years shall be loosed out of his prison; from whence you may consider
what will be the condition of the world, when in that time you shall see it
embroiled with dissentions, wars and seductions, as you may see by the 8. and
9. ver. of our Chapter.

The third part teaches us the general Judgment of the Universe, where the
wicked shall be condemned to eternal punishment, and the godly declared the
heirs of eternal felicity and glory.

But as our Text is under the first part of our Chapter, let me tell you, that
S. John in the beginning of it brings in an angel which is Christ, coming down
from heaven, having the key of the bottomless pit, with a great chain in his
hand to bind with it the dragon, which is the devil and Satan, a thousand
years, and shut him up into the bottomless pit, with a seal upon him, to stay
his power, and hinder his tyrannical Empire over the humane kind, that he may
deceive the nations no more; where in the golden age of Satan's chaining, you
may consider the condition of the faithful and godly men, and see their
conquests, triumphs, and victories over their enemies in their very punishments
and death, for the promulgation of the Gospel, and the advancing of the Kingdom
of Jesus Christ: for in the 4. ver. the beloved Disciple of our Savior S. John
says, that he saw thrones, and they (that is the Martyrs) sat upon them; and
I saw the souls of them that were beheaded for the witness of Jesus, and for
the word of God, which had not worshipped the Antichristian beast, neither his
image, nor bad received his mark upon their foreheads, or in their hands;
adding, and they lived and reigned with Christ a thousand years: which are the
words which I have chosen to entertain you with by the special assistance of
the blessed Spirit; but for a clear intelligence of them I shall divide my Text
into two parts, where in the first I shall speak of the life and reign of the
Saints with Christ in these words, and they lived and reigned with Christ; and
in the second part I shall show you the duration of it, a thousand years; and
they lived and reigned with Christ a thousand years.

The first Part.
If we consider the holy Scripture we may evidently see that our Savior has
only two several Kingdoms; the one providential, which is that universal
Sovereignty by which Christ manageth the affairs of all the whole world, both
in heaven and earth; the other spiritual, which is that royal but celestial
authority which he exercises over his people, the elect, which is that kingdom
in which the Saints or faithful live and reign with Christ, as you may see in
Revel. 5.10. where it is said, that Christ has made us unto our God kings and
priests, that we may reign on the earth, or and we shall reign on the earth,
(...) or (...), and that in a spiritual manner; so in Romans 5.12. we read, that
if by one man's offense death reigns by one, much more they which receive
abundance of grace shall reign in life by one Jesus Christ; and in our Text,
and they lived and reigned with Christ.

Which makes me wonder at the Chiliasts or Millenaries opinion, which gives our
Savior in this place of Scripture, as in many others, a third Kingdom which
they call Monarchical; wherein Christ when he enters upon it, will govern as
earthly Monarchs do, universally over the world, in a visible and earthly glory
and splendor, which is the personal reign which they give to our blessed Lord,
and which I observe to be diversely understood by its assertors.

For the Jews persuade themselves, that at the possession of that Kingdom,
Jerusalem shall be most splendidly reedified with the Temple, which according
to them will be the third, Sacrifices offered unto the God of Israel, Marriages
amongst themselves most gloriously celebrated, and all prosperity and happiness
without any molestation or hindrance of their enemies enjoyed; so that they
understand that reign of Jesus Christ both carnal and spiritual.

Some ancient Doctors of the Christian Primitive Church, as Justin. dialog.
contra Tryphon. Lactantius ille, Firmianus, Tertullian, against Marcion, lib.
2. and others were of that opinion, that the Monarchical Kingdom of Jesus
Christ should be administered in a spiritual manner without any bloody sacrifice
or libation, without marriages or sensual pleasures; for as Justin Martyr
(after his discourse about the day of judgment, which he calls (...)) says to
Trypho the Jew, at that time we shall immolate true and spiritual sacrifices,
and offer praises and thanks-givings unto our God, without any bloody sacrifice
upon an altar.

Some heretics as Cerinthius and Apollinaris understood that Monarchical
Kingdom of Jesus Christ in a fleshly manner, saying, that the Saints should
reign with Christ upon the earth, in all manner of voluptuous pleasures, gulae
and luxuriae, of gluttony and wantonness, which perhaps may be the sense of
some of our Sectaries, although they pretend to interpret it of a visible and
earthly Monarchy, without any fleshly and sinful volupty, as one Archer a
London-Divine expresses it.

But I will not stay so long upon that Monarchical Kingdom, for we do not know
such a kingdom in the holy Scripture, attributed unto Christ, nor to the
Saints, although you read in my Text, and they lived and reigned with Christ;
and indeed it is evident that the Scripture denies it, for we read S. Joh.
18.36. that Christ said to Pilate, my Kingdom is not of this world; nor from
hence, which manifestly contradicts the Chiliasts or Millenaries opinion, for
if Christ (as they say) will govern at that time as earthly Monarchs do in a
worldly visible and earthly glory, how is his kingdom not of this world?

Moreover, if there were such a kingdom given to our Savior, we should have
heard in the Scripture of a third personal coming of Jesus Christ, which we do
not; for the Scripture makes only mention of two personal comings of our
blessed Savior, where the first is his coming in humane weakness, to make us
strong against our powerful enemies, the devil, the flesh and the world; the
second his coming in majesty and glory, to give judgment to the quick and dead
after their resurrection, and we confess in our Creed that from thence, that
is, heaven, where Christ now is, he shall come to judge the quick and the dead,
which is confirmed by the Athanasian and Nicene Creed, to whith we must keep
close, as being the says which was once delivered to the Saints.

And if some Millenaries will not understand that Monarchical kingdom of our
Savior personally, then that kingdom falls of it self, for Christ now reigns
by his Spirit in the hearts of his regenerated Subjects, as they will confess
with us, and they reign with him; for as our Text says, and they lived and
reigned with Christ.

But further that Monarchical Kingdom of Christ cannot stand without two
general corporal resurrections, the one of those Saints which were dead before
that personal coming of Christ, at which he shall take the administration of
his Monarchical kingdom, the other at the end of the world at his sinal coming
to judgment, as they themselves acknowledge, which is a thing that the
Scripture makes no mention of; for the Word of God makes only mention of one
general corporal resurrection, at the end of the world, as you may see Job
19.25. where it is said by that most patient Patriarch, I know that my Redeemer
lives, and that he shall stand at the latter day upon the earth, and though
after my skin worms destroy this body, yet in my flesh shall I see God; nay
Martha as you read S. Joh. 11.24. confesses to Christ, that her brother shall
rise again in the resurrection of the last day, and not at the day of the
administration of Christ's Monarchical kingdom; and you know that S. Paul 1 Cor.
15.52. says, that in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, we shall rise at
the last Trumpet; and so in our Creed we confess the refurrection, and not the
resurrections of the flesh; and that will not serve the Millinaries to say,
that in our Chapter in the 5. ver. it appears clearly that there are two
general resurrections of the flesh, when we hear of a first resurrection which
insinuates a second one; for that first resurrection which is mentioned there,
is the resurrection not of the body but of the soul, from the death of sin to
the life of grace, as S. Aust. did well observe; I know that some take that
first resurrection for the glorious happiness of the soul, by which she alone
passes by the death of the body into eternal life, and that by the preceding
words of the 1. verse, which are, but the rest of the dead, that is, the wicked
and reprobate, lived not again, etc. because they experimented in hell the
first death and damnation, which is of the soul alone, which obliges S. John
to say in regard of the Saints departed who are opposed to the wicked, this is
the first resurrection, and blessed and holy is he that has part in the first
resurrection, on such the second death has no power; for those that live with
Christ in heaven in regard of their souls only, shall live with him eternally,
in regard of both bodies and souls in the celestial Jerusalem; but although
this explication be true in it self, yet you must observe, that it is not
proper in this place of Scripture, which considers the wicked and godly men not
as departed from this world, but as living upon the earth; and so S. John
considers the wicked as dead in their sins, and having part in the first
spiritual death, and the godly men as living by grace, and having part in the
first spiritual resurrection.

I could raise many more Arguments against the doctrine which the Millenaries
hold concerning that Monarchical kingdom, but I will not be tedious: I shall
pass by the three several assensions of Christ which they hold, for we know no
such thing in the Scripture; I shall also omit the place which some Millenaries
maintain besides heaven and hell, where the souls of them are, who shall rise
to reign with Christ a thousand years; for you know that the Scripture makes
only mention of two places after death; the one of which says S. Austin in
his hypognost. is according to the Catholic faith, the kingdom of heaven, and
the other according to the same faith, says this Father and Doctor of the
Christian Church, is hell; Etenim tertium locum penitus ignoramus; for we are
wholly ignorant of a third place, which is confirmed in his Book de precat.
merit. cap. 28. and insinuated in the 22. artic. of the Church of England.

I will not trouble you with the several passages of Scripture which they bring
to prove that Monarchical kingdom, which they will have with Christ, it is
enough to tell you, that they put a merely literal construction upon the
Prophesies and promises of Scripture, which the holy Ghost intended to be
spiritually understood; for if the Prophets speak concerning the kingdom of
Christ the re-edifying of the Jewish Cities, the pomp and magnificence of
restored Israel, and their large privileges, they draw those things to a gross
corporal, and syllabical sense, which the judgment of the whole Christian
Church seconded by the event, has upon good ground ever construed not of the
letter but of the spirit, to show the comfortable condition and great advantage
of the Evangelical Church under Christ, manifested in the flesh; which
evidently teaches us, as I said before, that Christ had only two several
kingdoms, of which the one is providential, and the other spiritual, in which
the Saints live and reign with Christ, as you may see in my Text, where S. John
speaking of that kingdom, says, and they lived and reigned with Christ.

But for a clear illustration of those kingdoms, you must observe, that the
providential kingdom of Jesus Christ, is his essential, universal and natural
kingdom, which he administreth as God over all his creatures, in Majesty and
glory, with his Father, and the holy Ghost, and obtains as the only Son of
his Father, jure naturali, which kingdom is mentioned in Daniel the Prophet,
4.34. and 6.26. but the spiritual kingdom of Jesus Christ figured by the
kingdom of Judah is the donative, personal, and oeconomical kingdom, which the
Son of God received from his Father, as you may see in Psa. 2.6, 8. where God
having set his Son for our King upon his holy hill of Sion, says to him, Ask
of me, and I shall give thee the Nations for thine inheritance, and the
uttermost parts of the earth for thy possession; as having in any Countries
some that are to be saved, as we see in Rev. 5.9. where it is said, that Christ
has redeemed us unto God by his blood, out of every kindred, tongue, people,
and nation.

Moreover, you may see the spiritual kingdom of Jesus Christ, Dan. 2.44. where
it is written, that in the days of the Kings of the fourth divided Kingdom,
which was the Roman Empire, the God of heaven shall set up a kingdom, that is,
the spiritual kingdom of Christ, which shall never be destroyed, in which
kingdom the Saints living a spiritual and celestial life reign with Christ; for
as you read in my Text, which speaks of that kingdom, and they lived and
reigned with Christ.

But for a clear intelligence you must observe, that the spiritual kingdom of
Christ is distinguished into two wise, by reason of its two several
administrations; into the kingdom of grace, and the kingdom of glory, where the
kingdom of grace is the Sovereignty which Christ exercises in this world over
the Elect, governing his people by the Scepter of his holy Word, and defending
them against their enemies, the devil, the flesh, and the world, by the mighty
virtue of his blessed Spirit, which is that kingdom which S. John in chap. 3.
ver. 5. speaks of, saying, Except a man be born of water and of the Spirit, he
cannot enter into the kingdom of God; and Romans 14.17. the grand Apostle says,
that the kingdom of God, which is, the kingdom of grace, is not meat and drink,
but righteousness, peace, and joy in the holy Ghost; the kingdom of glory is
that Royal Government and Empire, which Christ the King of kings most
gloriously exercises over the triumphant members of his Church after this
life, and shall exercise for ever in his glorious Palace of heaven, over the
bodies and souls of all the blessed of his Father, after the universal
Resurrection, which is that kingdom which is mentioned, Mat. 8.11. when Christ
says, that many shall come from the East and West, and shall sit down with
^braham, Isaac, and Jacob in the kingdom of heaven, and S. Mat. 26.29. when he
says, I will not drink henceforth of this fruit of the vine, until that day
when I drink it new with you in my Fathers kingdom.

But leaving the kingdom of glory, give me leave to tell you, that in our Text
S. John speaks of the kingdom of grace when he says, and they lived and
reigned with Christ; for you may observe, that here is described the happy
condition of the militant Church all the time of the shutting up of Satan, in
which the faithful will reign with Christ, over the devil, the flesh, and the
world, overthrowing their enemies in their very death and most cruel tortures,
as you may observe by the words that precede my Text, where S. John speaks of
those that suffered for the word of God, and for the witness of Jesus,; after
which he adds, and they lived and reigned, etc.

Moreover, the seditions, battles, and seductions which follow that happy
condition of the Church, as you may see in the 8. ver. where it is said, that
Satan after the expiration of the thousand years, shall go out to deceive the
nations, and gather them together to battle, evidently shows, that it is of the
kingdom of grace which S. John speaks of; which obliges me to say, and they
lived, that is, the life of grace, which is mentioned in Gal. 2.20. where the
Apostle S. Paul says, I live, that is, the life of grace, yet not I, but
Christ lives in me; and the life, that is of grace, that I now live in the
flesh, I live by the faith of the Son of God; and indeed, it is only in that
gracious kingdom of Christ that we live that celestial and spiritual life; for
the life and kingdom of grace are inseparable, he that lives the life of grace
reigns with Christ, and he that reigns with Christ lives the life of grace;
and so S. John joins them together, saying, and they lived and reigned with
Christ.

And if you regard the Martyrs who died under Domitianus and other cruel
Emperors, enemies of the Church of God, we may say, and they with the rest of
the Saints lived and reigned with Christ; for the blood of the Martyrs is the
seed of the Church, by which many come unto the saving knowledge of Christ to
reign with him in his kingdom of grace, and in regard of those Saints that are
born of them, we read in the 6. verse, and they in their seed shall reign with
Christ, where you may observe, that here there is no mention of the Millenaries
Monarchical kingdom, and indeed without such a kingdom the Saints reign upon
the Earth with Christ by grace, they reign with him by faith, by hope, by
patience, and by all the rest of the Christian virtues; then let us say, and
they lived and reigned with Christ a thousand years, which leads me to the
second part of my Text,

The Second Part.
That number 1000 is taken in Scripture definitely and indefinitely; definitely
for a certain and limited number, as you may see Judge. 15.15. and 1 King. 3.4.
indefinitely for a great but not limited number, as you may see Dan. 5.1. where
a 1000. lords signify a great multitude of nobility; and so a great but not
limited number is designed by many thousands, Rev. 5.11. according to which
sense we shall take that number of a thousand years mentioned in our Text, for
S. John speaking of the time of Satan's binding, in which the Saints should
reign with our Lord and Savior with progress, although not without affliction,
says, and they lived and reigned with Christ a thousand years, and that is
confirmed by the Royal Prophet, Psa. 90 4. where he says, that a thousand
years are as yesterday in the sight of the Lord, and after him. S. Peter, 2
Pet. 3.8. tells us, that one day is with the Lord as a thousand years, and a
thousand years as one day, to show us, that any long time whatsoever is as one
day, even as a moment before the Lord, because the eternity of God admits no
succession as the eternity of angels and men, for in the eternity of God
nothing is passed and nothing is to come, all things are present unto him,
which is not to be found in the eternity of angels and souls of men, where
there is succession to be found, and indeed to distinguish the eternity of God
from that of angels and men, which has a beginning and no end; Boeth. lib. 5.
de consol. Philosoph. says, that it is possessio totalis and perfect a vitae
sine termino, a total and absolute possession of a life without any limit; and
so S. Austin. lib. 1. de ver. relig. cap. 44. says, that in the eternity of
God he could not perceive any interval of time, because the intervals of time
consist in the motion of things, which are passed or are to come, then let me
tell you, that the thousand years of our Text do signify all the time of the
reign of the Saints, from the binding of the dragon, until the formal
manifestation of the Antichristian jurisdiction, at the loosing of Satan out
of his prison; as you may see by the 7. and 8. verses of our Chapter, and when
the thousand years are expired, Satan shall be loosed out of his prison, and
shall go out to deceive the nations, which are in the four quarters of the
earth, Gog and Magog, to gather them together to battle.

But for a clear explanation of our Text, we must observe the beginning of
these thousand years, for there remains the difficulty, where many Learned men
have pleased themselves with their sancies; for (leaving alone Prosper who
begins them at the beginning of the Seventy weeks which Daniel the Prophet
makes mention of in the ninth Chapter of his Prophecy:) Some with Alphonsus a
Castro, begin the thousand years of our Text after the day of judgment,
saying, that these thousand years are the eternity of the Saints in majesty and
glory; but the seductions of the world after the loosing out of the devil, as
you have seen in the 7. and 8. verses of our Chapter, evidently shows the
contrary: Others with the Millenaries, with Papias, Irenaeus, Tertullian,
Lactantius, and others, begin them at the death of the Antichrist; but you may
observe, in the 7. and 8. verses, that the devil being loosed, after the
expiration of the thousand years, the Antichristian jurisdiction shall prevail,
and so the thousand years of our Text do not follow the Antichrist but precede
him: some of the Rabbis, Ketina and Eliezar among the Jews will have the
beginning of those thousand years, after six thousand of the creation of the
world, at the beginning of the 7000 to the very end of it; But how do they know
that the world shall endure neither more nor less then six thousand years,
after which the world shall have a rest of a thousand years; the Scripture I am
sure makes no mention of such a thing; and therefore leaving that opinion I
say, that others begin them at the Passion of our Savior, as Gregorius and
Austin and Pererius; but although it was said, that at that time the prince of
this world should be cast out, S. Joh. 12.31. and that in the Cross Christ,
having spoiled principalities and powers, made a show of them openly,
triumphing over them in it; yet you must know that it was not the beginning of
Satan's binding, and therefore I omit for the same reason the opinion of some
Learned men that begin the thousand years at the death of Julian the Apostate,
in the beginning of the Reign of Constantine the Great.

For if we seriously consider, we shall see, that a thousand years begin at the
Nativity of Jesus Christ, at that time Christ beheld Satan as lightning falling
from heaven; for at his Nativity he took that strong man, bound him, and
spoiled his house, as Christ himself insinuates, Mat. 12.29. did not the devils
know that they were bound when they besought our Savior saying, if thou cast
us out, suffer us to go into the herd of swine? Mat. 8.31. you cannot but know
that verity, if you consider that the devils could not stand before him without
fear and trembling, as we read in the Evangelists; and the heathens themselves
show us, that the devils were bound at the Nativity of Jesus Christ, for Suidas
in vita August. records, that Augustus the Emperor, enquiring of the Oracle
of Apollo, what man should reign after him, received no answer from the devil,
then that an Hebrew child newly born among the Jews, hindered him to speak; and
commanded him to depart from thence; and I have read, that all the Images of
Egypt did fall to the ground, when our blessed Savior entered into that
Country to avoid the bloody fury of the Infanticide King Herod.

Moreover, some Learned Historians tell us, that the Romans having formerly
consulted the Oracles to know how long the Temple of the Goddess Peace should
stand, an answer was made them, until a Virgin should bring forth a child; and
so it came to pass, for at the blessed Virgins deliverance, it fell to the
ground; and further Plutarch. de defect. orac. does report, that in the Reign
of Tiberius the Emperor, a strange voice and exceeding horrible clamor, with
cries and howlings, was heard by many in the Grecian Sea, lamenting and
complaining that their great god Pan, the master devil was now departed,
insomuch that all the Sea resounded their dreadful Echoes; whereby it is
plain and manifest, that even in all parts the devil complained on the Nativity
of our Lord and Savior, as being at that time so bound, that he could not as
he did before seduce the Nations of the earth, for many of the Gentiles seduced
before by him, came at that time unto the knowledge of Jesus Christ, and
suffered Martyrdom for our Lord.

And all that agrees very well with the narration of S. John described in our
Chapter, for the beloved Disciple of Christ says at the 1. verse, that he saw
an angel coming down from heaven, having the key of the bottomless pit, and a
great chain in his hand, to bind the prince of darkness with it, which shows us
Christ who came down from heaven, as S. John himself says in the 6. chap. of
his Gospel, that being conceived by the holy Ghost in the womb of the blessed
Virgin, (...) he might be born of her to destroy the works of the devil, and
bind that strong man, as you may read in the 12. of S. Mat.

Then you may see that the thousand years of our Text begin at the birth or
Nativity of our Savior, to continue until the formal manifestation of the
Antichristian Jurisdiction at the loosing of Satan, as you have seen by the 7.
and 8. verse. of our chapt. which time is already expired and sinished; if you
consider who are those that are called Gog and Magog, who are to exercise their
tyranny against the Church of God, after the expiration of the thousand years,
as you may see in the 8. and 9. verses, the devil shall go to deceive the
nations of the earth, Gog and Magog, and gather them together, and they went
upon the breadth of the earth, and compassed the camp of the Saints about, and
the beloved City.

You know that Gog and Magog are two words which are taken from the 38. of
Ezechiel the Prophet, where the Jews by Gog understand the king, and by Magog
the people; but you are not ignorant that Magog was one of the Sons of Japheth,
as read in Genesis 10.2. who at the first did inhabit next to the Caspian
mountains, and by succession of time extended themselves into all parts of the
world; from thence came the Scythians, Tartarians, and other Barbarians, from
thence came the Hunnians, Vandals and Goths, and therefore it is not without
reason, that those people are said to be as the sand of the sea in the latter
end of the 8. ver. of our chapt. for they have supplied the world with almost
an infinite number of people, which caused some Learned men to say, that the
North was the shop of all Nations, from thence come also Turks, who by violence
took away the Saracenical Empire; as for Gog you know that it is the proper
name of one of Joels sons of the posterity of Reuben, 1 Chronicles. 5.4. who
inhabited Eastward, and filled the Little Asia with his posterity, which was
called Gog.

But these Nations which came from Gog and Magog having degenerated from their
ancestors, became cruel enemies unto the people of God, as you see by Ezech.
38. and from thence the Scripture speaks of Gog and Magog to represent the open
and secret enemies of the Christian Church, as you see by the 8. ver. of our
Chapter, with a part of the 9. ver. which shows us, that those Nations Gog and
Magog compassed about the Camp of the Saints to sight them, then we cannot but
understand the Turks by Magog, and the Pontificial Tyranny with the cruelty of
the Sectaries by Gog; as for Magog from Miggag revealed and discovered it
becomes well the Turks, for they are manifest enemies of Jesus Christ, and open
persecutours of his poor members; they publicly esteem Mahomet that grand
Impostour, the son of the Prince of darkness, before our Lord and Savior, who
is the Son of God, and prefer their Alcoran full of Gentilism, Judaism, and
Arianism, compiled by men of impiety, before the sacred Scripture, inspired by
the holy Ghost the essential piety; as for Gog, let me tell you that it becomes
well the tyranny of the Church of Rome with the cruelty of the Sectaries; for
Gog from Gag is the same as covered and hidden, which is very fit for them, for
they cover and hide their tyranny and cruelty under the cloak of Religion,
professing one Jesus Christ, and him crucified, when they crucify and hand the
true members of our Savior; in all their wicked designs they pretend the good
of the Church, when they rend and defile it; and so by a damnable hypocrisy
cover all their profanations and wickednesses, as you have in this Realm beheld
with your eyes; where the Jesuits with the Sectaries erected a black Tribunal
for a most pious and Christian King, and his faithful Subjects, under a
pretext of a good Conscience.

And indeed as Gog did degenerate from his Predecessor Jacob, and his father
Joel, who with humility and reverence adored the Almighty God of Israel, and
followed his orders, so did the Church of Rome with the Sectaries degenerate
from their Ancestors, who acknowledged with all humility and obedience the
Church of God and its orders; or if you will, as Gog did imitate Reuben who
defiled his fathers bed, so the Church of Rome with the Sectaries imitate
Satan, who defiles the Church of God with Schisms and heresies; which makes
you clearly see, that the devil is loosed out of his prison, and that the
thousand years are expired and finished; they lived and reigned with Christ a
thousand years; not that I will say that the Saints do not now reign with
Christ, for I know that they do reign with him when they are his regenerated
Subjects, but that now they reign not with Christ with such progress as they
did before the expiration of the thousand years of Satan's binding; for we
seldom now see a true conversion, or a sincere repentance of our sins, but
rather often obstination appears in our errors, we will not change them
because we defended our sins openly, and so by our ambition we destroy the
Church of our blessed Savior; there is no fear of God amongst us, nor sincere
love one to another, nor charity toward our poor afflicted brethren, as there
was in the time of Satan's binding; we are as hard as Pharaoh, as cruel as Cain,
and as profane as Esau; it seems that all the Christian virtues are vanished
amongst men, and that all vices have took their places to give way unto the
prince of darkness, who is now loosed out of his prison; for they lived and
reigned with Christ a thousand years.

Perhaps you will tell me, if the thousand years are now sinished, or as you
said, expired at the formal manifestation of the Antichristian Jurisdiction,
how can it be said, that Satan is loosed out for a little while or season, as
it is spoken in the 3. ver. To that I answer and say, that this may very well
be said in regard of Satan's eternal binding, which follows after his loosing
out of his prison for a while; indeed if you consider the thousand years
binding of Satan, I confess that his loosing out will seem a great while; but
if you look upon Satan's eternal binding, his loosing out is but a little
season, which makes me wonder at the Millenaries opinion, who expect now a
visible and earthly reign, for in the expectation of such a reign, they loose
the spiritual kingdom of our Savior, and in their pretended happiness, they
may find a true unhappiness.

But I will stay no longer upon that imaginary kingdom, for the kingdom that I
proposed unto you, is a true and spiritual kingdom; the kingdom of our Savior
which is of grace, without which it is impossible to obtain the kingdom of
glory; for you know, that we must first reign here in grace, before we can
reign hereafter in glory; then let me tell you, that the Saints who now reign
with Christ in glory, lived and reigned before with him in grace by many years;
for as you read in my Text, and they lived and reigned with Christ a thousand
years.

Conclusion and Application.
But let us conclude with application, to learn from our Text, that the Saints
who are actual members of our Savior live with him in this world the life of
grace, the only life of Gods children, who are not born of the flesh but of
the Spirit, Joh. 3.6. not of corruptible but incorruptible seed, the word of
God, which lives and abides for ever, 1. Pet. 1.23. not of the prince of
darkness, but of the Father of lights; for as we read, and they lived and
reigned with Christ; indeed there is none but those that are light in the Lord
that possess it; for this spiritual life changes our darkness into light, and
our vices into shining virtues, and makes us like unto the Sun of righteousness
by the gracious brightness which the life of grace procures unto us, which is a
life that the Scripture calls the life of Christ; because the life of grace
looks on Christ as on its sacred object, and its meritorious cause; and by
excellency the life of God, not as if God were not the author of the natural
life of the vegetative, sensitive, reasonable, and intelligent creatures, for
we know that the God of heaven and earth gives life to all these creatures, and
that the natural life depends of him as of the God of nature; but it is so
called because God by the life of his grace lives in his children, that they
may live unto him, and conform themselves to his sacred Will; for the
regenerated know that by that life we die to sin, and live to righteousness,
always tending toward the mark for the price of the high calling of God.

Moreover, the life of grace is such an advantage to the regenerated Christian,
that by it the image of our God, which we by our sins have desiled, is restored
in our corrupted nature, and therefore the Scripture shows us, that the life of
grace is nothing else but the new creature and the new man: I wish that I could
speak with the tongue of Angels to express in some kind that celestial and
spiritual life which the Saints enjoy in our Savior, for I am sure that you
would be ravished with admiration in the very hearing of that sacred life, yet
I desire that you give place to my weakness, excuse my infirmities, and suffer
me to exhort you to run after it with all the sincerity of your hearts.

But before, forsake the world and its lusts; for it is impossible to live with
Christ while we live the life of this corrupted world; let then every one of us
pull down the Idols which we have erected upon our hearts to the profanation of
the Name of the Almighty God, and confusion of our immortal souls; you that are
covetous, let me persuade you to remove Mammon from your affections, that you
may offer an agreeable sacrifice unto God, and come to the life of grace;
consider that riches continue not long with us, for you know that sometimes the
sea, that unconstant Element takes by violence all ours, and that which we had
from others, as great Merchants by experience may inform you, and sometimes a
sickness will consume our estate; nay, sometimes the negligence or bad
conscience of our debitours will deprive us of all our revenues, and make us
poor and miserable; but suppose that all your goods remain with you all your
lives time, at last they must leave you although you will not leave them; for
at death, you carry nothing with you but a winding sheet in the grave, and a
good or bad conscience before the tribunal of God:

You that are voluptuous, leave your sensual pleasures that hinder you to come
to the life of grace; Consider that the pleasures of this world pass as soon as
they appear unto us, you enjoy them for some moments only, and that with grief
after their possession; for you know that sorrow inseparably follows the
sensual pleasures of this world; those beauties which captivate our affections
are mortal and changeable, and vanish at the least sickness, but we are blinded
by the fatal and irreligious Cupid, which holds us fast with his voluptuous
chains, which we must break to turn our faces to the eternal beauty which is
unchangeable and full of purity and holiness, that we may enjoy the celestial
pleasures with the spiritual life which we have in Christ; you that are
ambitious leave your worldly honors, and pull down your pride, and with
humility desire of God through Jesus Christ the life of grace, that you may
live with our blessed Savior; let every sinner pluck his sins out of his own
heart, that he may be able to receive the celestial impressions upon it, to die
unto sin, and live unto righteousness.

But observe, that if the Saints or faithful live with Christ in this world,
they reign also with him, for it is only in the gracious kingdom of Jesus
Christ that we live the life of grace; and it is true enough, nay, no Christian
can deny, that the Saints reign here with Christ, for in his kingdom the Saints
have power over their sinful flesh, when before their coming into it, the
flesh had power over them; which obliges the grand Apostle S. Paul Romans 6.12.
to say, let not sin reign therefore in your mortal bodies, that you should obey
it in the lusts thereof; in that kingdom of Christ we have power over the
prince of darkness, the god of this world; for in that kingdom we have him
under our feet, all that he can do is to howl and cry, but not hurt nor offend;
for in all the assaults which the devil presents unto the regenerated Subjects
of our Savior in the kingdom of Christ, they obtain the victory through him
who suffered for their sins, and destroyed for them that power which Satan had
over them; in that kingdom of our Lord we have also power over this corrupted
world, when before, it had an Empire over us; you are no more subjects nor
slaves of its corruptible treasures, vanishing honors, and sensual pleasures;
for if you possess some honors, enjoy some pleasures, and have riches, you
apply not your hearts unto them, and so you possess them as possessing them not.

Moreover, Consider what advantage we have in that spiritual kingdom of Christ;
for reigning with him we are in some kind mundi Domim, the Lords of the world,
because we have a spiritual right to all the creatures of God; for as the
Apostle says, 1 Cor. 3.21. all things are yours; but I say a spiritual right
to distinguish it from that which we call natural and civil right, which men
have to that which they legally possess, for we must take heed of this error
which makes an universal confusion wherever it prevails.

Now give me leave to tell you, that it is by faith that we here reign with
Christ, and that it is by hope, by charity, and by patience with all the rest
of the Christian virtues; for you know that they defend and hold us fast
against our enemies, so that we prevail against them in our afflictions and
calamities even in our death; Leave then the Millenaries with the earthly
opinion of their worldly kingdom; let them possess the earth if they will, as
for us we must look up to heaven to give there all our meditations while we
live upon the earth; we must leave the earthly kingdoms to the Alexanders and
Gaesars, and seek after the spiritual kingdom of Christ, for it is impossible
to come into the Celestial Palace of our God, if we have not been in the
gracious kingdom of our Savior; then let us all look now for that kingdom, and
keep there all our life time, that having lived and reigned with Christ in
grace, we may hereafter live and reign with him in glory. Amen.

To the truly Noble and Religious Gentlewoman, M.rs TAMISEN BROOK Grace,
Happiness and Peace.
Madam,
IF I were ignorant of your great Piety and Charity, many hundred Families
would make me know it; you and your most worthy Family is always at work for
the poor members of our blessed Savior; you are another Dorcas, full of good
works, your thoughts are always in heaven though you live upon the earth, your
words tend continually to union and peace, and your great care is to work out
your salvation with fear and trembling; which is seen not only in your private
devotions, but in the public ones, where I may say that you are a pious and
godly example to all others of your Sex; indeed the Church of England, among
all the daughters she did procreate, there are few to be compared with you; but
if your humility will not accept of that expression, permit me to make all the
English world know that the Church never possessed a better one; for every one
knows that your house is a Temple, and a little Church where Vows and Prayers
are continually sent up to heaven for the preservation of the Church of England
our mother, and for our gracious Prince, nay, for the conversion of those that
are distant from the true knowledge of our Savior, who came into the world to
redeem us from our iniquities, the redemption of men being our Saviors meat,
which I present you with as it was delivered by me in a Sermon, which I hope
you will accept, being the meat which daily you and your worthy Family feed
upon; for I am not ignorant, that it is your singular pleasure and delectation;
nay, I am sure that it is so agreeable unto you, that you will kindly receive
it from him, who is,

Madam, Your most humble and obedient Servant, James Le Franc.

Christ's Spiritual Meat: Delivered in a Sermon Preached in English at the
French Church in Norwich.
S. JOH. 4.34. My meat is to do the will of him that sent me, and to finish his
work.


IT is common amongst men to extol the persons of merit and reputation, but if
any amongst you has ever esteemed a learned and most prudent wit, that could
upon any matter choose considerations fit for the instruction of his auditors,
and by the object of the sight and other external senses, could with a
mavelous industry and aptness awake the internal senses, and lift up our
understandings to the contemplation of the highest things, let him now reflect
upon our Master, the eternal Wisdom of God the Father our great doctor,
Christ who is over all God blessed for ever; let him say with me that there is
none, that ought to be paralleled with him; for if you consider the industry
which Christ our Mediator used when he was living upon the earth, you will
easily conclude that it was admirable, for he ever made use of his Celestial
Industry to promote his Fathers glory and men's salvation, taking sometimes an
occasion from their too great inclination which they had after the things of
this world, to draw them into the knowledge and inquisition of spiritual and
eternal things of the heavenly Jerusalem; as you may observe in the 6. Chapt.
of S. John; where Christ seeing the people careful to seek after him for only
corruptible and common meat, took occasion to discourse with them about the
sacred bread of God, and the spiritual manna, which if any man eat of, he shall
live for ever.

Now let us follow Christ through Samaria, to observe some things of his
celestial actions and wonderful works; but seeing that Christ does stay, let
us stay with him, for I perceive that our Savior is weary of his journey, and
forced to rest himself on Jacobs well, but while he rests himself, there
comes a woman of Samaria to draw water; Christ discourses with her about the
true and spiritual worship of God, and takes occasion from the water to
instruct her about the celestial fountain of living water, which she tasted of
with such pleasure, that she, leaving her waterpot, went into the City to call
her fellow-Citizens, the Samaritans, and invite them to the participation of
that spiritual water which she had received from our blessed Savior: But while
she thus runs to invite them, the disciples of our Lord desire him to eat, but
Christ whose hunger was after the souls of men, said unto them, I have meat to
eat that ye know not of, which made them believe that while they were absent
some body had brought him something to eat, saying one to another, has any man
brought him ought to eat? but Christ that he might no longer keep them in
suspense, because it was given unto them to know the mysteries of the kingdom
of heaven, teaches them, with sew but significant words, a great and sublime
mystery, saying, My meat is to do the will of him that sent me, and to finish
his work, which are the words which I have chosen to entertain you with by the
special assistance of the holy Ghost; but for a clear intelligence of them, I
shall divide my Text into two parts, where in the first I shall entertain you
with the will and work of him that sent Christ, and in the second part I shall
show you, that that will and work of God is our Saviors meat, My meat is to do
the will of him that sent me, and to finish his work.

The first Part.
As the Philosophers place the moral virtues in two ranks, where in the first
the virtues are glorious and worthy to be loved of themselves, as Justice; and
in the second rank, worthy to be wished for the virtues of the first, as
Courage which is a sit virtue, when justice cease amongst men; so the
Schoolmen divide the attributes of God into two orders, where in the first the
attributes are incommunicable unto the creatures; as Gods Immensity,
Independency, and Unchangeableness, for all the creatures of the Universe, even
the Angels, are dependent, changeable and limited natures; but the attributes
of the second order are said to be proportionably communicable, in effectis
analogis, by the resemblance of the effects, as Gods Wisdom, Goodness, and
Will, for you know that those attributes are ascribed unto Angels, and given
unto men; and as God has a will, so have Angels and men, as being the right of
the intelligent creatures.

But here we shall not speak of Angels nor men's will, but of Gods will, My meat
is to do the will of him that sent me; for he that sent Christ is God the
Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost, according to the old Maxim of Divinity,
opera Dei ad extra sunt indivisa, seu toti Trinitati Communia, the outward
operations of God are common to the whole Trinity; so that you must observe
that the Son, the second Person of the blessed Trinity, was sent as Mediator;
for he was one of those blessed Persons who did consult about men's redemption,
nay, more then that, he was that sacred one, who of his own free will offered
himself to be consecrated for the performance of that gracious work, as you may
see Heb. 10.5, 6, 7. Sacrifice and offering thou would not, but a body have
thou prepared me, in burnt-offerings and sacrifices for sin thou have had no
pleasure, then said I, lo, I come to do thy will; where you may easily observe,
that Christ as God sent himself as Mediator, that he might redeem us from the
power of the Prince of darkness, and the spiritual bondage of our sins.

Nevertheless because the first Person of the blessed Trinity is the Father of
our Mediator, and the Person a quo filius agit, from which the Son does act;
the sending of Christ into the world for our salvation, is particularly
attributed unto him, as you may see in the 5. Chapter of S. John, 36. ver. the
same works that I do, bear witness of me, that the Father has sent me, which
verily is asserted in many other places of that Gospel; and so in that sense we
must say, my meat is to do the will of him that sent me, for indeed you must
observe, that that person amongst these of the blessed Trinity who sends
another, is that person from which the person sent proceeds, and so we read in
the Scripture, that the Father has sent his Son, and the Son misit Spiritum a
Patre, did send the holy Ghost from the Father, but we do not read, that the
Son has sent the Father, nor the holy Ghost the Son, because the Father
proceeds not from the Son, nor the Son from the holy Ghost, but the Son is from
the Father alone, and the holy Ghost proceeds from the Father and Son; then let
us say as before, My meat is to do the will of him that sent me: And indeed you
must consider, that the Father is Author of our salvation by a way which is
not given to the Son our Mediator, as the Son our Mediator is Author of our
salvation by a way which is not given to the Father; for as the Learned men
distinguish some essential operations of the blessed Trinity, respectu termini,
and make them personal operations, as the Creation to the Father, the
Redemption to the Son, and the Sanctification to the holy Ghost; so they divide
the ways by which the Persons of the blessed Trinity are said to be Authors
of our salvation; for the first Person of the Blessed Trinity which is the
Father, is said to be the author of our salvation by way of procuration,
because he procured us that great work in the sending of his Son, and so Christ
says, my meat is to do the will of him that sent me; the Son our Mediator is
author of our salvation by way of merit, because the Son of God alone is the
meritorious cause of our salvation, not the Father, for he alone acquired it
for us through his blood; the holy Ghost is said to be author of our salvation
by way of application, because the holy Ghost our Sanctifier applies unto our
souls the great benefit of our Redemption by his divine virtue.

Now you must observe in our Text the Father to be author of our Salvation by
way of procuration, and the Son by way of merit, for in my Text, the Father
sends the Son, and the Son our Mediator finisheth the work and executes his
Fathers will, for Christ speaking as Mediator says, My meat is to do the will
of him that sent me, etc.

But let us come to the explication of Gods will, and give me leave to say with
some Learned men for our illustration, that there are three sorts of wills
attributed unto God, respectu rerum quas Deus vult extra seipsum, in regard of
things which God wills out of himself; I say in regard of things which God
wills out of himself, for if you consider the object of Gods will, as not being
out of himself, you must know, that the object of his will is God himself, and
by consequence there is no difference in Gods will, for it is nothing else but
Deus scipsum volens.

In regard then of things that God wills out of himself, the first sort of will
attributed unto God, and that properly is voluntas decreti, the will of Gods
Decrees, by which he freely and most certainly from all eternity determined to
manifest all things which were to be framed in time, of which will it is spoken
in the 1. Chapt. to the Ephesians, the 9. ver. when the Apostle says, that God
has made known unto us the mystery of his will, that is, the will of Gods
decree, which by the Schoolmen is called voluntas beneplaciti, the will of Gods
good pleasure, because by it, according to his good pleasure, and without any
merit in our selves he loved us; voluntas antecedens Gods antecedent will,
because from all eternity, before any thing was created, it was approved in
God; voluntas absoluta, Gods absolute will, because it is grounded upon his
good pleasure, and does not depend of things which are framed in time; and
voluntas occulta Gods secret will, because a a priori at the first, it was not
revealed unto the sacred Angels, nor perceived by men;

The second sort of will ascribed unto God, and that improperly, is voluntas
signi, Gods will of sign, by which God shows us what is agreeable unto him,
and what he will have us to do; which is the mark and testimony of Gods decree
manifested in his holy word, although not always the sign of that decree which
is first conceived by us; which will, endued with several names, as Gods
conditional will, Gods revealed will, and Gods consequent will, is declared
unto us under the prescription of a commandment or prohibition, and under the
rule of a promise or threatening; for as the Magistrates Commands are called
their will, so Gods Commandments or Promises are called his will, as you may
see Act. 13.22. I have found David the Son of Jesse a man after mine own heart,
which shall fulfill all my will, or as it is expressed in the Original, in
regard of several Commandments and Orders, (...), all my wills.

The third and last sort of will attributed unto is voluntas objecti, Gods will
of object, which is nothing else but the things that God wills, commands and
prescribes unto us; that is the object of Gods Commandments, as it does appear,
1 The. 4.3. this is the will of God, even your sanctification, so in the Lords
Prayer when we say thy will be done; and in our Text, Christ speaking of that
will of object, says, my meat is to do the will of him that sent me.

Now to know what is meant by that will, we cannot have a better Interpreter
then Christ himself, who says in the 6. Chapter of S. John, ver. 39. This is
the Fathers will which has sent me, that of all which he has given me, I
should lose nothing, but should raise it up again at the last day; it was that
which his Father told him before his Incarnation Isa. 42.6, 7. I the Lord have
called thee in righteousness to open the blind eyes, to bring out the
prisoners from the prison, and them that sit in darkness out of the prison
house; and you know when Christ prepared himself for the execution of his
Fathers will, that he said, Lo, I come to do thy will, Heb. 10.9. by which
will, says the Apostle, ver 10. we are sanctified through the offering of the
body of Jesus Christ once for all.

But for a clearer illustration, let me tell you, that this will is the
salvation of man, which our Lord came to advance and to accomplish, for you
know that to that end Christ was sent into the world, that whosoever believes
in him should not perish but have everlasting life, Joh. 3.16. a truth which
manifestly appears, Isa. 49.6. when he says in the person of the Father,
speaking to the Son, I will give thee for a light unto the Gentiles, that thou
may be my salvation unto the end of the earth; nay, a truth manifested by
our Savior when he lived amongst us, as now he will have us to understand it,
when he says, My meat is to do the will of him that sent me, and to finish his
work; then you may observe, that this will of God was the manifestation of his
Fathers most sacred counsel unto the world, Christ being the sacred Interpreter
of his Father, and the word by which he informs us of his will, for as Christ
says, S. Mat. 11.27. all things are delivered unto me of my Father, and no man
knows the Son but the Father; neither knows any man the Father but the Son,
and be to whom the Son will reveal him, this sacred will of God was the
sulfilling of the Law for those who should receive him by a most siducial
apprehension, for as Ambrosius says, persectionem legis habet qui credit in
Christum, he that believes in Christ has the perfection of the Law, which he
had learned from the Apostle S. Paul, Rom 10.4. who says Christ is (...) the
end or perfection of the Law for righteousness to every one that believes;
this sacred will of God was the death of our Savior for the sins of those that
should obey him, as you clearly see, Heb. 5.9. where we read, that Christ
being made perfect through sufferings, he became the author of eternal
salvation unto all them that obey him, that they may be conformed to the most
bright image of him that says, My meat is to do the will of him that sent me,
but let us add, and to sinish his work.

To tell you that, I need not to give you an enumeration of all Gods works, for
the work of God, of which it is spoken in our Text, is the same as the will of
him that sent Christ; for as Euthimius says, the will of the Father who sent
Christ, and the work committed unto him, is the Salvation of men, according to
that of S. John, 17.4. where Christ says, I have sinished the work which thou
gave me to do, and so the will of God which we have expounded unto you, is
the work of God which our Savior had to perform, and indeed it is not without
cause, that this will is called a work because the satisfaction for men's sins,
and their reconciliation with God is a work by excellency, a work compounded of
many works, which nevertheless are under one work, which is our redemption;
then you must observe that this work does not consist in the last act that
Christ performed upon the Cross; for he wrought in it when he sought after the
lost sheep of the house of Israel, he wrought in that gracious work when he
let the Gentiles, their neighbors, take some crumbs of his sacred bread for
the salvation of their souls; he wrought in it when he did communicate himself
unto the Samaritans which were grown a base people, and amongst whom the
service of the God of Israel was not pure, he wrought in that sacred work all
the time he was upon the earth, till his obedience was accomplished upon the
Cross, where he said, It is sinished, S. John 19.30. ver.

But observe, that this work is of another rank then that of our good works
which God commands, approves and works in us by his holy Spirit; for this
work of our salvation is the great and sublime work of God; a work which excels
the great work of the Creation, being a work, as I may say of greater labor
then that of the Creation, for as S. Austin says, Deus loquendo creavit sed
patiendo redemit, God created the world by his speaking, but he redeemed it by
his suffering; because the ruin and perdition of men was such, that there were
more obstacles at the redeeming of men, then at the creation of the Universe;
for, besides there was the same virtue required to raise the dead, as to give
being to nothing, and life to dust; the justice of the living God was opposed
unto their salvation; therefore to satisfy the divine justice the death of our
dear Savior was necessary for them, to whom God had said, Genesis 2.17. In the
day thou eatest of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil, thou shall
surely die.

Moreover this work of our salvation is a work in which God manifested his
Wisdom in an higher degree then he did in that of the Creation; for besides we
know more of the Divinity by the work of our redemption, then we do by the work
of the Creation (the mystery of the Trinity being revealed unto us by that work
of his grace, which was not not discovered by the works of nature) we see in
our Redemption Gods admirable work; a most wonderful way, where God punishes
our sins, and with all saves men by it, so that the punishment of men's sins in
our Savior becomes the salvation of them; nay, more then that, in that sacred
work, Christ the Physician took Physic for us his Patients, to heal us of our
spiritual sicknesses, where in nature the Physician gives Physic to his
Patients to cure them of their corporal diseases; then let us say, My meat is
to to do the will of him that sent me, and to sinish his work; where you must
yet observe that this work is the only work of Christ, for this work is such,
that no man nor angel can reach unto it, there is none but the Lion of the
Tribe of Judah the Son of God, that can say in regard of this great and mighty
work of our Redemption; My meat is to do the will of him that sent me, and to
sinish his work, which leads me to the second part of my Text.

The Second Part.
Those that are acquainted with the Scripture know there are two sorts of meat,
the one for the body, which is the common signification, as it is the common
meat; the other for the souls which is spiritual by resemblance and proportion
to the corporal meat, which is the metaphorical signification of that word
meat; and indeed as the material meat maintains and keeps our bodies, so are
our souls maintained and kept by the spiritual meat; moreover, as our bodies
increase and receive their strength against weakness, from the material meat,
so have our souls their growing unto a perfect man in our Savior, and receive
their strength against all temptations by the spiritual meat.

But if the spiritual meat has some resemblance with the corporal meat, give
me leave to tell you, that there is something in the spiritual meat which is
not to be found in the corporal; for the corporal meat must be given to those
that enjoy a corporal life, otherwise it cannot help all our dead bodies, but
the spiritual meat which is the nourishment of our souls, that proceeds from
God, when it is given to those that are spiritually dead, restores them unto a
celestial and spiritual life; moreover, the corporal meat can for a time keep
our natural and temporal life, but it cannot preserve us from death; but the
incorruptible meat of the Word of God, and above all the living bread which
comes down from heaven gives an everlasting life to our souls, and preserves
them from eternal death.

And further you must observe; that after this life, all corporal nourishments
shall cease, but never the spiritual nourishment of our souls for the blessed
of (...) God the Father, shall ever sit at the table of their master, to eat
with him of the sacred bread of God, and drink the new wine of the kingdom of
heaven with him, that says, My meat is to do the will of him that sent me, and
to sinish his work, where by these words you may easily see, that in this place
the word meat is taken in a spiritual sense; but

For the better explication of this meat, let us observe that the spiritual
meat has some properties and effects that presuppose some imperfections in our
souls, when the spiritual meat is an aliment and medicine for them; which
cannot agree with our blessed Savior, nay, more then that, those qualities
ought not to be ascribed or adapted unto him, who is all perfect, Christ our
Redeemer, who is a lamb without blemish and without spot; and you will confess
that Christ who gives life to the world, needs not its entertainment nor
restoration of any strength; but behold there is something in the spiritual
meat which will very well agree with our blessed Savior: delectation and
pleasure, for you must know that as the material and corporal meat (when it is
present and taken by a man of a good appetite) does recreate and generate
pleasure and delectation; and (if it be absent) causes a great desire, so does
the spiritual meat; for when it is present and taken by our souls that seek
after it, it recreates them, and gives the souls a great but spiritual pleasure
and delectation.

And after this manner the eating and drinking is taken often in the Scripture
for the possession and enjoying of very acceptable and pleasant things; for the
celestial and spiritual pleasures which we in this life and after it shall
enjoy in the Lord; as you may see, Psalm. 19.10. where the Psalmist speaking of
Gods Commandments celebrates them as more to be desired then gold, and sweeter
then honey, and in many other places of the same book, as Psa. 42.3. Psa. 63.1,
5. the royal Prophet expresses his most fervent desires for God by hunger and
thirst; and his greater pleasures by the fullness of marrow and fatness, saying,
My soul thirsts for God, for the living God; and then with delectation, My
soul shall be satisfied as with marrow and fatness, and my mouth shall praise
thee with joyful lips; moreover, Christ speaking unto his Disciples of the
sacred pleasures which we shall enjoy in the possession of the spiritual
blessings in the Celestial Jerusalem, says, Luke 22.30. I appoint unto you a
kingdom that ye may eat and drink at my table.

In this sense Christ calls his Fathers will and work his meat, saying, My meat
is to do the will of him that sent me, and to finish his work; because it was
all his pleasure, all his delight, and all his desire; as if Christ should say
unto his Disciples, who presented him meat that he might eat of; I am not
touched now with an appetite to corporal meat, even after my weariness, which
forces me to rest my self on Jacobs well, as I am desirous to accomplish Gods
work, and the will of him that sent me, and indeed the care of that great and
sublime work, makes me forget to eat any thing for the refection of my body;
where you must observe, that there are two things which make men forget to eat
and drink, a great sadness, and a great pleasure; for you know that sometimes a
great sadness will so feed an afflicted man that he will forget himself, and
leave his meat and drink, as it does appear by our royal but afflicted Prophet,
Psa. 102.4. saying; My heart is smitten, and withered like grass, so that I
forget to eat my bread, and Psa. 42.3. he says, My tears have been my meat day
and night, while they continually say unto me, where is thy God?

But if sadness makes us forget our meat and drink, much more does pleasure, on
which a proverb is framed, where it is said, he takes there so much pleasure
that he loses his meat and drink; and you know that to be true, for oftentimes
a profound meditation on some agreeable things, or a pleasant exercise will
make us forget the time of our refection, as it appears in our blessed Savior,
who says, My meat is to do the will of him that sent me, and to finish his
work; for Christ refuses the meat which his Disciples presented him, because
all his pleasure and his delight was in the salvation of men, and conversion of
those who were to come to meet him, as you may see in the 40. verse of our
Chapter; he would not then feed upon his Disciples corporal meat, but upon the
conversion of men, his spiritual meat and delicious banquet.

I know that our Savior did eat many times to show the truth of his humane
nature, and make the Jews and others know that he was a true man, but he did
leave his meat, when necessity of men's salvation did require it, to manifest
himself the Savior of the world; indeed he used the corporal meat with the
common, but the salvation of men was his proper meat; for you know that amongst
all the provisions which God gives us for our nourishment, some there are which
we taste of with greater pleasure then others, as you may see in Isaac whose
singular meat was venison, Genesis 27.3. and so every one says, speaking of the
meat which he singularly loves, this is my meat, as Christ in this place
speaking of the meat which he loved above all, says, My meat is to do the will
of him that sent me, and to finish his work; Indeed being question of men's
salvation, he had a singular reason to say, that it was his meat, because no
angels nor men could deliver us from the hands of the prince of darkness; none
but God manifested in the flesh; for Christ alone God manifested in the flesh
is the only King who did eat at the table of men's redemption; Christ is he
alone who has trodden the wine press, Isa. 63.3. I have trodden (says our
Savior, speaking of that he was certainly to perform) the winepress alone, and
of the people there was none with me, Christ is he alone who has been
consecrated by afflictions for our salvation, Heb. 5.9. For Christ being
consecrated through sufferings, became the author of eternal salvation unto
all those that obey him, and there is no other name under heaven given amongst
men whereby we must be saved but this of Jesus Christ, who says, My meat is to
do the will of him that sent me, and to finish his work.

Conclusion and Application.
Now brethren to conclude, let us consider the great work of our Redemption,
which our Lord and Savior performed, from the birth of his sacred person to
his death upon the Cross, where he says, It is finished, that we may abstain
from sin, and run after righteousness; let us look upon the divine wisdom that
found a way to punish our sins, and with all save men by it; nay, more then
that, a way where the Physician took Physic for his Patient, to cure him of
all his spiritual diseases, that we may never cease to praise the Lord our God
whom we adore; ler us admire here the tender affection of our dear Savior, who
being offended as well as his Father notwithstanding the reconciliation of men
with their God and him through his blood, that we may exclaim with the Apostle,
that neither death, nor life, nor angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor
height, nor depth, nor any other creature shall be able to separate us from the
love of God which is in Jesus Christ.

Moreover, let us consider in the work of our Redemption the union of heaven
and earth, which our sins had broke; and you shall see that the sacred angels
descend from heaven to protect, help, and comfort us against our enemies and
eminent dangers, which beset us in this corrupted world; being now ministering
spirits, for them who shall be heirs of salvation, Heb. 1.14.

But to admire yet more the great benefits of the incomparable work of our
Redemption; consider seriously what we were by our sins before the decretal
resolution of God to save men by Christ; examine what we are now by nature, the
slaves of the Prince of darkness, the sons of this corrupted world, and the
children of death and eternal damnation, our condition was (as it is by nature)
worse then Lots in Sodom, then Isreal's in Egypt, then Sampsons among the
Philistines, then the Jews in Babylon, and the Prophets and Apostles in the
obscure prisons; for we were under the power of the god of this wotld, bound
with chains of obscurity, and tied fast to the infernal pillory for our eternal
shame, if Christ had not come to destroy him that had the power of death, that
is, the devil.

Moreover, let us learn here, that although Christ is alone in this great work
of our Redemption, yet in the general enterprise of doing the will of God every
one according to his condition is sent from him to do his will; Kings and
Princes have their work from God to do, for as S. Paul says, Romans 13. (...),
the Princes are the Ministers of God for good; they must kiss the eternal Son
of God, the Lord of lords, and King of kings; they must lay down at his feet
their Scepter and Diadem, that their kingdoms may continue longer under them;
nay more then that, they must administer all things for his glory, all the
kings of the world being under Christ the King of kings; which the great
Monarch of England most piously acknowledges by the Church, when she says,
that his Majesty is next and immediately under God and his Christ, in his
Dominions, supreme Governor.

The subordinate Magistrates have also their work from God to perform, they
ought to do all things according to equity, and minister justice without
partiality, and weigh with deliberation the considerable matters which they
have in hand; lest too much rashness in the execution of them, should embroyl
them and the people with ruin and confusion, or some other fatal accidents:

All the Spiritual Guides and Ecclesiastical Superiors have a work from God to
do which must be their meat, they must consider, that all things ought to be
done decently and in order in the Church of God; and that they must not do
things to please their fancies, or the common sort of people, but our God, and
Christ our Redeemer, who did seek only the glory of his Father that sent him;
the nurses of piety and learning, ought to apply their understandings for the
work that they have to perform, that they may find some means to advance and
promote the saving knowledge of Jesus Christ, and keep the Church of God from
schism, licentiousness and heresy; all the Ministers have a work from God
which they must accomplish, for we are ambassadors for Christ, who has given
unto us the ministry of reconciliation, 2 Cor. 5.18. which is a work of a
sublime excellence, where we feed our selves with divine meat, when we give
others the sincere milk of the word of God.

But further you know, that all Christians have a work from God to do, for they
are sent from him to seek after the meat of obedience unto the word of God;
that they may live soberly and religiously before him, and by a Christian
conversation, inflame the hearts of others to the glory of his holy Name:
Lastly, all men and women have their work from God to accomplish in their
vocation and family as well the greatest and richest, as the least and poorest
of all; as well the Nobility as others their inferiors: for to all the
intelligent but mortal creatures the time is precious and given for a pious
exercise, it must not be employed about drunkenness but soberness, not about
the profanation of the sacred Name of God, but its holy celebration; nor about
idleness but watchfulness: Let us then, brethren, forsake our covetous desires,
let us not run after the impetuons blast of this world, the time which we have
employed for our covetousness, pride and vanity, ought to oblige us to redeem
it, and to lay aside the sin which does so easily beset us in this corrupted
world, pursuing with patience the race that is set before us, and looking unto
Jesus the author and finisher of our faith, who says, My meat is to do the
will of him that sent me, and to finish his work. Amen.

FINIS.

