THE EXAMINATION, and CORRECTION of a Paper lately Printed Entitled A Relation
of the Discourse, between Mr. Hugh Peter's and Lieut. Colonel John Lilborn in
the Tower of London, May 25.

Whereunto is added for the satisfaction of all that desire it; and the just
Vindication of Mr Peter's, from the Scandal the Relator would i^sinuate against
him by his imperfect, false, and misapplyed R^lation; a perfect true and
impartial Relation of the whole discourse that passed between them.

By ROBERT MASSEY, Doctor in Physic, who was present thereat, and an Ear
Witness thereof.

Nunquam sera venit veritas. LONDON, Printed by Gartrude Dawson, May the 5.
1649.

The examination and correction of a Paper lately printed, and entitled a
Relation of the Discourse between Mr. Hugh Peter's, and Lieut. Coll. John
Lilborne in the Tower of London, May the 25.
HAVing perused a Paper passing up and down intituling it self the relation of
a Discourse that passed between Mr. Hugh Peter's and Leiutenant Colonel John
Lilborne Prisoner in the Tower. And perceiving the evil Spirit and intention
of the Relator, though in his front seems to carry the pretention of public
benefit; and being sensible how exceedingly he has wrested and tentered the
discourse, to make some thing at least seem to speak in it to the slander and
scandal of that reverend, and the Gospels, and his Countries faithful friend
and servant, Mr. Hugh Peter's: I thought my self obliged in honesty, being
present at the discourse, and an ear-witnes of the same; to give the world a
true, impartial, perfect relation thereof; and then leave the impartial
well-affected reader to judge of the Relator, and his relation accordingly.

But before I come to give you the Relation, of the Conference between them; I
shall take leave to premise to the Readers observation, some few particulars;
whereby he shall easily observe the Malignant and evil genius of the relator,
and relation published, as it appears to insinuate into the people, suspicions
and jealousy of the Parliament, General, Leiut. General, and the whole Army;
and on all the Faithful and worthy Patriots of the Common wealth: thus as it
were adding more fuel to incense, and inflame the malignant, discontented,
hot-spur, hair-braind Spirits of the times, unto such actings, as may
effectuate their mischivous, malignant designs, for the ruin and destruction,
of the Commonwealth, and Free State, thus newly by Gods blessing, and their
uncessant endeavors settled and established, as the harvest and reward of our
long and tedious labors and sufferings or at least vent their personal and
private malice and spleen, in that they cannot be esteemed and preferred,
according to that value and worth that their pride and self-conceipt has
exalted them in their own thoughts to aspire unto: and all this they would
color over under the pretense of standing for the Laws and the Peoples
Liberties, although these men will account or esteem nothing to be Law,
Justice, or Freedom, longer than it stands with their private ends and
pleasures; thus to bear them out and justify them in their headie, rash, and
inconsiderat enterprises, they will stand for, and cry up any rotten,
oppressive, slavish, absolet law, though the very self-same laws have been by
them exclaimed again, as unjust and unrighteous: And all because it warrants
their malignant, sinful, reasonlesse proceedings and actions in the
accomplished of one or both their evil ends and designs forementioned; and
this reader (...) find to be the intent and purpose of the false Relator, in
his relation of the conference between Mr. Peter's and Lieut, Coll. John
Lilborne, for thou shall in the ensuing true relation observe, that he has not
only omitted some things and words that were spoken; but also added many other
some that were not: and what he has related of truth, he has wholly
perverted, misapplyed to his evil and malicious purpose; and so I leave him,
and his friend and friends, to the conviction of their own conscience.

And now gentle Reader, I proceed to give thee (according to my promise,) a
full, true, and impartial relation of the discourse, that passed between them,
not adding or detracting any one word, or syllable as near as my memory shall
enable me, which was thus:

Mr. Peter's, my self, and one Captain Smith of the Army, coming to the
Custom House about some business, and walking in the walk there, Mr. Peter's
was shamefully and basely abused and vilified in slanderous words and
execrations by the Malignant Porters, and Frock-men there, so as if he had not
withdrawn in probabillity, they would have fallen on his person, Re(...) ha^^
^^tion tha(...) n^(...) ^^(...) Mr (...) ha(...) sit(...) Lie(...) Jo^^ ^^^bu^^
for their carriages and countenances did evidently speak forth their
malicious purposes; Mr. Peter's thereupon resolved to go to the Tower, where,
said he to me, I shall find some of Collonell Prides men, who through the
Lieutenant of the Towers assistance, he being my very good friend, I shall
procure some of them, to seize some one or other of those uncivil rude
fellows. Thus we went to the Tower together, and as we were entering in at the
gate, we had some discourse of Lieutenant Collonell Lilburnes being there, the
place only administering the occasion thereof, in that we had formerly known
Lieutenant Collonell Lilburne: So Mr. Peter's coming to the Lieutenant of the
Tower, after some salutes, and that he had informed him of his abuse at the
Custom House, partly of his own mind, and partly, at the instance of my
self and one friend more; he desired the Lieutenant of the Tower that he might
see Lieutenant Collonell John Lilburne: the Lieutenant of the Tower replied,
Sir, I am very strict and careful who I permit to visit him but I shall suffer
you, seeing it is your desire; Mr. Peter's replied, I have been acquainted with
him formerly and seeing I am come hither so accidentally, I desire to give him
some good counsel, if he be in a disposition to embrace it; as also to hear
from his own mouth what he has to say for himself in refference to his rash
counsels of late: So the Lieutenant of the Tower, Mr. Peter's, my self and
another friend being also desirous in freindship to see him, went to his
lodging, where we found him at dinner, with wholesome fare, though mean, which
(after salutes passed) occasioned as I supposed the Lieutenant of the Tower to
say to him, I perceive Lieutenant Collonell your fare is suitable to your
allowance.

Yea Sir, replied the Lieutenant Collonell, the fare is good will you please to
sit down Gentlemen and eat with us; so we sat down and eat with him and
his wife, she being then at dinner with him.

Mr. Peter's give me leave to be plain with you, said L. Coll. Lilborn, I doubt
you are come on some design, you are sent a fishing by your great Masters:

Mr. Peter's replied, I have no other design in the world, but to give you a
friendly visit L. Coll. as these Gentl. can testify; my coming hither being
merely accidental.

You have no design now, no more then you had the last year when you came
hither to lie in the Tower, whilst the Aldermen were here?

I profess said Mr. Peter's, in the presence of God, I have not now, nor had
then any de^^gn, but coming with some of the Parliament soldiers that were to
quarter in the Tower, I liked Coll Whites house so well, for the pleasantnes,
air, and convenience thereof in my opinion, that I took up my abode there for
a while, for my health sake: but you speak of designs, as if all men were on
designs? I protest, I know no design my self, the Parliament or any in the
Army have, other then to advance the glory of God, and the good of his people.

You know in a Play, every one acts his part, and so you only act yours, and
another his, I will not trust any of your or their fair words, or
protestations; I know not what designs they have, but I am sure they would
take away my life if they could.

Why, said Mr. Peter's, who goes about to take away your life, I know no man
that seeks your life? you may live long enough for me or for any other for
ought I know.

I care not for my life replied L. Col. Lilborn not this, if they should take
it away as they dare not: but they were as good take it away, as keep me here
and take away my livelihood, by which my self, wife and family should subsist.

Why, has he on allowance from the State, said Mr. Peter's to the Lieut. of the
Tower, has he not?

Yes said the Lieut. of the Tower; the State allows him twenty shillings a
week, if he would accept of it, as the rest do.

Why, will you not accept of it, said Mr. Peter's?

No replied, Lieut. Coll. Lilborne; I scorn to undervalue my self so much as to
accept of it, I had rather make a shift and be without it: I am sure the King
that they have put to death for a Tyrant allowed more then it to the meanest
Prisoner that ever came hither.

Why? what has been accustomed to be allowed said Mr. Peter's?

The meanest prisoner that ever came hither said he had three pound a week: the
very Smith that the Bishop of Canterbury sent hither, whose head is now on
London bridge, had so much while he was here.

Is it possible? said Mr. Peter's: yea but you know L. Coll. Lilborne, that the
State now has many more uses and occasions for money then the King had.

I deny that said L. Coll. Lilborne, how can that be? they have all the Kings
Revenues; and many other ways that bring in money, that he had not: and
therefore may as well allow it as he could.

No, but indeed the State is very bare of money notwithstanding, in that these
troubles have occasioned the experce of much more then was needful in a time
of peace:

No, said Lieut. Coll. Lilborne that cannot be that such vast sums of money
as they have had and have, should be thus expended: what with a mischief should
become of it? do we not see that Ireton and Cromwell, and your great Masters
the Parliament men as you call them, give away to one another thousand, of it
at a clap: that is the way the Commonwealths money goes.

Indeed replied Mr. Peter's, they have given money among them heretofore; but I
pray you, what has been given of late? and because you speak of Ireton, what
has he got, that you mention him? I am sure I heard a near friend of his
aver, that to his knowledge, that service for the State had impaired and
hindered him in his own estate at least 3000 l.

No replied L. Coll. Lilborne, what need has he, his father has enough given
him for himself and Ireton too; and they piss both in one Glass, and know
well enough how to share it i^le warrant you:

Because you mention Cromwell so much; what has he had given him, that he has
not deserved, by his many great and indefatigable services for the
Commonwealth? and therefore what has been given him he may in justice,
honesty, and honor accept: but let us leave this discourse, L. Coll. Lilborne,
will thou never leave thy self free from trouble? what is the occasion of your
being here?

Do you not know, replied L. Coll. Lilborne, ask your great Masters, they can
best inform you.

But do you hear of the blood that has been shed of late; they say your
bustle has been the occasion of it. I was at Sandwish, and there I met with
some of their Letters, signed with C. Y. S. C.

You did not find my hand there, did you, said L. Coll. Lilborne?

No replied Mr. Peter's; but yet they say, our are much the occasion of the late
stir. Is it wisdom, because you cannot have all done presently, according to
your minds; therefore to run out to such courses as will tear all to pieces,
and undo both your selves and the whole kingdom?

I the occasion thereof, replied Lieut. Coll. Lilborne? it they deal with
others as they deal with me, there will be occasion enough ere long i^le
warrant you; for I have been here this three months or upwards, and have not
as yet seen accusation, Accuser, or Judge, and is this according to the Laws
and Petition of Right, which they have professed and promised so often to
maintain? I tell you, they are worse tyrants then the King, whose head they
have taken off.

You talk of Laws and the Petition of right, replied Mr. Peter's, when as you
will have nothing to be law but what pleases your self, and serves your own
turn, and that no longer neither. Has not you your self exclaimed more then
any man against the Laws, Lawyers, and their Courts in the Kings time, as
wicked, cruel, absolute oppressive and slavish? yet now you seem to cry up
those laws again to serve your own turn.

I tell you, said Mr. Peter's (taking up Cooks reports) these Law Books
Lieutenant Collonell, do undo thee, thou wast of another mind to my
knowledge not long sithence.

Law Books undo me? No, they do or should keep us all from undoing.

I tell you, said Mr. Peter's, there is no Law in thee, for do you not see by
daily experience and as your self have formerly observed, that Cooks and
Littletons opinions, and the opinions of the Judges pass for Law?
notwithstanding you shall not find three of them in one mind in many cases,
now Law truly so called is not the opinion of this or that man.

But what say you then to the Petition of right and Magna Charta, are not those
Law? our Predecessors called them Laws and if they be no Laws we are in a
miserable condition.

I have said there is no Law in England, I tell you this is my own private
opinion and I know not three more in England of my mind in this particular, it
is my opinion only I say, for the reasons forementioned.

No Law in England! If this be their Tenent and yours, that are a leading man
amongst them, the Lord deliver us: you are all of you a company of the very
arrant'st Traitors, Rogues, and Villains in the world: did not you fight for
the Laws of the land? I am sure you told the people you did, if you did not?
you have deceived the people: and you have no other way or shift in the world,
that I know of to save your selves from being Traitors, in taking of the Kings
head, but that he endeavored the destruction of the Laws, and therefore for
the peoples safety, you were bound to destroy him.

Why, This is true, said Mr. Peter's, this is it indeed that made his execution
just and righteous before God and Man; but yet the Laws were, and are some of
them, evil, wicked, and slavish, that had by him and his predecessors from the
Conquest, been forcibly and tyrannously imposed on us, and we nor you did not
fight for the continuation or preservation of them I hope, but to be freed from
them. But I pray you, L. Col. give me your definition of Law; for it may be
else you may mistake and wrest my words.

I will not give it you in my own sense, the Parliament shall give it you in
their own Declaration. So turning to their Declaration, Mr. Peter's read it, and
said, Why, is this a definition of Law? This is only a description of the
benefit, and good effects thereof; and all these good things here spoken, do
we not now enjoy in England? This is no definition, it wants the Genus and the
other ingredients that make a true definition: the definition of Law is rather
some such thing as this, viz, Reason deduced and collected from particular
events: For necessity, you know was, and is the mother of Law, evil manners
are the occasion of Laws, and I know no Commonwealth this day in the world,
that can show me a Body of law that will hold to all changes that may and will
happen in a State: and therefore the daily Placats and Proclamations, or Edicts
of the States of Holland, pleased me very well when I lived there.

So then it seems all must be according to the will of your Parliament and
Army, it seems the Sword must give us Laws.

Why what Law has there been in this land heretofore, that was not imposed by
the Sword? Did not the Norman thus impose his slavish Laws on us? And what Law
have we now that we have not gotten and preserved by the Sword. I tell you, the
sword must be in some hand or other, to enforce the observation of Laws, or
what were you the better for Law? It is honest an good Governors as much as
laws, that bring all these benefits on a people you read of in the Parliaments
declaration: for if wicked debauched persons be in place of power, be the Laws
never so many or good, the people will be miserable; but now if good men be in
place, if the Laws be evil or defective, there is some presumption and ground
of hope that they will make them better.

I tell you (replied L. Col. Lilburne) I had rather live under wicked Devils
with good Laws, then under the best men in the world with bad or none at all.

But I am not of your mind, nor many reasonable men else, I think.

Why then, said (L. Col, Lilburne,) if the sword must give Law, if six Thieves
meet three honest men and because they are stronger, rob them, and take away
their money, therefore the act is justifiable in them, because they had the
stronger sword.

No, replied I: but if three honest men should met six thieves that had robbed
them, and being stronger then they, should take away their own again from them,
is not the act lawful, because they used force to cause the thieves to deliver
them what was their own again? But L. Col. Lilburne, said Mr. Peter's, because
you cry up Law, and are for Law so much, what do you think of the Decalogue,
or ten Commandments, are they no laws for us in England, or what do you think
of the Parliamen^s Acts and Orders, are these no laws? I tell you, our wound
at present lies mainly in the laws of the land, and in the Administrators and
administration thereof, there being no less^ by computation then 50000. Lawyers
in the land, enough to set ten Kingdoms together by the ears the process of
law being as tedious and vexatious as ever, and the Courts as numerous, some
few only excepted, I hope the Parliament will take this into their
consideration in time, and recti^ie this grievance to the Nation.

Sir, said L. Col. Lilburne, I thought my self safe whilst I squared my
actions by the Rules of those laws which the Parliament has so often sworn
and declared to maintain, as the Petition of Right, etc. and so you may, and
every man else, that walks so by them, as he walks not beside them.

I shall let you see your mistake (L Col. Lilburn) in that particular, and that
you^s and the Commonwealths safety lies not in the Petition of Right, or Magna
Charta, or any other thing commonly called Law in the land, For Necessity, you
know, is the mother of all Laws, and therefore laws do and must change and
alter, in that no law by man can be made so absolute and perfect, but that
time and many other circumstances may alter the reason of it, which indeed is
only the law, and then it ceases to be a law any longer. And as for Magna
Charta, and the Petition of ^^^ht, what are they but some poor dull fragments
and pieces of reason and ^^eedome that our forefathers scrabled for, and
wrested by force out of the hands of their cruel tyrants? And because we have
obtained a little of what was our right, must we be bound up to it so, as
never to endeavor more to make our selves absolute free men, when God gives in
our power so to do. Sir, I am very sorry for you, and do wish the Spirit of
glory may rest upon you: for I assure you in many things of your Discourse,
especially in the violence of it, your spirit seems to me very unhumbled and
unchristian. And so L Col. I bid you fare well, if I can do you any good, I
shall be ready to serve you.

Thus, Reader, have I given thee to the best of my remembrance, and of theirs
also that were with ^e, and were ear-witnesses as well as my self, a true,
full, and impartial Rela^ion of the Conference that passed between them: Now I
leave thee impartially to judge, whether the Relator in his Relation intended
it for the public good, and not rather to vent and insinuare a slander on Mr.
Peter's, and to prejudice him, and the whole State in him, in the thoughts of
the people.

Vale.
FINIS.

