REMARKS ON Mr. Richard. Bolton's PIECE, CONCERNING The Heat of the BLOOD.

An Mercurium Congelasti? An quid aliud vanitatis? nunc maxim a proposito
long es; semper rebus aliquid defuerit, dolis nihil. At si quoties te isia
fefellerint, recogitas: Si de hac re vicinos interrogas, nisi tu vel ultro te
fallis, facile deprehendes quorsum his praestigiis credendum sit. LONDON,
Printed; and sold by John Shelmerdine, Bookseller, in Manchester, School.

REMARKS, etc.
I Have perused, Sir, your wonderful Discoveries about the Heat of the Blood,
and find you think Fire is not actually hot in it self, but only as it affects
the Sensory; and by this way of arguing, I may as well argue there is not one
Scholar in the University of Oxford, and for the self-same Reason you assign,
to wit, because I see 'em not. And truly, Sir, were they all composed of such
nitrosulphureous elastick Particles as your self, the Assertion would prove
true. But I hope the old Element still retains its connate Quality, and the
most famous University a genuine Offspring. By the wonderful Discoveries you
have been able to make, you have made it a Demonstration a priori, that a Pig
^^ not an Elephant, nor a Mouse a Cheesemonger, though she lives by him, nor your
self a Professor of the Chair, though you have the Effrontery to dictate like
one. But, Sir, since your Genius leads you to such immature Discoveries, be
pleased to solve these following Phoenomena. It Is observed that Irish Men are
most of 'em Fools, and the Reason assigned, is, That the Pressure of the
Circumambient Atmosphere makes their Brains fly out at their Nostri1s. Your
Friend Gideon Harvey took a great deal of pains to show why a Dog loves to lick
the Pudenda of a Salt Bitch; and if you can but solve this wonderful
Phenomenon, why a Bull upon the like Occasion purses up his Nostrils, it will
entitle you to more Learning than yet you have manifested you are master of,
and will oblige the World, and your Brother Pantagruel, who made such wonderful
Discoveries in Rabelais's Memoirs. I have one thing more to remind you, and
that is, That our Cooks dish up well Scotch Collops, and if you can but inform
'em how to lard the animal Spirits, which you assert are a sweet oily Mucilage,
'twill further demonstrate you have beyond Mankind a Crassa Minerva; or if you
please, a fat Head, or an oily-nitro-salino-aereal-sulphureous Cockloft. But
were they as you assert, how comes it to pass that a Nerve will not swell above
the straitest Ligature, or any of this Mucilage distill from it upon section, or
cannot by pressure be squeezed from it, it being of a clammy Consistence? If
such a Mucilage did circulate through the Nerves, no doubt but some of these
would happen. Your wonderful categorial Head, without the least show of Proof,
has endeavored to convince the World, that the Brain, that Metropolis in the
Microcosm, by the influence of the animal Spirits, heats the Blood by the
Glandules, those emunctories of the Body; and I may with as much reason affirm,
that Whitehall, the noblest part in that vast City, to wit, London, was lately
burned by the Effluvia of a Boghouse. Sir, there is not one Notion in your
Book, barring the little Nova Atlanta of your own Head, but what is taken
either from Dr. Gibson, Dr. Willis, Mr. Boil, Dr. Mayow, Dr. Connor, Monsieur
le Grand, or the Exercitationes quinque, lately printed at Oxford, and
therefore I was amazed to see such an Imprimatur to so notorious a Plagiary,
but presume the Criple wanted a Pass to travel by. One great Mystery you have
discovered, why Flame naturally ascends, to wit, because, as you allege, it is
for the most part the nature of it to do so; which is as much as to say, Mr.
Bolton for the most part naturally talks like a Child, because it is not in his
nature to do otherwise. You have likewise explained how it may be said
naturally to descend, to wit, when it cannot get upwards; which amounts to no
more than if you had informed. the World, That had the Confederate Army only
made use of Duck Shot, they had never been masters of the Castle of Namur. And
in that wonderful Discovery you have found out the Rationale, how an expert
Schoolboy, with a good Ball and a hard Flag, can sometimes count to 300
Rebounds. Your next Advance, I suppose, will be about Cob-nuts and Marbles. In
one place you assert, Fire is not actually hot, but as it affects the Sensory;
in another place you say, the motion of the vital Spirits cause not the Heat of
the Blood, but produce a Sensation of Heat. Good Sir, be pleased to reconcile
these Contradictions, and if you can, divide betwixt the North and North-West
side of a Hair; for, any thing you have yet offered, Diemerbrook may be still
in the right of it. Nor have you fully replied to Dr. Henshaw; for I think you
are the first Man that ever discovered cold Chyle in the Body of a living
Animal, which I suppose is the greatest Discovery in Anatomy you are able to
pretend to. Sir, whether you Name be any of those you mention, to wit, Thomas,
Robert, or William, it concerns not me, but I am pretty well satisfied all the
Names in Europe cannot give you the constituent Parts of a Philosopher. You
assert, the Heat of the Blood proceeds from a swift intestine motion of its
Particles. Now I believe you will be as hard set to explain intestine Motion as
a Quaker to explain what he means by the Spirit within him.

You likewise assert Attrition to be the Cause of Fermentation, and
Fermentation the Cause of Attrition, which is as much as to say, you are the
Son of your Father, and your Father Son to you, but I rather fear an Author
about the Growth of a Mushroom. Your metaphorical Glands are properly so
called; for I am very well satisfied there are not any such things really in
rerum Natura; the animal Spirits you assert to be in the form of a Mucilage,
and you may as well affirm a Rose to be in the Surface of a Cow-Turd, and the
one I believe as truly as the other. You likewise assert they are oily and
sulphurous, because the Brain by being exposed to the Air will soon grow
foetid. I doubt not, Sir, but you know what else will, but hope you will not
ransack each Close-stool to demonstrate the Existence of animal Spirits. You
have likewise told us of the way of grinding animal Spirits into smaller parts;
so that in your next, I suppose we may be informed how Diego with his Spanish
Geese went to the World of the Moon, or how a Spanish Genet may be made
pregnant by a Hurricane. P. 99. you say you have explained an Account of the
Heat of the Blood, without any manner of Proof, and in that you say true. P.
105. Spirit of Wine and Oil of Turpentine will turn to an actual Flame by being
mixed together. Here the Plagiary has mistaken the Mixture; for it ought to be
Spirit of Nitre and Oil of Turpentine: see the late Exercitationes quinque,
Printed at Oxford: But he that ventures at all things, and is master of few, is
certain to be catched, and it had been much better for him to have sat still
than rise up and fall. But let not this Absurdity be published from Oxford, or
from the Presidents and Censors, those Representatives of the College, since
it is certain a Mixture of these two, to wit, Spirit of Wine and Oil of
Turpentine, neither grow hot nor turn to an actual Flame, but to a white Liquor
not unlike Milk or Chyle, which may remind the Youth, before he write again, to
wipe his Mother's Milk off his Chin. But this Mistake might easily slip the
Vicechancellor, his Talent I presume not leading him to Experimental Learning,
besides his great. Affairs not permitting, and I would hope the President and
Censors never perused the Copy: And as for his Patron, Dr. Angel of Chester,
they best know how matters were betwixt 'em. P. 117. your next Discovery to
suppress Heat in Fevers, is either to take down the animal Spirits by
withdrawing the Pabulum, or by Acids, or by cooling and fixing the predominant
Spirits, and evacuating other accessory Causes; which amounts to no more than
this, that if a Man have a Fever, we must use some means to recover him, but
which to take I am afraid the Youth knows not, but perhaps knows as well how to
fix the animal Spirits as the wise Men of Gotham did to hedge in the Cuckoo. P.
126. The sulphurous volatile parts of the animal Spirits are, I suppose, Sir,
beyond your Apprehension: But, good Sir, how do you make out the Composition of
the Spirits? No more for ought I can see than a Country Piper that plays all
the Notes of Roger a Coverley, all the mechanical Blasts of the Aspera Arteria.
P. 127. I would gladly know what you mean by Acidity joining with Acrimony, and
how you will make out, that in Fevers the Blood is too much exalted with
Sulphur, when in malignant Fevers it is evident the Pulse is most commonly
depressed and languid, which doubtless would not be were the Blood too much
exalted with Sulphur. P. 135. Where the Blood ferments, there the Fermentation
is caused, but demonstrate the place, and do not assert all things and prove
nothing. P. 139. He gives an Account of the Expansion of the Spirits, but that
was before alleged by Dr. Morton; and in answer to that I refer him to the
Exercitationes quinque, Printed at Oxford, where he may see in what manner they
can be most properly said to expand 'emselves. Lastly, Sir, your repeated Word
Grand demonstrates to the World you had a Windmill, not an Aristotle in your
Head. P. 192. Air would hinder Circulation, and disturb the Blood, wherefore it
mixeth not with it. What are the Bladders of the Lungs impleted with? And if
so, how come some Airs to be Pestilential, others Scorbutic? It Is plain this
would not be if the Particles of Air mixed not with the Blood. Yet this we see
confirmed by daily Experience. But in what you have informed us concerning the
use of the Lungs, if we peruse the Authors that have writ before, it is not so
much as that of the Satyr, that with the same Breath could warm his Fingers and
cool his Broth. Wherefore, good Sir, be pleased to stay till you are Master of
Smiglecius, and then, if not for an Author, you may set up for a Nego Minorem.

FINIS.

