A PROCLAMATION BY The PRESIDENT and COUNCIL of His Majestiy's Territory and
Dominion of NEW ENGLAND in AMERICA.
WHEREAS His Most Excellent Majesty our Sovereign LORD JAMES the Second, King
of England, Scotland, France and Ireland, Defender of the Faith etc. by
COMMISSION or Letters Patents under His Great Seal of England, bearing Date the
Eight day of October in the first (...) of His Reign has been graciously
pleased to erect and constitute a PRESIDENT and COUNCIL to take Care of all
that His Territory and Dominion of New England called the Massachusetts Bay, the
Provinces of New Hampshire and Main, and the Narraganset Country, otherwise
called the Kings-Province, with all the Islands, Rights and Members thereunto
appertaining; and to Order Rule and GOVERN the same according to the Rules,
Methods and Regulations specified in the said Commission: Together with His
Majesty's Gracious Indulgence in matters of Religion.

And for the Execution of His Royal pleasure in that behalf, His Majesty has
been pleased to appoint Joseph Dudley Esquire to be the first PRESIDENT of His
Majesty's said Council, and VICE ADMIRAL of these Seas. And to Continue in the
said Offices until his Majesty shall otherwise direct, and also to nominate and
appoint William Stoughton, Esquire now Deputy-President, Simon Bradstreet, Robert
Mason, John Fitz-Winthrope, John Pynchon, Peter Bulkley, Edward Randolph, Wait
Winthrope, Richard Wharton, John Usher, Nathaniel Saltonstal, Bartholomew
Gidney, Jonathan Tyng, Dudley Bradstreet, John Hinks, and Edward Tyng, Esq's
to, be His Majesty's Council in the said Colony and Territories.

The President and Council therefore being convened and having according to the
Direction and Form of the said Commission, taken their Oaths and Entered the
GOVERNMENT aforesaid; and finding it needful, that speedy and effectual Care be
taken for the Observation of His Majesty's Commands, and particularly for the
Regulation and good Government of the Narraganset Country or Kings-Province,
which has hitherto been unsettled. They the said President and Council have
resolved speedily to erect and settle a constant Court of Record upon the
place; and that the President, Deputy-President, or some others of the Members
of His Majesty's Council shall be present to give all necessary Power and
Directions for Establishing His Majesty's Government there, and Administration
of Justice to All His Majesty's Subjects within the said Narraganset Country
or Kings-Province, and all the Islands, Rights, and Members thereof. And the
said President and Council have in the interim assigned Richard Smith Esquire James
Pendleton, and John Fones Gentlemen, Justices to keep the Peace of our
Sovereign Lord the KING and all His Subjects: And also given Commission to the
said Richard Smith to be Sergeant Major, and Chief Commander of His Majesty's
Militia, both of Horse and Foot within the Narraganset Country or Province,
and all the Islands Rights and Members thereof. THEREFORE the said President
and Council do hereby in His Majesty's Name and by virtue of His said
Commission strictly Require and Command all other persons being or coming upon
the place, to forbear the Exercise of all manner of Jurisdiction, Authority,
and Power, and to cease all further Proceedings for the Allotments or Divisions
of Land, or making any Strip or Waste upon any part of the said Province, save
only on each man's stated Propriety, except by License obtained from the said
Court, or the President and Council, until there shall be such effectual
Regulation and Government established as is directed by His Majesty. And the
said President and Council do hereby henceforth discharge all His Majesty's
Subjects within the said Narraganset Country or Kings Province and all the
Islands, Rights and Members thereof from the Government of the Governor and
Company of Connecticut and Rhode Island and Providence Plantation, and all
others pretending any Power or Jurisdiction. Hereby Charging and Commanding all
His Majesty's Subjects to yield ready and due Obedience to the said Justices of
the Peace, the Sergeant Major or Chief Commander of His Majesty's Militia. And
George Weightman, Thomas Eldridge, Thomas Monford and William Chaplin are
hereby appointed and authorized present Constables: and Liberty given to the
aforesaid Justices to appoint so many more as they shall see needful to them,
and to administer Oaths unto the aforesaid Constables and such as are to be
Ordained. And all other persons are to be aiding and assisting unto them the
said Justices and Constables in the Execution and Discharge of their respective
Offices, Charges and Trusts, as they will answer the contrary at their utmost
Peril.

Given from the Council-house in Boston this 28th Day of May Anno Domini 1686.
Annoque Regni Regis Jacobi Secundi secundo. By the President and Council,
Edward Randolph Secr':

GOD SAVE THE KING
BOSTON, in N. E. Printed by Richard Pierce, Printer to the Honorable His
Majesty's President and Council of this Government.


