Man without Passion: Or, The Wise STOIC, According to the SENTIMENTS OF
SENECA.

Written originally in French, by that great and learned Philosopher, ANTHONY
LE GRAND.

Englished by G. R.

LONDON, ^rinted for C. Harper, and J. Amery, and sold by them at the Flower de
Luce, and at the Peacock, both against St. Dunstan's Church in Fleet Street.
1675.

THE TRANSLATOR TO THE READER*
IT is no small encouragement to read good Books, and search out such Company
as may lead us to the knowledge of our selves, and the practice of Virtue and
Goodness; (so much despised in this age) since happy is the man that gets
(that) wisdom, and the man that obtains (that) understanding: The Merchandise
of it is better than the Merchandise of Silver, Prove. 3.
and the gain thereof than fine Gold. She is more precious than Rubies, and all
the things thou can desire are not to be compared unto her. I am much obliged
to a learned Divine (whose Company, by accident, I had for some hours, in
passing to my House in the Country) for recommending to me a Book so full of
Treasure and advantage; having received much satisfaction, and (I hope)
benefit, by the rational and plain Instructions which abound in every Section:
leading to a Discovery both delectable and salutary to the virtuous; but
increasing the guilt of men, that forsake the paths of Virtue, to walk in the
ways of the vicious; who, though inwardly convinced, will not easily be brought
to be public Approbators of such austere Principles, which are evidently
proved to be natural, by the practice of the Heathen, strangers to the written
Law, and those powerful aids of Grace, promised for asking. If Nature herself
can do so much, what may not be done if Grace be called to her assistance.

The Author, in his excellent Epistle Dedicatory, To King Charles the Second.
says, that if profane things might be touched without offense to the sacred,
and if there be no danger of incurring the censure of the faithful, by
publishing the Doctrine of the Heathen, he thought it no matter of scruple to
set forth the most difficult of their Paradoxes; and to bring a man to light,
Seneca.
who, though he had not yet appeared to the World, was nevertheless the wonder
of all ages.

Antiquity paid him reverence, but hardly believed he could ever have birth; it
gave him Praises, but ^^nied him Honors; and, ste^fast in unbelief, left
Posterity in doubt, whether a man could be rendered sociable, that was not
subsistible in Nature. From whence it came to pass, that some modern
Philosophers placed him in the rank of fabulous things. The excess of his Merit
caused their incredulity: and fancying that he could never appear but in
imagination, thy would afford him no other subsistence, but such as men assign
to idle Conceits and Chimeras.

The common people, who judge of things by outsides, who condemn Prodigies
because they comprehend them not; and own nothing for possible, that is beyond
their reach, might well be always of the same opinion, if they had not the
great Example of this wise Stoic now on the Throne, (which men despaired to
find in the Retirement of Philosophers) to undeceive them.

Reader, Thou shall find in this Treatise Reason, and Examples sufficient to
convince thee of the Truths therein asserted: howbeit thou must be put in mind,
(I find it in my self too true) that a curious Garden neglected is not only
very troublesome to bring into good order, but to keep it well requires a
skilful and diligent hand. Nature will be carefully attended and observed by
him that will reap her fruits: Heaven it self suffers violence, and the
violent enter it by force. All things yield to hard labor, Heaven and Earth do
favor the virtuous, and hate the vicious man; and he, in his right mind, is
odious to himself. What Peace, Content and Glory is it then to be virtuous?
What Shame, Self-horror and Confusion to be vicious? If it be not in our power
to choose whether we will tell a lie, commit Adulteries, Murders, Thefts,
Debaucheries, etc. we may fairly plead to our Conscience and the Judge, before
whom all flesh must appear, that we could not avoid the commission of those
Crimes: Our Laws were also horribly unjust, which punish Transgressors, Parents
ought not to correct their Children, and good men are guilty of folly and
vanity in giving others wholesome Counsel; and why should not men receive as much
content and satisfaction from a vicious as from a virtuous action? But if it be
in our Will to live virtuously, and we do not well employ this excellent talent
of Nature, it is but just it be taken from us, and to be denied the assistance
of Grace: thus we are left without excuse, and our destruction is of our
selves: But if we do what we can, who shall doubt of Gods acceptance?

THE AUTHOR'S PREFACE:
THough truth be common to all men, and her beauty create no jealousy; though
she be reverenced of the blind, as well as the clear-sighted, and depend as
little on time to be made known, as upon the Senses to make herself the beloved
of many; albeit she be infused into the minds of all mortals, and the change of
Climates alter not her Nature, that she be as unvariable at Rome as at Athens;
Veritati nemo praescribere potest, non spatium temporum, non privilegia
Regionum. Tertul. lib. de Veland. Virgin. c. 1.
and that Customs, which overtop our Laws, be not able to abolish her Maxims.
Yet Experience teaches that nothing is less known upon Earth; and that
Philosophy which ought to conduct us to her, has disguised her, turning all
her Resemblances to an Idol, and confounding her shadows with her substance,
has caused received Opinions to pass for so many Truths. Judicia nullius Jus
deterius, sed fermius efficient. l. 87. ff. de Regul. juris.


The Stoics thought it no injustice to be singular, nor the severity of their
Doctrine an Opponent to Reason; and though their Sentiments were raised above
the common pitch; that they were not therefore less true: that Virtue which
they reverence in their wise Stoic, seemed to them too just to dishonor their
Profession. They are not ashamed to defend a party that had all virtuous Men on
their side; and they feared they might show a doubt of his Merit, if they made
difficulty to engage with that School, which protected him. The Peripateticks
built their Science on the Multitude of their Scholars; and, leaning on the
Opinion of the People, they affirmed that what was generally received could not
be faulty. They say, that Zeno left them not, but out of Caprice; that his
Precepts differ not from theirs but in mode of Speech; and that he had never
thought of erecting his particular School, but for the envy he bore to Polemon,
that filled his mouth with those proud words, which caused the separation
'twixt him and other Philosophers. So that truth, which cannot be divided by
any number of Auditors, nor changed by Custom of Countries, is found unhappily
shared between two different Sects, and as if she had abandoned her own Nature,
she is in a manner constrained to countenance an Error, because she sought not
to be popular; for the multitude of Disciples is no infallible sign to
authorize the Peripatetick Doctrine. A man is not blameable because his
Antagonist has a bigger train then himself. The number of Adherents is often a
mark of Error; and, as some Orators (to their shame) will defend the worst
Causes, the most ridiculous Opinions have some Approbators.

Truth is sufficiently victorious, when good men receive her; the number of
pretenders augment not her Glory; and, being disinteressed, she seeks not to
please many. If the Stoics be not then cried up, if they seem to be less in
the right then their Enemies, if they have not that Credit that makes their
Adversaries insolent, they must attribute this misfortune to the severity of
their Profession. That Virtue which should gain them Admiration, has procured
them Envy; and, as the Rigor of the Gospel has rendered Christians odious to
Turks and Barbarians, the Gravity of Zeno's School has made the Stoics
despicable to other Philosophers. But notwithstanding the strenuous endeavors
of malice to discredit their Sentiments, yet did they gain some followers; the
wisest of the Ancients have taken their part, and if we believe a Historian of
our Age, Pliny, Tacitus, Plautus and others profess no other Doctrine but what
they fetched from their School. Does not Tertullian maintain a great number of
their Paradoxes? And our Judgment must be grown weak, not to observe that they
principally compose a great part of his Works: Clement of Alexandria, is he not
a Stoic in all his Writings? Does not he render the Mysteries of Christianity
familiar to us by their Doctrine? And does he not lead the faithful to a
virtuous life, by the Discourse of these wise Heathens? Lipsius lib. 10.
Manuduct. ad Stoic. Philosoph.
Being therefore seconded by so many illustrious Doctors, I thought I could not
go astray by walking in the Stoic Paths; and that I might boldly undertake to
demonstrate, that a wise man may live without Passions; since those great men
have forbid them. If I serve not my self of their Arguments in this Work, it is
because I pretend not to write as a Divine, but as a Philosopher, and labor to
prove my undertaking, rather by Reason then Authorities. I declare then with
Seneca, that Reason is Man's real Good, and his only advantage: That the Goods
of the Body, and of Fortune, are not in his power, and that without searching
for Riches out of himself, he may find his happiness in his Virtue. After this
I descend to the Description of Passions in general, where I show plain enough
(I think) that they are not born with us, that Sense and Opinion are the
Principles; that they are useless to Virtue, and that man cannot serve himself
of them without becoming their Slave: then I come to the particulars, where,
after having characterized them, I discover the Weakness of Pleasure, the
Ingratitude of Desire, the Injustice of Fear, and the Cowardice of Sorrow. If I
am somewhat prolix in the Front of the several Discourses, I judged it not
needful to say any thing for my self in that point, lest my excuse should not
turn to my advantage, by causing others to interpret that to be a Perfection,
which is the greatest of my Defects.

Discourse I.
The Stoics Defense against Passions.
NEver was Calumny more insolent then when she set upon the reputation of the
Stoics, discrediting their Doctrine, to diminish their innocence, and by a
Practice as Malicious as Self-ended, exhibited an information against Virtue,
that she might the better attack those who pleaded her cause. Passions (which
are but the diseases of Fools) were the Pretext: and seeing that those Famous
Philosophers went about to Suppress them, as the Monsters of Humane Nature.
Forbiding the wise man (they intended to represent) any use of them, as
concluding from their disorders did arise all our evils: this backbiteing Enemy
procured them foes, to take Vengeance on those pretended injuries, and dealt
with Orators to persuade us, that passions were no less then perfections of the
Soul, making not only Apologies but Elogies for them; And of these were formed
a party who designed their ruin. For hardly had this generous Sect taken root,
their weighty paradoxes made impressions upon the most Solid minds, and the
most clear sighted grown doubtful that truth might be on their side, seeing
they lighted us to her with so much Majesty; but she was surrounded with as
many adversaries as Philosophers; all who were not Stoics, became their
Enemies, and as that Hero in the Fable, they fought with Monsters from their
first Original.

The Academia which might be called the Mother of good manners was their first
Persecutor, using them as Rebels because their principles were different, and
fearing least the growth of these might be their overthrow, they labored to
make them appear to the Judgments of men, as Persons diseased in the Spleen and
Hypocondrium every Apes face in Plato's School had a fling at them, All his
Scholars became Masters of Art in the mystery of Calumny: and as they could not
make an accommodation between these Men's Maxims and their own soft opinions,
they represented them for vainglorious extravagancies, as full of guilt, as to
them they seemed ridiculous. The Lycaeum afforded them as few good offices as
the Academia, and Aristotle by his fox-like War, labored no less for their
Ruin then did Pythagoras by his bare faced opposition. For although these
Philosphers agreed not in opinion, their principles different, the thoughts of
the younger not agreeing with the tenets of the elder Brother, yet may the
former boast of routing his Enemy by succouring his Adversaries, defending his
own cause by pleading for the Arabes against the Stoics, and passing from the
School to the Study, imitated those Politicians, that cunningly employ the
Weapons of the factious Subject, to suppress the Rebels of their Government.

For although this Philosopher gained every where Disciples; drew Princes to
his School by the curiousness of his Discourse, put Athens to Silence, and all
her Citizens into a disposition to erect his Statues in the Chief places of
their City: yet did he judge that to affirm his Doctrine it was needful to throw
down that of his antagonists, the shadow of an Enemy being ever dangerous in
that state where Novelty is affected; who ever will be absolute in Government
seeks his own preservation by the Rout, his Victory by the Death, and his
safety in the Sepulture of his adversaries.

If Plato were more just then his Disciples, and for being more Divine could
judge more reasonably of their opinions, he was not more valiant. If he showed
less of Passion at their Defeat, he had not resolution enough either to follow
or defend them; for he that dives deep into the Writings of this sublime
Philosopher, will see, That if he be their Panegyrist, he is not of their
party: If he reverence their Virtue he despairs of ever reaching it. If he be
inamoured with their perfections, he is an Enemy to that Severity that bears
them Company, and if he have conceived a high esteem of their Doctrine, he wants
courage to embrace it, His Theater confesses that so high a Virtue draws his
Respect rather then his Love, and that she is too severe in her Philosophers to
make her of the Number of his beloved.

Some other Modern Philosophers, more zealous for their Ruin, are not content
with the credit of this acknowledgment, but much more vain then those whom they
accuse of Vanity, Worship their own conceits, esteem their own Judgments above
their Teachers, and as if all their words were Oracles, they appeal from their
Master's to the esteem of their own opinions, They stick not to say that Pride
is the Soul of all Stoic actions. That the praise they expected was the
motive, and that the hopes they had to out Live their Funerals, was the moving
Cause.

Now, although I take part with the Stoics, and herein approve only the
opinions that have some agreement with Seneca's, I forbear not to value
Socrates, Amicus Plato, amicus Socrates, sed magis amica veritas Aristoteles. 1
Eth, ad Nicom.
to be a friend to Plato, and to honor truth from the lips of her Adversaries.
Nor can I easily believe that these combating Authors ever had it in design to
blast the Stoic reputation, and to purchase Glory by their dishonor; but I
rather persuade my self that they preferred their own Satisfaction before the
truth, seeking to content their own humors rather then their conscience; and
governed by self Love, that blinded them, they were less careful to be truths
Champions, than to appear Eloquent Disputants: Or else (which is most likely
and does most hide their infirmity) as Satirical matters are more fertile than
Elogies, we are ingenious in Slanders and tardy in praises, invectives are more
pleasing to our minds than Panegyricks, so it may be said that they contrived
Errors where with to charge the Stoics, made formal Monsters to assault them,
and mixing the Art of Poetry with the liberty of Orators, they invented faults
to delight themselves in the publication thereof. For what Color was there,
that the Stoics should be judged guilty for leaving the Academia, and
forsaking their Masters Party, to side with truth? who can lawfully accuse them
of insolence for courting of virtue themselves and procuring her the Love and
admiration of others? Is it no temerity to proceed against Philosophers after
the manner of Rebels, for taking nature and reason to be their Guides? Is it a
Crime to aspire unto goodness? And can a man be condemned as unjust, because he
endeavors to be more virtuous then his Companions? And yet this is the Crime
of the Stoics they are guilty because they desired to be better than others,
their Instructions are suspected, for being too austere: their Life is odious
for being too much retired, and their Disciples at this day are accounted but
asses, only because they would approach too near the perfections of Angels.

It Is true, that those, who discourse of principles from the consequences they
produce, and who judge a cause by the Number of the Counsel that plead it, can
hardly figure to themselves that Zeno's School was once the most Famous, seeing
it has yet brought forth only fantasmes: the felicity wherewith it fed her
Disciples has produced but an imaginary happiness; and the wise man, they
promised us, so many ages past, has only appeared in Idaea. They add that this
Sect was surely ill grounded, since it could not preserve its innocence in its
uprightness, since it found the period of its glory in the Funerals of its
Authors, and was constrained to borrow the Pen, of one of its Disciples, to
keep up the memory of it is ancient greatness. It Is true that if Seneca's works
had not recovered it, and if he had not given it by his Eloquence that
Splender, which time and the malice of the envious ravished* from it, their
precepts had been buried in silence, and their paradoxes had been to us
unknown. We might have Labored at this day for the Name of him that began it,
and all Historians had been to seek in teaching us to whom Aristotle was
obliged for the ground of his quarrels, whether to the modesty of Zeno, or the
Confidence of the Cynicks. These reproaches are not without some Color of
truth, and as those, who form them, are prejudiced by passion, it may be said
of them, that they are as Wise as these hot heads, that some times utter
Oracles and think it not. For although I am concerned for the honor of my
Teachers, and that it be more my advantage to speak after their manner, then to
accomodate my Self to the weakness of their Enemies; Yet I confess with them
that the Wise man whom they place so near to their Gods, and whom the Academy
sets so little distant from fabulous matters, has not yet appeared but in
their Writings, and if some men have built him Temples, none are yet found that
have loaded his Altars, but with wishes, for his Birth. Also that wise Roman,
unjustly condemned for comparing his Wise man with Jupiter, and for uniting in
his person the infirmities of a Man with the powers of a God, does not pretend
so much to an Original as a Copy and he that examineth well the sense of his
words, will confess that he proposes only the Idaea, and seeks to conduct us
to the object by the Glass of Representation.

When Fabius forms an Orator, shows him the Art of persuading, teaches the way
to enamel his discourse, to swell his periods for the Elevation of his meaner
thoughts. When he disguiseth truth or untruth by Ironie, causes Toombs or
Statues to speak by apostrophy, runs to pretended Revelation for a crafty
prattling, wherewith to deceive his Auditors, calls for Hyperbole to put a gloss
upon vices or diminish true Virtues; And inventeth a hundred Modes of Speech to
set out the Flourish of his Style. It may be said that he has attained the art
of good expression, is become the Father of Rhetoric, brought her forth that
taught him to speak, and displayed all the artifices of an accomplished Orator.
Nevertheless it must be confessed that this good Speaker is not yet brought
forth, and he that is so well described in his works has neither yet mounted
the Pulpit, nor pleaded at the Bar.

Who will then admire that this wise Stoic has not yet appeared, that his
Glories should forerun his Birth; that he should be at age before he be of
Years, and that he should become both the Favorite and the admirer of Virtue,
before he could be acquainted with her; Seneca's honor is not small that he
raised him to such a pitch as his Rivals cannot look up to, without envy, and
made him the shame of the Peripatick, after he had been the wonder of the
Cynicks. A Conqueror is not accounted rash for projecting designs which he
could not bring to pass; or for employing heroic Virtues in the gaining of an
Ordinary Victory: Valor would be disrobed of Splendour, if limited; if her
endeavors were restrained by the Laws of prudence, and she always obliged to
walk within the Circle which Morality has prescribed her.

How convincing soever this Reason be, yet does it not satisfy the most
obstinate, and although the Peripateticks agree with us, that it is not more
impossible for Seneca to bring forth his wise man, then for Fabius or Cicero to
form a perfect Orator, yet can they not comprehend how this Wise man can be
without passion; that he should be a Man and not partake of his faults, and be
engaged in the Body, and not feel it is infirmities. They affirm, as do their
Masters that these Motions are natural to us, that it is not in our power to
hinder their Birth, that they are the Seeds of Virtue, and that as Speech and
Gesture make the best parts of an Orator, Passions are the auxiliaries that
nature has given us to make us active and virtuous. That whilst the Spirit
shall be united to the Body, whilst the Angelical part shall share with the
Bestial, and the Soul be constrained to Negotiate with Flesh and Blood; she
will find disturbances. That these infirmities of the Soul are the Subject of
her Merit, and Victories, and that it is necessary that man should fret and
fear, rejoice and be afflicted, if he will be just, and prudent, temperate and
valiant; For by their discourse Virtue would be without employment if she had
not these Monsters to fight with, Nascitur ex affectibus Virtus, and nata cum
illis consistit. Architas, apud Stob. Sermon. 1.
and this illustrious habitude that may be termed the Life of wise men's
actions, would languish if she had not these insurrections of the Sensitive
appetite to exercise her virtue But who sees not at first that this Discourse
strikes at the principles of Morality, abaseth virtue to a dependence upon her
Slaves, and permits Rebels to entrench upon her power by insinuating the
utility of Enemies, that destroy, under pretense of ayds and succors, and I am
of Socrates mind, and dare affirm with him that whilst the Soul informs the
fools head, she will be forced to conceive Passions, and whilst she has no
higher apprehensions then the Common People, she will be constrained to fear an
ill accident, to form enterprises, to hope well of them, desire Wealth, and to
regret its loss. But if she view all these objects with indifference, receive
Fortunes ill looks with as much Constancy as her good Offices. If without
trouble she see Death represented on the face of that Body she animates, if she
consider her own Goods with the same Eye that she beholds the wealth of her
Neighbor, if she care not for pain, and place her contentment in the
possession of virtue, What service shall passions do her? To what end shall she
desire Treasures since they make her not happy? Why fear evils since she owns
not that there is any evil but vice, whose arrival she may prevent by the bare
Acts of her will? Why should Death afright her, since she finds her advantage
in it? Why should she call anger to the vengeance of an injury, since she
slights it? and why should she draw Joy from Fortunes smiles, since she places
her happiness in a good Conscience? Passions are then of no use to the Wise, it
is the weak and senseless that resent them, and if we consult those very people
that have showed them any countenance, they will confess with us, that they are
rather friends to vice then Virtue, more guilty then innocent, and more proper
to foment then to allay the disorders of our Soul.

And yet will any believe that Virtue must be idle unless she proclaim War
against Monsters? and that this noble faculty must pine away, unless she fight
to Subject the Rebellious, and to range the Factious into reason? She is,
without doubt, too generous to derive her Glory from the Destruction of so weak
Enemies. She judges her self well enough employed, when forming the Ornaments
of our Soul, and slighting the insolence of her Slaves, she is busied about
making us accomplished and Virtuous: When the Sun finisheth his course, when he
withdraws from our Horizon, that his absence causes our nights, and seeking
another part of the World to enlighten, he is not less powerful then when
making our Shadows to fly away, he guildeth the tops of our hills, and produces
the Enamel of our Gardens and Meddowes. But as he draws not his light from our
darkness, it is hot in other parts though we feel it not; and he is as absolute
a Monarch in the Antipodes as in Africa. So virtue forms not her Glory from
our disorders, nor is she less active when she treats with her Lovers then when
she combats Vice, and dissipateth Passions.

Discourse II.
That it is Man's happiness to live according to the Law of Nature.
THe Oracles of old have so little Coherence with their Name and the Events
that followed them, Interpres Apollinis egebat interpret, and Sors ipsa
referenda erat ad fortes. Chrysippus.
are so different from their promises, that it may be doubted whether the
Devils that pronounced them, ever really aspired to Divine Revelations, whether
they strove not to appear more malicious then powerful; and whether they had it
not as much in design to flatter the Credulity of the Supersticious, as to
chastize the vanity of Philosophers. For who so examineth well all their
proceedings shall easily see that their words are void of Sincerity: and as the
Fox that puts the Changes upon Hunters, they wind us into their uncertainties,
and lead us into Danger, when they make show of carrying us from it. If they
promise the Husbandman a happy Harvest, if they flatter Conquerors with the
Rout of an Enemy, if they assure Lovers of a Reward for their Constancy, and if
they engage the Merchants to seek strange Lands to gain Estates, they are then
as much Impostures as when they instruct Philosophers; teach the Proud to
moderate their ambition, prescribe Rules to the Covetous to satisfy their
avarice, and show men virtues which themselves cannot practice. In short all
they reveal is faulty: and nothing has yet departed from Apollo's Temple,
which became not a lie or was a kin to impossibility. The Pythians were the
ruin of most Monarchs, those Oracles weakened the most proud Empire of Europe,
and their predictions were more destructive to Romes Common Wealth, then the
Revolt of her Subjects, the Faction of the Seditious, the ambition of her
Generals, or the oppositions of her Enemies for relying upon the fidelity of
their words; their Captains neglected the advantages they usually had upon
their adversaries, and taking the victory for granted, they disposed themselves
more to Triumph then to fight, to be Masters of the Field, then to contest for
it. Those Philosophers that consulted them, for the Conduct of their affairs
Succeeded no better then the Chief Commanders, and those who boasted of having
peeped into all the Secrets of Nature, discovered the Rules of Policy and
unfolded the Paradoxes of Morality; were astonished to find themselves Novices
in the School of Wisdom, Chilo quid difficilimum interogatus, Seipsum
agnoscere respondit: unumquemque enim Multa ex caeco amore Sibi attribuere.
Stob. Sermon. 21.
and though they remembered all their instructions they could not comprehend
their meaning, or give an assured interpretation to words that seemed to them
at first so intelligible. But of so many Maxims as proceeded from the mouth of
these Apes of the Diety, they judged none more dark then that which commanded
them to know themselves: these two words run them into despair: they saw all
their knowledge limited by those few Syllables, they readily confessed their
ignorance since they were Strangers to themselves, and that they ceased to be
Philosophers whilst they had neglected to Learn how they should become such.

It Is true that Physic came to succor the Academia, and by an undertaking
that surpast her strength, did endeavor to teach what had been long unknown;
For as if truth had lain hid in the Entrails of our Body, and to discover its
parts were a Sufficient information of its defects and prefections, she
invented the Diffection of this wonderful Fabric, she found out the Instrument
to sound its Sores; she opened the veins to draw out the Corruption of the
Blood: employed the Lance to Scale its Ulcers, and to get the Stone from the
Reins, she thought that by observing our Diseases, the Nature of our
constitutions would be discovered, that the knowledge of the Pains that beset us
would be their Cure, that Learning would be attained by sight of our Maladies:
and it would be sufficient to know that the Gout pricked the Nerves, Ophtalmy
(or inflammation) fixed it self in the Eyes, the Quinsey swelled the Throat; the
Stone raged in the Bladder, the Colic rended the inward parts, and the Fever
discharged its fury upon the radical Moisture; to discover from so many
miseries the State of his Condition. But finding these endeavors of none
Effect, that this was but the unfolding of the meanest part of Man, that there
was in this House of Flesh a Heavenly Guest undiscovered, and that this Body,
so much considered, was but the Instrument of his operations; the design of
thus knowing our Selves she soon laid aside, the diseased whose sickness could
be but half discovered, was given over and much ashamed that so much had been
undertaken, she resolved that a knowledge which was dispaired of being found out
by Anatomy, should be turned over to the Philosophers.

But these insted of reflecting on our Corporal disorders, to study the
Traffic held between the Body and the mind, to consider that the more Noble
part of themselves was clogged with Mire, that the Chains by which they were
united made their miseries common to both, Cavenda haec ignorantia, qua de
nobis minus sentimus, sed plus illa, qua plus Nobis tribuimus: per hanc
damonibus, per aliam pecoribus sociamur. Bern. lib. de dilig. Deo.
and that contrary to Natures order the Slave did often invade the Sovereigns
right. They busied themselves in observing the advantages of the Soul: they
left the Maid to Court the Mistress; and wholly dazzled with her perfections,
they made her a Temple, and therein placed their chiefest good. Hence arose all
the Disputations that separated the Philosophers, for each one exercised his
Reason upon this, according to his own apprehension, and built a felicity as
himself fansied: and as they were ignorant of themselves they made War against
each other, without knowing the ground of the Quarrel they sought for
happiness, but could not find it. They Writ her praises, and knew not wherein
she consisted, and if they did discover that she was grafted in some part
within them, they knew neither the Name nor the nature of it.

Epicurus who imagined that his Soul was terrestrial, her Nature not different
from that of his Body; and though her operations were more excellent, yet that
she proceeded from the same matter, sought amongst the Beasts wherewith to
render himself happy, and making an Idol of his Body, placed his Felicity in
Voluptuousness. Aristotle, who is politic in all his Works, and so well knew
how to Reconcile Philosophy to the humor of the Monarchs of his time, did Fancy
that man's Felicity was not separable from the goods of the Body and of Fortune:
Fieri non potest, certe egre, ut bona aliquis faciat sine instructo apparatu
multa enim, velut per Organa, facienda sunt per amicos, opes, civilem gratiam
aut potentiam. Arist. ad Nicom. 1. cap. 8.
that his happiness was unperfect if he were not as healthy as powerful; and
that Content consisted in Friends to converse with, Subjects to command, and
Children that were as well Heirs of our Virtues, as of our Estates.

If it be no School Treachery not to side with so Learned a Master, and if a
man run not the hazard of being censured by his Scholars for taking Reasons
part, and pleading Senecas cause, I think it may be said such thoughts are too
mean to form a Disciple of Christ, and that his words are too little generous
to make an ordinary Philosopher. For who shall imagine that things out of our
power should make us happy? and that Fortune, which is but a Chimera should
dispense the favors which are the Recompenses of Virtue. Wherefore should we
build our happiness upon Riches; Since our minds are the Magazines of true
wealth, and why should we expect that from Strangers, which we may bestow upon
our Selves? Nature is too liberal to deny us our Desires: She is too Noble to
refuse us a gift which she preserves for us in the Cabinet of our Soul: and her
Guide is too faithful to carry us astray from that good to which we aspire.
Those that so much cry it down have not known the advantages of it: and had
they studied to become as reasonable as eloquent, they would have confessed
with us, that she is not less a Teacher of the faithful then a Soverain to the
Politicians, and the Mistress of Philosophers. Virtue is her workmanship, born
in her bosom, and so obedient a Daughter, that she follows her Counsels in
all her Actions. Just men own her for their Mother, Nesciat justus, nisi
Secundum Naturam Vivere; in cujus instituto Dei lex est. Ambros lib. 2. de
Abrahamo. cap. 11.
they pay respect to her Orders, when ever she commands; and as her Laws are
descended from Heaven, they fear to offend him that rules there, by hearkening
to other Counsels then hers.

Morality which boasts of governing Men in their Actions of aiding them in
their Needs; of defending them against evil accidents, of combating Vice, of
teaching us Virtue, and of making continency and modesty familiar to us
Mortals, is useless to them that observe Nature, all the Precepts of Morality
have yet produced but paper Virtues; and if they have at any time formed a
Philosopher or a Monarch, the Success is more to be attributed to their own
good inclinations then to the Soundness of those Maxims. There are some
Nations that avoid Vice and follow Virtue, without the help of this Moral
Guide; who having not instructed them, are yet so Wise as to conquer their
passions, root out Voluptuousness, limit desire, resist sorrow, and despise
riches. Our Country people may lawfully dispute the Reward of Constancy with
the most cloudy browed Philosophers, and I know not whether those Disciples of
Nature do not inspire those Famous Doctors, with the Love of Temperance and
Justice. They are virtuous without Art, they laugh at Fortunes disgraces, they
look for Death without terror, and being persuaded that it is but a passage to
Life, they receive it contentedly. They endure poverty without complaint; they
Practice Virtue without Violence, they bear Sickness with patience, and without
running to Morality for advice, they become patient, just and courageous. If
their valor be not so splendid as that of conquerors, it is not therefore less
real; and if their sobriety be less published then that of our strictest
Monasticks; it produces not fewer chaste and continent persons.

And even St. Austin, though an Enemy to the Virtues of the Heathen,
attributing (with much heat) all to Grace, Non est in homine penitus extinctae
Scintilla rationis, in qua factus est ad imaginem Dei. August. 22. de civit.
Dei. cap. 24.
and seeming to grant Nature nothing, that all might be owned to the assistance
of Jesus Christ, is astonished that Sin which brought all our Senses into a
Cloud of Error, darkened our minds, depraved our Wills, and poured into our
Souls the Seeds of all Vice, could not choke the inclination we have for that
which is good: that we should be naturally just after our Fathers Revolt, and
guilty as we are, we should retain a Love for Virtue, and a hatred for her
Contrary. Some of his Disciples doubted his Arguments, they could hardly
comprehend how that which makes the Fountain of our Crimes, should be the
Original of our good Deeds, and that, against those inclinations which he
maintains, she often brings forth perfections instead of Monsters. They admired
that the first Men that succeeded in Adams sin, should become righteous by
conversing with Nature, that they should put Laws in Practice which they never
read off, and by consulting this prudent Mother, they should conceive a
Reverence for their Creator, compassionate care of their Subjects, and an
affection for their Equals.

Methinks it is not very hard to clear all these Doubts, and without stumbling
at the Difficulties they lay down, it may Suffice to propose them a Dilemma, to
show them the Truth by day light. For after Adam's fall it must be, that either
God forsook his Works, or that he knew Nature potent enough to do well, without
the aid of Written Laws. If to augment the guilt of the first Man; or diminish
the rigor of his punishment, you represent God infinitely offended; who justly
denies his assistance to Adams Descendants, be careful that you do not equally
question both his providence and his Mercy, and remember, that you cannot take
from him the Care of his Creatures without offending his Bounty. But if you
believe, that Nature is impotent in the Exercises of Virtue without particular
Grace. That Man in the State of Sin has more inclination for Vice, then
Virtue, that the one is natural to him and the other a stranger. Where are
those commandments that brought him back to his Duty? Where are the Written
Laws that decided his Doubts? Where the promises and threats for reward of the
Righteous, and punishment of the Wicked? It must then be concluded, that Nature
is not so corrupted, but that we may draw some advantage from her. That though
we be guilty, there remains something of our innocence, and, with a little
Labor to keep her in Breath, we may avoid Vice, practice Virtue, and triumph
over our Passions.

Discourse III.
Continuation of the same Subject, and of the Advantages of Reason.
THough Nature be the common Mistress of Philosophers, though the Cynick Sect,
morose as they are, court her as well as the Academia; and may boast that Plato
was her Lover and the Wise Roman her Slave; Nevertheless they that carress her,
set her out in such Different shapes, and the Forms they give her, are so
disproportionable the one to the other, that it may be doubted whether they
knew what they describe, or whether they do not imitate those jealous Suitors
that disguise the perfections of their Beloved, to divert their Rivals. Some
have thought her gentle and easy to be entreated, that much Art was not needful
to gain her; That such as were faithful to her obtained her, and that a
constancy of Life was the way to possess her. They affirm that to keep her
Laws, Finem Zeno ita edidit; convenienter Vivere, quod est Secundum unam
rationem, and concordem. sibi Stob. in Eclog.
we need but an even Temper and that contrary to the humor of vicious men, that
delight in change, it was enough to will and not to will the same thing. Some
others, a little more elevated, derive her Original from Heaven, they
distinguish not her Author and her Self, and mistaking the Effect for the
Cause, persuaded themselves, that following her Documents, they might become
the Children, rather then the Slaves of the Gods whom they Worshipped. Stoici
Secundum Naturam Vivere finem esse decreverunt, Dei Nomen in Naturae decore
commutantes. Clem. Alex. 2. Strom.
They changed the Name of God into that of Nature, adored his power in His
shadow, and imagining the World to be Eternal, they mixed the Creator with the
Creature.

These were the two Opinions of the Ancients, and consequently suspicious to
those that esteem their good works but splendid sins, and the greatest part of
their thoughts matters of Crime. Nevertheless they are not very far distant
from the Truth, and by a little light brought in to unmist them, they may
easily pass for Articles of our Faith, and Maxims of our Religion. Saint
Ambrose explains the former, to be of the number of the Faithful, he wills us
to have but one Resolution. Assuesce ita Vivere, ut vita tua quandam picturam
exprimat, eandum servans Semper imaginem quam acceperis Ambros. lib. 11. Ep. 82.
That our Endeavors correspond with our first undertaking, and that we learn
of the Painters not to varnish without preservation of the first Lineaments.
The other seems so reasonable to them of that Party, that they think it needs
no Authority to support it, and if Clement of Alexandria had not laid forth his
Eloquence to render it probable, it is sufficient to know that Nature is a Law
more ancient then Adam, that Men reverence her Decrees, that it is she that
governs the Universe, directs the Inhabitants, and that all Creatures found
therein, own her for their Sovereign, to Judge that she merits not a meaner
Title then the Daughter of the Diety.

If the Novelty of these opinions put doubt upon the Truth of them, if we could
run the hazard of becoming infidels by favoring the sentiments of the Heathen,
yet should I not be afraid by embracing the Doctrine of Chryssippus, to stray
from the common consent of Divines or by reserving to Nature her own Benefits,
think my self injurious to the Religion I profess; For placeing the Felicity of
Man in his own Nature, viz. his Reason I concern my self in the glory of God
and the honor of Nature, and as I show her to be so obedient to her Father
that she observes all his Laws, I make it appear that Reason is so submissive
to her Mother that she follows all her Dictates. So that it may be said
without offense to those grand Doctors, That Reason composeth Man's real good,
that his Felicity consists in the use of it, Quid aliud censes esse beat
Vivere, nisi Secundum id, quod est in homine Optimum, Vivere? quis vero
dubitavarit nihil aliud esse hominis optimum, quam eam partem animi, cui
dominanti obtemperare convenit caetera quaeque quae in homine Sunt? haec autem,
ne aliam post^les definitionem, men's aut ratio dici potest. Augustine. lib. 1.
cont. Academ.
and that to live happily, a man need but be conformable to the Councels of
Reason. To apprehend this Learning well, we must suppose (with Seneca) a great
difference between the Reason of the wise, and the Judgment of other Men: For
as this is but a bare opinion that arises from our Flesh, which erects her
Empire in the Senses, and has no other Considerations but what proceed from
the meanest part of a Man, she seeks nothing but sensuality, and prefers the
desires thereof, before those of the Soul, and as a grateful Child, speaks ever
well of the Parent, Opinion is a thing so much fixed to the Earth, that her
desires are limited there, and her thoughts are so little generous, that she
seeks for no other goods but what our common Sense has set a price upon. The
honor she pretends to, is fickle and vain, her Resolutions uncertain, her
Counsels dark, and she passes Judgment expert. If some times she have good
intervals, and being hurried by the vanity of the Objects which she pursues,
she wing her self toward Heaven yet those agitations are so short and
inconstant, that they last but a few moments. She is presently stagering, if
what she desires agree not with our Flesh. She gives the Title of Error to our
choicest thoughts, and pleasing her self with Novelty, She soon rallies her
Counselers and makes them appeal from their first advices. But Reason is the
Daughter of Heaven, her Extraction augments her Excellence, In homine Optimum
quid est? ratio; haec antecedit animalia, Deos Sequitur: Ratio ergo perfecta
proprium hominis bonum est. Senec. Ep. 76.
and if some Philosophers may be credited, She is a proportion of Gods Essence,
an effusion of his being, and an expression of his Greatness.

Trismegistus thought her formed of his Substance, a Branch of the Diety, and
as the Sun shoots forth his light without diminution of his Power, God
produced Reason from himself without weakening his Nature. These bold words,
though they seem to destroy our Faith, by which we know Reason to be a part of
our Soul, produced by time, yet it cannot be denied but that she is an Image of
the Diety, having the Characters of the Almighties greatness and that (without
thinking it Robbery) she imitates those perfections that render Him (only)
worthy of Adoration. They also which could not comprehend the adorable Mystery
of the Incarnation, who doubted whether the Divine Nature were compatible with
ours, and whether He that was begotten from all Eternity, could become Man by
time, made no difficulty of apprehending that God allied Himself to our Soul by
Reason, and that he communicated daily with our Spirit by means of this His
Image. Indeed this production seems to be His legitimate Daughter, since she
has so much share in his glorious qualities, being Heiress of his perfections,
and bestowing upon our Souls the same Advantages which she has received from
her Father. For besides that she represents the plurality of His Persons by
the Trinity of His powers, and shows us, without confusion, the unity of His
Nature in the division of the faculties whereof it is composed. Reason makes
her so unchangeable in goodness that she never forsakes her when once she has
owned her, repentance never succeeds her wishes, her Counsels are as just as
her Designs: and she is assured she shall keep her innocence so long as all her
thoughts please her, and that she consult her in all her undertakings. So that
Reason is the most excellent part of us, her glory makes all our felicity: and
a Philosopher said truly, that if the Spirit were the Soul of the Body, Reason
was the Soul of our Spirit. She is also the most Majestical part of the Soul:
and if any Philosophers were found so rash as to deprive her of that quality,
they might boast of having destroyed her, by doing violence to themselves.

Those who value a Man by the abundance of his Treasures, who Judge of his
Blood, by the long continued line of his Ancestors, and place his good Fortune
in the Beauty of his Manors, his gaudy Apparel, and the number of his Servants
and Slaves that surround him, do plainly discover that they never knew Nature,
and that they have been ignorant that these gifts which they so much prize, are
favors that God for the most part vouchsafes to his Enemies. But to know well
the Excellencies of a Man, and to proportion his esteem to his merit, he must
be viewed in his Shirt: Strip him of all that Splendour that dazles our Eyes:
consider him without those Ornaments that set off his Body, and press the
plummet to the depth of him, to be informed whether Reason has preserved her
privileges in him, if she have not suffered her self to be abused by common
opinion, if Passions have not deceived her, and if she have not permitted
Foreign Commodities to prejudice the Productions of her own Country, to cheat
her Subjects, and debauch her Ministers.

I acknowledge with our Divines, that Reason is weakened and conceives proud
designs, that her lights are darkened by Sin, and that she is subject to
illusions since her revolt against God. I confess that the Soul since her
disobedience, is light in her undertakings, and embraces falsehood for truth,
that she often sides with Vice, and seldom takes part with Virtue. To enlarge
upon these defects, and to add to her own disorders the Tyranny of her Body, I
do know that they agree not, that this Earth plays the Rebel against the Sun
that enlightens it, and that overwhelming the Laws of Nature, the Mistress
becomes often the Captive of her Slave: Briefly, I know that in her operations
she has need of the Organs of this Tyrant, seeing with his Eyes, hearing with
his Ears, judging of the diversity of tastes by his Tongue, and that she would
be condemned to perpetual ignorance, if these parties concerned undertook not
to inform her of their knowledge of Colors, of Sounds, of the softness and
hardness of Objects; How be it these disorders destroy not her good
inclinations: She is undistracted in her misery, the advantages she had in her
innocence are not lost by her fall; and although she be thought blind, she can
yet find out the Truth in the midst of sensual illusions. She is so generous in
all her Enterprises, that with a little Care to redress her, she gives us fresh
assurances of her fidelity: those Remains of Light that are yet in her since
the State of innocence, put her in mind of her first Glories; and although she
be guilty, she is yet righteous enough not to commit any thing unworthy of her
Birth. Her disobedience caused her submission: She knows God after she has
offended him. She emplores his aid when she remembers her contempt of his
Commandments, and as she finds her self bound to restore what she has robbed
Him of, she obliges the Soul to acknowledge Him her only Sovereign. The
Messengers she sends abroad for foreign intelligence, cannot deceive her
unless she please, their falsehoods make her prudent, and if they be cunning
enough to give her false informations, they are neither so powerful nor
industrious as to persuade her into the belief of them. That Prison that
surrounds her cannot arrest her thoughts. The Diseases that weaken her Body,
cannot touch her: and as if she held no commerce with the Earth; She remains at
Liberty in the midst of her Fetters, and keeps her health in an infected
habitation. If Passions are able to obstruct her operations, if they can cool
that Fire that makes her Act as a Commander in chief, they are not able to put
it out: and if Sin have disfigured this living Image of God, it has not been
able to deface her first lineaments, the impious perceive her in their
debaucheries, if their Mouth protect them, Reason condemns them, if the night
favor their Crimes, the Sun lays them open: and it is but small comfort to
have Companions in Sin, when they find every where a Witness to accuse them, a
Judge to condemn them, and the Executioner to punish them. Reason is then Man's
only benefit: Sic est faciendum ut contra universam naturam Nihil contendamus;
and ea tamen conservata, proprium sequamur. Cic. Offic.
he must use it to climb Heaven, he must consult it to govern his Life, and if
he do but hearken unto her, he shall be virtuous, and tame the most insolent of
his Passions.

Discourse IV.
That a Wise Man's happiness is not built on the Goods of the Body.
SOme modern Philosophers seem to wonder that the least of all Causes, should,
in our Actions, be of the greatest use. That the End which subsisteth but in
Idaea, should be the Motive of all our works; and that that which has so
little share in all humane productions, should be so necessary a Midwife to
bring them forth. They build their opinions upon Aristotle's discourse, and as
they Learn of him, that that which has no being must needs be barren, and that
nothing can be drawn from it but what is imaginary, they conclude, that seeing
the End is nothing in substance, and that its being depends on our intelects,
it can conceive naught but Chymera's, and bring forth nothing but conceited
apparitions. Others somewhat more ingenious, Arriaga in Phys. 8. 81.
do say, that its subsistence is not so sensible as that of the matter; that
its manner of operation is different from that of the Form, and efficient
Cause; and that when this unites the Soul with the Body, and makes them agree
in one, the End does but figure out Idaea's; and form imaginary Resemblances.
Nevertheless convinced by the deductions of the first of Philosophers, they
avow that if the End be not the more Noble of the four principles, she is how
ever the most necessary: and that if she make less show then her Companions,
she has so much the ascendant of them, as to make their operations Suitable to
her Designs. True it is that all our Projects would be monstrous if our
intentions prevented not their birth: and Nature, that is so regular in her
Works, would commit nothing but Debaucheries, if she directed them not to the
End appointed by her Maker; As Goodness is the most illustrious Object of
Morality, and all that is there entreated of, tends to the acquisition thereof,
we are not to wonder if all men seek her, if the guilty as well as the innocent
court her: and if she often procure her self real Lovers, by the bare
appearance of Goodness. When a Tyrant oppresses his people, ransacks his
Neighbors Countries, depriveth the innocent of Liberty, and to enlarge his
Frontiers, intrencheth upon those Bounds where wise Nature had limited his
Authority, Policy which is always self interessed, excuses all these disorders
by Pretext of a greater Good: and the advantages she hops for, by weakening
the Subject, and ruining the Enemy, seem considerable enough to justify such
iniquities when a Criminal is accused, and brought before the Judge, finding
himself engaged to show innocence in the matters laid to his Charge; he
borrows a good Countenance to excuse himself: and as there is no man so
impious, as in his Crime, purely to intend Evil, he throws his offense upon
the sincerity of his intentions.

Goodness is so Natural to Man, that he cannot loose the Love of her: and when
ignorance hides her Truth from him, Bonum est, quod omnes appetunt. Arist. Eth.
or that Opinion cheats him in the search of her, he forbears not to Scuffle
for her, and to catch at all her Resemblances. The Academia that made
profession of understanding her Essence, is of this an evident proof: for
designing to form a Felicity that should surpass all our desires, they invented
happinesses, that have hitherto only bore the Name. They would have it to
consist in the health of the Body, that Pleasure should be its inseparable
Companion; that Fortitude should have no other employment, but to defend and
preserve its healthful state, and that Beauty, which is but the Feminine
ornament, was part of a Wise Man's Felicity. As Experience taught these
Disciples that health was a fountain that watered all the parts with her
perfections, that its Comeliness consisted in a good intelligence with the
Elements; and that all the Favors of Nature lost their Splender in an infirm
Body, they set up health as the Principle of their Felicity: They averred that
to live happily it was necessary to have a sound Body; and that all our other
Faculties were useless to us, when the visage had lost its Color, and the
Members their strength, and when the food, that was for our nourishment, became
offensive to the Eyes. They compared health to a Calm Sea: They would have it,
that as this favored the Alcyons in laying their Eggs, and in bringing forth
their young; the other assisted the Conqueror in the obtaining of Victories,
Princes in the Conduct of their Subjects, Artificers in their Labors, Orators
in their Praises of virtue, and Philosophers in outbraving their misfortunes.
That it was health that charmed the disturbances of our Life, and that we
should be condemned as eternally miserable, if this did not sweeten the Travels
of our Pilgrimage, and change part of our miseries into delights.

If these Philosophers had well studied the Nature of Man's chief happiness,
and not ransact the Flesh for matter wherewith to content the mind, I persuade
my self, that in seeking to be happy, they would have put some difference
between their own felicity and that of brute Beasts: and that distinguishing
their own condition from that of impious persons, they would have learnt that
that which entertaineth vice, and nourishes all our Passions, could not be a
Principle of their Felicity. For albeit that sin be familiar to us, that we
bear the seeds thereof in our Souls, and that to will the commission of it be
sufficient to make us guilty. Mean while it is never more dangerous then when
it meets with aids to second it, Nusquam pejus, quam in sano corpore, animus
aeger habitat. Petr.
then when it causes our advantages to serve its designs, and when by the
health of our Body, it throws Infection into our Souls. There are some Men that
know not what Virtue is till they become impotent in Vice: Sickness must
disable them, to cure them of sin; and they would never call to mind that Hell
may be one day the place of their punishment, if the enflaming fever did not
feed upon their Intrails. Others there are that owe their innocence to the
absence of health: their Method of Life would be always criminal, if they were
not sometimes infirm, and if some violent agitations did not overthrow their
designs, they might be ranckt in the Number of dissolute Persons. As health is
a benefit as frail as dangerous, God bestows it but on few, the Men of great
action have been ever much concerned: those high Enterprises that have
disturbed the whole World, have afforded them little rest, the violent
eruptions of their spirits, weakened the activity of their Bodies: and if to be
in health were to be happy, it might be concluded, that Wise Men are miserable
the one half of their Lives.

Beauty is but a result of health, and as subject to decay as the principle to
alteration; Yet have we some Philosophers that love her, that present her with
praises, after vows of affection, and by a blindness, the more blamable for
being voluntary, fancy her to be the second part of their Felicity, they call
her the Mate of Virtue, they describe her to be Divinely animated, and will
have it, that she does not less influence the Souls of Wise men, then the
imagination of Fools. To hear them discourse, She is the delight of all our
Senses: and although she be the most pleasing object of our sight, yet is she
the ravishment of our Ears in the recital of her perfections. If we believe
some Heathen, the Gods themselves, behold nothing here below more glorious then
a face on which they have bestowed their favors, and men draw not more vanity
from any thing what ever, then to find themselves enriched with a benefit, that
appears without difficulty and may be enjoyed without Envy. For she exercises
so absolute a Dominion upon humane conceit, that she converts all that behold
her into Lovers: the persecutors of the innocent, are friends to her:
Pulchritudo eos, qui ipsam sentiunt, amicos reddit and inimicum Neminem Sibi
fieri permittit. Stob. Sermon. 68.
and more happy then Virtue it self, she has not yet found an Enemy to make
War against her, nor envious persons to bespatter her perfections. Do but see
her, and you love her: when you have once seen her, you cannot be her Enemy:
and her allurements are so potent, that she takes us from our selves, at her
very first appearance to our Eyes.

But alas, who is there that may not easily discern that so fading a perfection
cannot make us happy? Animus Spectandus est: Nihil pulchritudo juvat, cum quis
mentem, non bonam, habet. Idem. Sermon. 69.
and that a Benefit, which has all its glory from our opinion, is too light to
satisfy our desires, too little Solid to stay our hopes, for what can there be
showed us upon Earth, more frail then Beauty? or what is there more to be
slighted then a Face, whose Charms are only in the Eyes of them that are taken
with it, and which owes the greatest part of its Dazzling Flashes, to the
blindness of its Adorers? Those Famous Beauties that have put the most
ingenious of the Poets into a Sweat, and sucked so many Praises from his Pen,
in excuse of the disorders which they have caused in the World, are not so much
the works of Nature as his witty Inven^ions: and if the Love he bare to Corinna
had not disturbed his mind, Helena had been at this day without Admirers, and
Penelope without Gallants. To be in love, is to have sore Eyes: and if Passion
did not often cajolle men's Fancies, in favor of them they adore, it might be
said that Love had long since had no buisiness in the World, or that if he had
made new Conquests the Fools head must have been the Seat of the War.

Beauty is so frail, that she cannot be kept a few Years, and what Art soever
Women use to preserve her, they must resolve to become ugly, Nostra longum
forma percurrens iter, deperdit aliquid Semper, and fulgens Minus, malisque
minus est. Sen. in Herc.
if they will grow old. That Clearness which contributeth to her Splendour,
advances her Ruin: the Sun which gives her a dazzling quality, disfigures her.
Time who is her Guardian is her mortal Enemy. The Body that sustains her puts
her to Death, and if some times the strength of Constitution prolong her Ruin,
it is but to reserve the Spoils for the meanest of her Maladies. To draw Reason
from the Proud Mistresses of Beauty, that Tyrannize the Spirits of indiscreet
men, and to be avenged of of the Evils wherewith they afflict their Martyrs, it
is not needful to Negotiate with death to cast pale Colors into their Faces, to
employ the Nails of a she Rival to deface their most curious Features, or that
some strange accident should carry away the Off-sets, which they value more
then their Lives: (...) of an Ague or Fever has force enough to overthrow
these charming Adversaries; their choicest Complexions yield to disordered
Seasons: the Rose forsakes their Cheaks when it feels the Cold; and as there
is no distemper that is not able to change their Comeliness, there is not any
Beauty but may become the scorn of her Slaves.

But if sickness did not attack these Beauties if the seasons were sufficiently
constant not to alter their hew, and if the injurious air had any respect for
their perfections, yet time, which Periods Empires, would not spare them; in
prolonging their days, he would diminish their Beauty, and by a strange, but
ordinary Metamorphosis, he would change the proudest of Natures works, into
Monkees and Baboons. The Sun when he sets, has charms that attract the
consideration of the curious: the pleasant rays which he sheddeth at bidding
us good night, are our Shepherds delights; and Astrologers observe that his
withdrawing lights are not less beneficial to us, then when he apears again in
our Horizon, and rides triumphant over our heads. The latter season has her
pleasures: if she carry in commodities in one hand, she brings equal advantages
in the other. She is the Expectation of the Husbandman, and the reward of the
Vine keeper; and if she drive the people from the hills and open Country, she
fills their Cellars with Wines the Garners with Corn, and the Barns with fruits
of the Harvest.

But when Women look toward age, when their hairs assume the Color of Ashes:
when wrinckles furrow their foreheads, when their Eyes betake themselves to the
faculty of casting Pearls, when their Cheeks incline to their Chin and when
those two Milky Mountains become one double bag full of Blood, they are no more
desired by men: then they seem horrible to their Lovers; they which courted
them before now hate them, and as if all those lines in their foreheads, were
so many marks of their indiscretion, they shun the sight of them, as of the
most frightful Monsters of Nature. Also those that understand well the Nature
of Beauty, consider her as a remote advantage, and esteem the fruit more then
the possession, they are content to see her on the Faces of their beloved; and
knowing that her quality is too inconstant to make them happy, they give her
freely up to those soft Ladies, that seek only to be beautiful.

But of all that made so great account of the benefits of the Body. I meet with
none less reasonable, then they who join them to voluptuousness, and who
believed, that to live happily, it was necessary that Pleasure should make the
last perfection of their felicity. For although health be but an even temper of
the Body, though the concord which proceeds from the mixture of the Elements
be a pure effect of their good understanding, and that the vigor of the Body
have its dependence on the heat and Humidity of the Blood, yet the good offices
which health rendereth unto her Landlord are considerable enough to gain some
reputation in the Schools. For it is she that preserves his comeliness, which
accommodates the interests both of Body and Soul, which gives him strength to
contest with the diseases that beset him, and in the Opinion of Aristotle, it
is a Treasure surpassing all the Riches of the Earth. If Beauty have her
frailties, if her Empire last but few days, and if after she has triumphed
over a small number of Slaves, she become the spoil of old Age or of Death, she
has perfections which procure her reverence, the reasonable Creatures worship
their Creator in his Image, virtue serves it self of her in communicating with
her Lovers, and as if the splendour of Beauty augmented the Majesty of virtue,
she takes pleasure to employ her, when she Acts the Sovereign in the hearts of
the Sons of Men.

But pleasure is infamous, in what shape soever she be dressed. She is ashamed to
apear in public; they who protect, condemn her, they seek for darkness to
possess her and knowing that she is as common to the Beasts as to us; they
blame her in all their discourses she is of so Malignant a humor that she
turns all our delights to remorses or punishments. She courteth not virtue
but to corrupt or seduce her. If she give her Slaves a smile, it is but to
deceive them, and more cruel then Tyrants she paies respect to her Enemies and
gives death to them that are her sworn faithful Servants. Yet have we found
Philosophers who have pleaded for her, and forceing virtue to take her for a
handmaid would afterward persuade us that the Mistress and this Maid held a
very good correspondence.

Epicurus, that sage Professor of delights imagined that Man was born to enjoy
her. That pleasure ought to be the seasoning of all his actions, and that after
he had paid his honors to virtue, it was lawful for him to aspire to the
enjoyment of her Slave. As he makes her to assist at her Triumphals, he will
have her the constant companion of her Labors: in all her occupations he
renders her assistance necessary, he is of opinion that Fortitude it self would
fail if the pleasure which she expects from the rout of an Enemy, did not
Spirit her to Battle: and that temperance would be little concerned for the
regulation of our Passions, if she were not spurred on as well by delight as
utility. In fine he says that pleasure to a wise Man is no dishonorable
companion, that the Slave might be courted without wrong to her Mistress; and
that the conversation of dissolute Women was not more unsuitable to
Philosophers then Zenos disciples amongst the Academians. I know that Seneca
labors to justify this opinion in some part of his Writings: and having
arraigned the sense given it by them of the party, he forms the Authors
apology. As if he had been of Intelligence with Epicurus rather then with
Truth, he takes part with him against his adversaries, he asserteth that the
pleasure whereof he treats is modest, that her humor is not less austere then
that of virtue, and that if she put on the pleasing ornament of a more cheerful
countenance, it is but with less difficulty to gain her Mistress a greater
number of Lovers.

I should readily subscribe to this opinion, and it were sufficient to know
that it proceeds from Seneca, to receive it with reverence. But as most men
abuse it, they run to his Doctrine for a Justification of their disorders* and
supported by his Approbation they believe it is lawful for them to hunt after
sensualities; I find my self engaged to explain his meaning and to unfold to
the Disciples of Epicurus, that Seneca is not of their Party, though some words
have run from his Pen to their advantage. If he give a favorable Explication of
their Masters meaning, they owe it to the greatness of his civility: he gives
him combat too often, to approve the most sordid of his opinions and when he
shows them the weakness of pleasure, Voluptas, cum maxim delectat,
extinguitur, nec Multum loci habet, itaque cito implet and tedio est, and post
primum impetum marcet. Sen. de vita beata. cap. 7.
and the merit of virtue, he lets them sufficiently know that he employs all
those discourses, but to persuade them to slight the Maid that she who is her
Sovereign may receive their Honors. As this is the only Mistress to whom he
paies reverence, he is concerned for her glory, and he would think it a
betraying of his Courage, if he should reconcile her to an Enemy whom she
dispiseth. He cannot suffer that she who is content in affliction, joyful in
the midst of Torments, who laughs at Fortune and Triumphs over those evil
accidents that strike terror into the most stout hearted men, should become the
consort of an effeminate, who grows pale at the sight of a misfortune, who
sinks under the assaults of distempers, and who turns the most pleasing
delights of virtue into the severest of her own torments to show us that they
are unequal Companions, he declares virtue to be Eternal, and that pleasures
last but for a moment, that the one is generous but the other sordid, that the
one has its residence in the Soul, but the other in the Body, that the one is
insatiable, but the other always attended with content. Virtus contemptrix
voluptatis and Sortis est, and longissime ab illa resiliens, labori ac dolori
familiarior, virilibus incommodis magis quam isti effeminato bono, inserenda.
Sen. 4. de benef. cap. 2.
In fine that to affect voluptuousness is to have lost our understanding, and
to be more sensual then Beasts in making the felicity of rational Creatures to
consist in Pleasures.

Discourse V.
That the goods of Fortune cannot make a Wise Man happy.
THose that proportion their esteem of things by the rule of gain, and who judge
of their value by the pleasure or credit which may arise from them, do wonder
that in the Stoic Schools, virtue only should be valuable, and that honors and
wealth which they deem so necessary to humane Life, should in their discourses
pass for indifferent matters; they are so wilfully linckt to the interests of
the Flesh, that they study only to content that, and they would not be thought
to be so ignorant of the nature of goodness, as to allow that Title to any
thing in which the Body has no share. For albeit that virtue have charms
sufficient to enamour us, that her Beauty invite us to court her, and that the
felicity which she promises to all her Lovers be considerable enough to stir
up all men to be her Suitors; yet can they not resolve to seek her, her
benefits seem to them not sufficiently splendid to engage their affections,
they affect not a Mistress whose Portion will not set them out in the world,
and dispising all the joys that attend the possession of goodness, they have
recourse to the Benefits of Fortune, the better to establish their conceited
happiness. Morality that Examiner General of the price of all things, which
stateth so just an equality between our corporal advantages and the goods of
Fortune, seems to favor their conceits, when she promiscuosly confounds
them with virtue, when she calls the Sovereign and her vassals by one and the
same name, when she averreth all Gods works to be perfect, and giving an
Earthly construction to the words of that famous Man Moses, she bestows the
quality of goodness upon all that the Creators bounty has made. So that
according to the fancy of these Philosophers, the Earth has nothing which
bears not the Character of perfection in its forehead and if we except sin
nature has nothing, how hurtful soever to us but may be accounted good in
their sense.

But the Stoic Philosophy, which is as much elevated above that of Aristotle,
as the Valor of Women is beneath the Courage of the Hero's, allows nothing to
be good but virtue, she cannot endure that that which countenanceth the vicious
in Sin, should be called by that name, and that we should serve our selves of
that which may be employed to destroy rather then to promote virtue. Most rich
men have made themselves guilty by wealth, and those famous criminals that at
this day are the shame of their Posterity, might have passed for innocent
persons, if Gold had not executed their wicked designs. If we believe the most
Learned of the Apostles, Riches are the root of all evil, Radix omnicum
peccatorum, cupiditas. Paul.
and the ruin of all our virtues. It is money that has invented all our crimes,
taught Children to attempt upon the Life of their Parents, and to procure the
death of them that brought them into the World. It was this that showed the
covetous to oppress the innocent, to ruin Families, rob the Church and make
bare her Alters. It was this that tempted friends to break their faith, and
Subjects to sport with Princes heads. It was this that furnished incontinent
persons with matter to gratify their lusts, to deprive Women of their chastity,
and their Husbands of their Lives, in fine Wealth has over turned Kingdoms,
confounded Families, and ruined private Men. But if Gold were not the cause of
all this confusion in the World, if innocence were not persecuted by the
covetous, and if Justice were not corruptible by an insatiable desire of
wealth, it would still be fatal to Mankind. And to oblige us to disesteem so
dangerous a Weapon it may suffice to know, that it fails not either to
destroy or to wound us. Pride and fear are its inseparable companions: these
Passions which seem rather to be contrary then different, become agreed to
Plague the Avaricious, and teach these terrestrial Souls that they cannot be
wealthy without being miserable. For if by means of their Treasures, they
design to make their Houses vie with Kings Palaces if by Gold they procure
favor at Court, if their Enemies become their Slaves, and if they share in all
those delights that compose the felicities of the happy men of this World, they
grow insolent, and extracting vanity from the magnificence of their Buildings,
the luxury of their Aparrel, and the number of their attendants, they are not
less injurious to their inferiors, then troublesome to their equals. But if a
disgrace Surprise them, if fortune cease to cajole them, and if experience
teach them that wealth has Wings, that a Tyrant may seize their Estates, and
that fortune, of whom they were borrowed may demand payment when she pleases,
they tumble suddenly into fear, their lofty humor is changed into dejection
they fear the future by the accidents already befallen them; and their cares
for preservation, swallow up all the delights which before filled them with
vanity. Riches are so dangerous to man, that he can hardly possess them without
guilt, and their use is so seemingly necessary that he cannot easily resolve to
quit them for fear of being miserable: his rest is incompatible with the
possession of money, he cease to be satisfied when once he has attained
wealth, and as he knows that Ambuscades are laid for that Metle of which he
has formed his Idol, he is no less afraid of the familiarity of his friends,
then the power of Princes, and the hatred of those that envy his Prosperity. He
suspects the embraces of her who is in his bosom, the reverend approches of
his Children puts him into doubts; and knowing that Gold has caused Children
and Wives to betray their Love and Obedience to Husband and Father, he fears
and stands upon his Guard to both. Divitias Nego bonum esse: nam si essent,
bonos facerint. Nunc, quoniam, quod apud malos deprehenditur, dici bonum Non
potest, hoc illis nomen Nego: Sen. de vita beat. cap. 24.
They then that seek their content in abundance meet with self chastisements
and convinced by the distractions that attend it, they are constrained to
acknowledge with the Stoics that a foreign advantage, having no price but what
our own fancy gives it, and which cannot be purchased without the loss of our
inward peace or our innocence, is not capable of making us happy.

As honor is vain, most commonly the recompense of vice, and inseparable from
wealth, it must create no wonder if the effect be as empty as the cause, and if
she loose that Title so often as she forsakes virtue, to adorn her Enemy. The
great Pomp of Princes is not an infallible token of their Justice, their
Actions, which would merit punishment in the person of their Subjects, are
recorded to their praise; and if success favor their Enterprises, they never
fail of Orators to magnify their wisdom turn their crimes into Virtues, call
their Murders victories and their usurpations legitimate Conquests. The
fighting of a single duel, deserves chastisement in a private Gentleman; But a
King is never more esteemed, then when he sacks whole Cities, Plunders
Provinces, depopulates Kingdoms, and converteth the most flourishing Realms of
the Earth into enhabitable Countries. But without busying my self about man's
Injustice, and to show that honor is not always the price of good behavior,
and that she is oftener the portion of crime then the reward of goodness, it is
enough to consider that even they which so highly extol her, do confess that
she is but a foreign commodity, which is as little at our service as her
companion Wealth, and that as the one is a dependant of Fortune, the other
subsisteth in popular opinion, which caused some who had seen the vanity
thereof to look out for more solid Principles to build honor upon, and finding
by Experience that so fickle a Judge would not be long in Love with one and the
same thing, they searched the Ages past for Pillars to support this light
Structure. Observing then that envy raked not in the Ashes of their Ancestors,
that their Reputation was no more the Babe of chance, that Fortune bare
reverence to their Valor, and Men to their memories, they boasted of their
Birth, they thought the Grandeurs of the Progenitors would render their
offspring illustrious, and being Heirs to their wealth they ought to partake
in the glory of their Actions. They sought for natural Reasons to justify these
conceits, they maintained that Gentility had no less power upon its descendants
then Yeomandry, and that as the one bequeathed their ruddy complexions to their
Children; and as some diseases were Hereditary to whole Families, the other
might lay claim to the honors that had made their Predecessors so famous upon
Earth.

But surely these succeeded no better then the former, and if the Principles
from which they fetch their Reasons seem to be less weak then the opinion of an
interessed Populace, the good they contend for is so little related to the
felicity of Man, that they cannot assign it the least share without being
ignorant of Nature. For besides, that Nobility has often her Original from the
enormity of her Ancestors crimes, Ex homicidio Saepe orta nobilitas, and
strenua carnificina. Alii pecunia emunt Nobilitatem, alii illam lenocinio, etc.
Multis perditionem nobilitas conciliat. Agrip. de van. Scient.
that those Titles of which the sound carries so much* awe are most commonly
the recompense of homicides or Adulteries, and that we find not many men
arrived at dignities by law ul ways, nor without suffering a thousand affronts
in the obtention: and that Gold (which is the Principle of all Court sins) is
at this day the Creation of Dukes, Marquises, Earls and Barons. This advantage
of being highly descended has so little stability, that it often comes not to
the Heirs, and causes persons of quality to own themselves more obliged to
fortune for their Gentility then to them from whom they received Life. We find
some Parents that cannot reckon any but Plebeans among their Children, these
Eagles have yet only brought forth Daws; and although the root were allied to
Kings and Consuls, yet do they despair that ever their Branches will revive the
memory of their Grandeur.

The Laws which establish the Heirs of Families, and often force the Father to
make his first born Master of his Revenews, cannot give them the faculty of
conveighing Gentility to his Successors. If Nature permit him to love the Son,
she allows him not the transmission of his Fathers honor; this benefit is above
the affection as well as out of the Power of the Parent: and in vain do some
Men pretend to the glory of their Ancestors, since it was not in their power to
bequeath it them. Virtue is the only advantage of the Nobility, it is she that
puts a difference between them and the Plough-Man and in the judgment of Plato,
she is the only inheritance which they may purchase to themselves without
obligation to Fortune. All those Pictures and figures that adorn the Closets
and Gallaries of Princes, Plato ait, neminem regem non ex servisesse oriundum,
and Neminem non servum ex Regibus. Omnia ista longa Varietas miscuit, and
sursum deorsum fortuna Versavit. Quis ergo generosus? ad virtutem a natura been
compositus. Sen. Ep. 44.
all those Combats they set forth with so much Art, all those Generals which
are represented at the head of victorious Armies, and all the Pomp wherewith
their Triumphs are accompanied create no Nobles: those great Men did not live
for our honor. Death that terminated their Conquests, has preserved their
praises, and it is virtue must make us their Heirs before we lay claim to their
Honors: what ever has preceded us is not ours, and we cannot lawfully covet a
Benefit which is the Fruit of their Valor, and not the testimonial of our own
deserts.

Discourse VI.
That Virtue alone makes a Wise Man happy.
IN my opinion Seneca never shows less of partiality then when he condemns
his Enemies, and without transgressing the Law of Nations, he becomes judge in
his own cause, his sentences are so just, and his decrees so equitable that no
Appeal can lie without violation to Truth. For as no man is willing to make the
price of his peace the purchase of his happiness, and as they who aspire after
felicity, aim at matters of real content, and not at bare appearances that
seduce or corrupt us, it follows that corporal advantages are too fickle to
stay our desires, and that the favors of Fortune are too inconstant or
defective to satisfy our minds, that Virtue only is the ultimate end, that it
is she that is able to satiate our hopes, and that what ever is not of
Intelligence with her is not to be admitted into the composition of a permanent
happiness. His principles are so manifest, and his arguments so solid, that
they are not to be opposed without offending the Justice of the cause he
pleads for. Every one desires to live happily, and makes it his business to
arrive at a condition that may fully answer his hopes: but as men commonly
suffer themselves to be surprised with vulgar Errors, and as the maxims of the
World become the rules of their actions; we must not wonder if they never
attain the felicity they erroniously hunt after, if for the most part they go
astray from the proposed End, and if they tumble into calamity when they
expected the height of happiness: they are always so unfortunate in their
choice, as to pursue the shadow for the substance: they are deceived by the gay
things that surround her and more unhappy then the Poet's Tantalus, Quid est in
quo erratur? cum omnes beatam Vitam optent, quod instrumenta ejus pro ipsa
habeant, and dum illam petunt, fugiunt: Nam, cum Summa beatae vitae sit solida
tranquillitas, and ejus inconcussa siducia, Sollicitudinis causas colligunt,
and per insidiosum iter, non tantum ferunt sarcinas, sed trahunt. Sen. Ep. 44.
they stray from the good they seek, and fly from the felicity they pursue. For
whereas the fairest fruit of a happy Life, is the tranquillity of the mind, and
a confidence which the sincerity of our Conscience gives us, they aspire after
goods that disturb her rest, they wish for Honors that streighten their
Liberty, they desire Riches which torment them, and by an inexcusable Error
they take the causes of their disquiet to be part of the effects of their
greatest happiness.

They do acknowledge that to be virtuous is sufficient to secure us from misery,
that this excellent quality which distinguishes Wise men from Fools, is their
fortress against the accidents of Fortune, and that they need but temperance to
be triumphant over voluptuousness, and courage to oppose the mischances that
assault them, yet can they not be persuaded that virtue alone can make them
happy, they distrust her power as well as her merit, and affirm that a quality
whose habitation is only in the Soul, and has no trading with the matter can
make but the one half of a felicity. They will have the Body satisfied as well
as the mind, that pleasures shall never be from it, that ease maintain its
comlyness, that it equally share with the Soul in joy, and would think
themselves ignorant of the nature of their chief good, if they brought not into
the composition the advantages of Simonides, the delights of Epicurus, and the
Honors of Periander.

To the Stoics it is not hard to oppose this opinion, and their reply is so
rational, that to judge of the clearness of their cause and the weakness of
their Enemies it is sufficient to hear them speak, for as these Excellent men
own no good but virtue, and set no esteem but upon the operations of Man's more
Noble part, they prize not the advantages that are foreign to him, the Pomp
and delights that attend them attract not their admiration, as they know that
the flesh agrees not with the Spirit, they would be ashamed to confer the
privileges of a Sovereign upon a Slave, that warreth against her. They assert
with much reason, that its not possible to be made happy by what we possess
not, that a Benefit to make a Man happy, must be in his power, and that
felicity depends so much on our Will, that we may bestow it upon our selves
when we please. For how can a Man place his happiness in works which are not
his own? Magnify himself in Treasures that Fortune may pull from him? And draw
vanity from Honors, which subsist rather in them that pay, then in them to whom
they are paid. But virtue, that is within him, she is the only advantage he
possesses: and if we may use the words of Senecas Enemies to confirm this
Truth, she is the sole benefit that will not forsake him when he has lost his
Children, Virtutes pereunt, si ea sententia vivit: nam saepe ab iis bonis est
ab eundum; aut illa deserenda: quod ut fiat paulo promptius, velut a
respectantibus fiet, quasi ob majus bonum minora, sed tamen bona, omittentibus.
Lips. lib. 2. ad Stoic. Philos.
when death has ravished his friends, when ruin has defaced his pleasant Seats
and when oppression or Tyranny has seized his revenues. What ever belongs not
to him is Subject to loss; Philosophy allows nothing to be permanent but the
possession of this; that Fortune which bruiseth Scepters in the hands of Kings,
spares her Empire, and this blind fantastic which takes pleasure in reducing
the Gods of the Earth to the condition of the meanest Bondmen, has not yet bin
able to make her miserable.

But as she is the whole felicity of her Lovers, she wills that they be
satisfied with her delights only, and permits them not by courting of outward
appearances to turn those things, which may divert her Love, into objects of
their affections. To speak truly all the things which we love with so much
Passion, have nothing of certainty but the miseries that attend them: the toil
and labors we undergo to obtain them, the fear of their loss after such
troublesome acquisition, the cares we employ to secure them, the grief we
resent when they are taken from us, are not so much the evidence of our wants,
as of their own Malignity, and it is not less easy to resolve, whether poverty
with its incommodities, be more supportable then abundance, with all its
inseparable torments. But Virtue is a benefit as solid as delightful, her
favors are above Fortunes reach, and although she despise the wealth of the
avaricious, the Pride of the ambitious, and the pastimes of the incontinent,
she does nevertheless satisfy the desires of all her real Suitors. She is their
happiness as well as their glory; the excellency of Virtue needs no off-sets,
and she is so jealous of her Lovers, that she will not admit their addresses to
any thing else when once they have chosen her for their Mistress. For if she
alone make not a Wise man happy, and if any thing else can be found in Nature
to dispute her title and quality, who should resolve to love her, since a Man
must often put himself in great hazard to obtain her? who would be faithful to
her, since she rejects what we esteem, and cannot enrich us but by teaching us
to be poor? Those alliances which are so essential to Governments to preserve
them in peace, and so useful to Families to maintain their concord, would be
burdensome to Men if any doubt could be put upon that Principle of Virtue, the
Shepherds would drive her from their Huts, as well as Kings from their Court,
and remembering that friendships are often contracted by the loss of the goods
of the Body and of Fortune, they would cast off a Virtue that instead of
procuring them Benefits strips them naked; strength would be odious to
Conquerors, she who has so often trampled upon the subdued world might
complain of the want of assistants, and though she be powerful enough to
attract admirers, few would be encouraged to fight Battles, or attack the Enemy
at the hazard of their Lives and Fortunes. Gratitude would be vexatious, if we
were to exercise it at the loss of our Estates: and she who teaches us that it
is more glory to give then to receive, would cease to be our delight, if
opinion could persuade us, that that which we return is part of the good deed,
that we must beggar our selves to make satisfaction to the good offices of a
friend, and that the same Virtue which raised us that friend, is not sufficient
to acknowledge his favors. But to stay no longer about raising the price of
Virtue above the goods of the Body and of Fortune, who sees not that Man is too
generous a Creature to lodge his felicity in such perishable commodities, and
which cannot establish him in their possession without making him the most
unhappy of all created beings? For if he believe that to live contented he must
feed himself with delicate Meats, and seek wherewith to awaken his dull
appetite in the diversity of Messes, the Beasts that brouze the Grass of the
Field will in nothing give way to him, they eat with more delight then he, they
taste the superfluities of the Earth with more pleasure, then do the
Gourmandizers of Ragousts and admirable sauces, and that hunger which seldom
forsakes them, makes all they eat delightful. If he will imagine that to be
happy, he must swim in fleshly delights, and turn voluptuousness top-side-turvy
to find matter wherewith to divert his sensualities the Savage Creatures have
the advantage of him, and take in pleasure with more delight then he.

The use they make of it is not seconded with repentance or shame, and as their
desires are more regular then ours, they perform the acts of nature without
weakening themselves, and beget their like, scarce loosing any of their own
substance. But if man will place his glory in the perfections of his Body, and
will conclude that the benefit of his senses contributeth to his felicity, he
will be constrained to acknowledge that the irrational Creatures are therein
more excellent then he. The sight is more peircing in Eagles, the taste more
faithful in Monkies, the feeling more delicate in Spiders, and the smell more
certain in the Vulture.

To make Judgment then of the dignity of a Man, the way is not to enquire if he
ransack Sea and Land to adorn his Table, if his Meats be curioussy Cooked if he
be served in Gold and Crystal, Nemo istorum, quos divitiae honoresque in
altiore fastigio ponunt, magnus est: quare ergo magnus Videtur? cum basi illum
sua Metiris, non est magnus pumilio, licet in monte constiterit. Sen. Ep. 76.
and if all the Objects that knock at the doors of his senses afford him
delight. If he can sum up Princes for his kindred and Alliances, if he be
Commander of diverse Countries, if he be as potent at Court as powerful in his
own House, and if his name be no less famous abroad then among his Neighbors.
But whether he be Virtuous, whether the purity of his Conscience be the effect
of that chearfullness which appears in his countenance, and whether he has
not any affections but what are conformable to Nature and Reason. These two
guides are so faithful that he cannot stray by following them, and that Virtue
which they lead us to, is of her self so rich that the possession of her is
alone sufficient to vie advantages with the Nobility, Empires with Monarchs,
Wealth with avaricious persons, and pleasures with voluptuous Men.

For it is she that draws us toward our Maker, that restores us to our Ancient
Dignities, that leads to the Principle from whence we proceeded, and that after
we have learned to be his Imitators here upon Earth, will make us his Friends
in Heaven.

Discourse VII.
That the Moral Virtues of the Heathen are not Criminal.
NOthing is more Natural to man then the desire of knowledge, it is the first
Passion that Occupies his Soul; Fools are attainted with it as well as the
Wise, Omnis homo natura sua scire desiderat. Arist. 1. Metaph.
and he that should go about to cure all that are sick of this disease, would
reduce them to a worse condition then they that are Deaf and Blind. For it is
knowledge that teaches men Arts and Sciences, that entertaineth Learned men
with the Miracles of Nature, that disabuseth the ignorant of their Errors, and
stirs up Philosophers to the discovery of Truths which they knew not. But she
is so unsteady and her humor has so little Coherence with the objects she
hunts after, that she makes game of all she meets with and she is so violent in
her pursuits, that no man has yet been seen that was able to resist her fury.
It is a Worm that gnaweth in every ones Brain, an Itch that (without respect of
persons) tormenteth both the wicked and the virtuous, a sickness that unites
joy and sorrow in the person of them that have it, and he that knows her
Nature will confess, that nothing is more common in the World then this
distemper, we find nothing more unjust, nothing more insatiable: She undertakes
voiages and runs over all the Earth, to find out some Novelty, she takes upon
her to know the secrets of Nature, and to unfold by what artifice this common
Mother brings forth Gold in the Indies, by what Virtue she hardens water
into Crystal, and converts the dew of Heaven into Pearls, by what means the
Adamant attracts the Needle with one side, and expulseth with the other, and
that being bruised in pieces it preserves a Quadrangular figure, and has on
each side a different Virtue. She ascends the Heavens without the mediation of
evil Spirits, there she examines how the Sun forms the measure of time, how he
divides the Seasons* and proportioneth his Circular motions; She contriveth
perspectives to discern his Magnitude, she draws him to a descent that she may
look into the matter whereof he is made, and without fear of being singed with
his heat, or blinded with his brightness, she climbeth his Globe to judge of his
Nature. We find men now adays so curious that they reverse the method of time
to satisfy their desire of Novelties, they rise by night to lay wait for the
Moon in her course, her borrowed light is not without charms powerful enough to
attract their affections: and though the Poets make her the Mistress of rest,
she becomes often the tormentor of Astrologers and curious persons; they descry
Clouds in her, which (if you believe these ingenious Artists) are nothing less
then new Worlds, wherein they describe Cities, Provinces, and Governments, and
without giving themselves the trouble of telling us which of the Apostles
preached the Gospel there, whether the Roman Pontiff be head of the Church in
those Worlds, whether the Spirit and Water compose their Baptism as they do
ours, they multiply Temples and form a Communion of our Saints with those
planetary Inhabitants. This diligent curiosity admits of some pardon,
because she hurts only such as give way to her surprisals, they are tormented
by the same vanity by which they were tempted and it may be said that the error
and blindness that attend it, are the cure of an evil of which they were the
cause. But we find some men, who daring to act the petty Gods, Aurea prima sata
est aetas, quae vindice nullo, Sponte sua, sine lege, fidem rectumque colebat.
Ovid. 1. Metamoph.
are curious in nothing but the discovery of other Men's faults, all their study
tends to the sounding of their Neighbors Conscience, they descend to the depth
of their Souls to peep into their designs, and prouder then the evil Angels,
they pry into the Secrets of that Court whereof God has reserved the knowledge
to himself alone, although they are ignorant themselves yet will they judge of
other men's intentions, notwithstanding they are Slaves to their own Passions,
their Reasons must be admitted for the pure Doctrine of the Gospel, and setting
up a Heathenish Virtue of their own inventing, they unworthily confound it with
the crimes and sins of Christians.

If I am no Molinist, if I confess that I understand not that competent or
midway knowledge by him found out, if I boldly assert the uncontrolable Freedom
of the Creator in all his operations, if I own no other knowledge in him but
what had the ancient Divines for approbators, if I cannot endure that his power
should be rendered weak or imperfect, and that it should be made dependant on
second causes in its working, yet do I not therefore approve all the Doctrine of
his adversaries: they are too rigid in most of their opinions to invite me into
their Party; and how much soever they are flattered in the Justice of their
cause, let them protest that they undertake but to discover the confusion that
sin has wrought man into, and the necessity of the grace of Jesus Christ to
restore him: they seem to me too severe when they at once pass the sentence of
condemnation upon all good works of the Heathen, and allow none to be upright
or sincere but such as proceed from Faith.

For if Virtue be nothing more then a habitude acquired by multiplied Acts of
Reason, Non ex regula jus sumitur, sed ex jure quod est, regula fit. L. prima
F. de reg. jur.
and if Reason be a Law of God imprinted in our hearts, who shall believe that
Man becomes guilty in following this guide? that he merits chastisements by
living according to his Instructions? and that virtue, who is always innocent,
should be nothing different from Vice, for not being elevated by faith, and
justified by the grace of the Son of God? sin may have ravished our original
righteousness, but it has not been able to rob us of natural purity; if it
were potent enough to corrupt our nature, it was not sufficiently powerful to
destroy it; and if he that committed the first crime were absolutely able to
bring all his Children into that revolt, he may boast of not having made so
many guilty as unhappy successors. The sickness they have contracted, hinders
not the performance of healthy actions, we may exercise Virtue though we be
fallen from our excellency, we may love God, although we be born his Enemies,
and as Birds do walk though their wings be clipped, we may perform actions that
are good according to Nature, although not meritorious without grace. The
Example of the Patriarcks is of this a convincing proof, their life was
pleasing to God, although they were guilty of their Fathers crime, they became
his friends without any reconciliation, they eschewed evil before the
Sacraments had healed their wounds, and to speak after the language of the
great Doctor of the Gentiles, they observed his Commands before they knew any
of his Laws.

To speak properly all Christian instructions are but so many Commentaries upon
their Lives, which being Written for our Learning, we become Virtuous by
imitating their actions: if holy men have taught us piety, it has been by
consulting these primitive Doctors, and even in St. Austins opinion, that
Virtue which renders to every one his due is not so much the effect of opinion,
as the product of nature and conscience, we can tell what Virtue is before we
are taught it, and we have an abhorrance of Vice though we never saw its
deformities. When God Almighty commanded man the observance of his Laws, he
made use of terms so plainly simple that the Casuists are at their Arts end
about the explication thereof, it was enough to give us the knowledge of his
will without adding the Reason of it, he knew it to be a sufficient
justification of his decrees against the transgressor to say thou shall not
kill, and thou shall not commit Adultery, for the Law of Nature prohibiting
impudicity and homicide, he employs but few words in the publication of the two
most important of his Commandments. When Cain had persued the criminal tract of
his Fathers offense, when he had committed the first murder upon his Brothers
person and when passion had armed him with weapons to bereave him of Life, whom
by the Law of nature he was bound to love and cherish, the Scripture observes
that he was both witness and Judge against himself, that he condemned himself to
death before he was accused, his crime became both his punishment and
tormentor: and without having yet received any written Law forbidding
Parricide, he confesses that his sin was too great to be pardoned.

As the Law of Nature is not one thing in those first Men, and another in the
Heathen; As both one and the other are governed by the same principles, and as
Conscience is a faithful indifferent Judge in both, Peccatum est, dictum factum
vel concupitum contra legem aeternam. Aug. lib. 22. contra caust. ergo illam
servare non est peccatum.
they condemn sin and approve its contrary, they are dejected after a crime
committed, and rejoice in well doing, they know that the one estrangeth them
from God, and that by the other they draw nigh unto him, and without having any
other guide then Reason, they know by the End proposed to themselves the
innocence or guilt of their actions. If then all their Virtues were false, and
if all their good works were real sins, I do not see why they should not
indifferently afflict themselves in the Commission of Vice and the practicing
of Virtue, why they should not complain that being created free Agents, they
are constrained to commit offenses against their will, that they are made
guilty for observing the Law of Nature, and that they are condemned to
everlasting punishments for succouring their Neighbor, serving their Country,
for taking Arms in defense of a good cause, and putting their lives in hazard
to prevent the ravishing of Women, the robbing of the Fatherless, and the
oppression of the innocent.

This Doctrine seems so rational to them that maintain it, that they judge it
needless to borrow any arguments from Divines to make out the truth of it, and
if the Council of Trent had not censured the contrary opinion, it were more
then sufficient to show that Jesus Christ delivers it to his Apostles, and
gives it authority by his Gospel, that all Christians might be obliged to
embrace it. When he teaches his Disciples how to walk amongst the Pharisees,
he exhorts them to follow their instructions: though he condemn their practice,
he directs them to esteem their Doctrine, though he forbid: them the imitation
of their manners, and invites them to reverence their precepts, though he
charge their actions with a thousand reproaches. As we commend the Virtue of an
Enemy, and prefer a public good above a private hatred, he distinguishes
their good works from their sins, he approves their Virtues and detests their
Vices, and putting a difference between the works of God, and the practice of
vicious Men, he commends the words that proceed from their mouth, and blames
the hidden malice of their hearts, and the scandal which they caused unto
others.

This Truth is so constant, that to consult the ancient Fathers, is sufficient
to confirm her adherents in their belief; and though St. Austin seem to be of a
different sentiment, yet in many parts of his Writings he forbeareth not to
approve it. He ascribes the flourishing of Rome's common Wealth to the Justice
of her Laws; he asserts that the uprightness of her Subjects had subdued more
Enemies then the courage of her Commanders, that they possessed the most famous
Empire of the World as the reward of their Virtues; and that though God would
not make them the Companions of Angels in Heaven, because they were Infidels,
yet he gave them the command of the whole Earth, Romani Mundi imperium
acceperunt a Deo, in remunerationem virtutum suarum moralium. August. apud
Suarez. lib. 1. cap. 6.
because they were virtuous. When he writes to Marcellus, he declares himself
openly to be of their Party: he delights in representing to him the price of
civil Virtues, since they attract such glorious rewards: he assures us they are
not criminal, since they may be admitted to Honors in Heaven; and that being
Christianized by the powerful excellency of Faith, they translate their Lovers
to the franchisement of that City whose Sovereign is truth, whose Law is love,
and whose duration is Eternity. These two places discover his thoughts; and who
ever shall well examine his words will confess that he mixeth the Virtues of
the Romans with their sins, because they had no regard to the glory of God, and
that they proposed ends to themselves, which for the most part were faulty and
unlawful. I know that in his opinion, that Act cannot be holy which is not
accompanied with Charity; that all the good inclinations we have for
commendable things cannot make us truly Virtuous, if they be not informed by
grace, and that Nature and Reason must implore the Celestial succors, if they
will perform works worthy of eternal glory. Nevertheless I cannot conceive how
that all who walk not in these steps should become guilty, that a Man should be
accounted disobedient to his Maker without transgressing his Laws, and that
without being accused by his own Conscience, he should justly be condemned to
those Torments that are only the portion of Sinners and wicked men.

If all these Reasons be not prevalent enough to convince a Jansenist he will
at least hereby be obliged to acknowledge that it is not so much an Error as an
Incivility, not to be of his opinion, and that that which has been examined by
the most skilful Divines, approved by the most famous Academia's of Europe, and
authorized by a Council, may be written without danger, and maintained without
fear of being charged as factious.

THE SECOND TREATISE OF The Nature of Passions in general;
Discourse I.
What the Nature of Passions is, and in what Faculty of the Soul they Reside.
THat self Love which caused so strange a disorder among the Angels in Heaven,
which separated the first Man from his Creator in the Terrestrial Paradise, and
which taught his descendants to aspire to the Sovereignty of their fellow
Creatures in other parts of the World, appeared in nothing more artificial then
in the dividing of Philosophers, in distinguishing their opinions and wills,
and that after they had all retained one and the same inclination; for truth
caused them to betake themselves to diverse ways to find her out. If truth be a
common Mistress if she yield to all that court her, and if as the Sun, she
enlighten all that come into the World, yet self love cannot endure that all
men should seek her by one and the same method, it debaucheth the minds of its
Suitors, and begets quarrels amongst them about her nature, and though it be
not less blind then unjust in its conclusions it permits us not to follow any
other advices for the discovery of truth, then our own.

Aristotle had never abandoned his Masters party, if he had not been
preoccupied by this Passion; and all those Philosophers which at this day toil
to prove his Doctrine, would be silent, or would speak but one and the same
Language, if this monster (self love) had not invented specious terms to
explain his meaning and establish his fond imaginations.

All those Sects that are daily brooded, are but sprouts of that self
complaisance, and the Gospel which contains so many Mysteries under the plain
simplicity of words, would at this day have none but Poets for Interpreters, if
pride had not corrupted some Malcontents, and put the Pen into the hand of
some (I know not what to call them) ignorant men, to mangle and disguise the
sense thereof. We delight so much in self opinion that no man's judgment is
valuable but ours, and truth it self is unpleasant to us even in the mouth of
our friends, if it be not clothed after our fashion, and obstinated by Passion
that blinds us, we admire only our own conceits, and will esteem no opinions
but our own. Few or none are willing to be accounted, ignorant every one
aspires to the contrary quality, we strive rather to be knowing then Virtuous;
and Socrates that spent his life in observing the different inclinations of Men
had some Reason to say, that if in a multitude we should only call for the
Artists by the Calling they professed, none would appear but those of that
Profession, but that if the judicious and prudent should be summoned to come
forth, there would be none of the Assembly but would hold up his head. Self
conceit is so natural to man, that it may be said to be inseparable.

This quality is the principle of all his actions; he always contemplates
himself with great delight, and if interest oblige him sometimes to reflect on
the virtue of his Neighbor with a disguised Admiration, we are assured that he
considers his own parts with perfect satisfaction. This truth appears
evidently in the present Subject every one defines the faculties of the Soul
according to his fancy. All those different Idea's thereof formed in the
Writings of modern Authors, are no less the proofs of the diversity of their
designs, then of their opinions; and that matter which has been most examined
in the Schools is at this day the most intricate and unknown. Some have thought
that Passion was not so much the Act of the Soul as of the sensitive appetite,
that she was partaker with the cause from whence she proceeded, Delectatio non
est in potestate delectantis, Nisi quia Actus est in potestate agentis. Scotus.
1. did. 1. q. 3.
that she stirred it not up, and that she was not at man's command but so far as
the Acts that occasioned it depended upon his will. To confirm this their
opinion, they confounded voluptuousness with the operations of the Angelical
matter; they say, that the one works the other to perfection; that pleasure was
always the companion of her Labors; and that Passions being ever busied in the
disturbance of her rest, could not properly be comprised under the notion of
action.

Others, whom I esteem not more plausible, but because they teach a Doctrine
more common, describe Passion by the effects she produces: They attribute the
alterations of countenance in them that are under her subjection, to her
violent proceedings; they will have it that the Soul is not less agitated when
she fears and is afflicted, then when she loves and hops, and that men make
not a different construction of one and the same thing, and one man of another
but because they are animated by different affections. In fine, they conclude
Passion to be nothing else but an emotion of the sensitive appetite, excited by
the apprehension of good or evil which chiefly busieth it self in disturbing
the Body contrary to the Laws of nature.

If this definition be common, if all Philosophers allow it, and if all
Aristotle's disciples engage to defend the principles thereof, yet methinketh it
may be rejected without offense to its authority, and it ought not to be
thought strange, that being of the Roman Philosophers judgment, I abandon the
Grecians Party, to maintain the opinion of the Stoics. For as I hold with
them, that Passions are not natural to man, that sense and opinion are the
causes thereof, and that their abode is rather in the will then in the
imagination, I must of necessity forsake his Doctrine and (against my humor
betray my own sentiments) to continue faithful to the most puissant Enemy of
that only Philosopher that in other things I honor.

Passion then in Stoic terms, is nothing else but a violent motion of the Soul
against Reason, caused by the apprehension of good or evil contrary to the
inclination of nature. I say that it is a motion that violently assaults our
Reason; for although Passion perform its last act in the will, although it have
its conception in the reasonable faculty, and may in some sort be called by her
Mothers name, yet for that the principle is corrupted by opinion, and this
Sovereign seduced by her unfaithful senses, the School of the Stoics have
commanded her to forgo that quality, and to bear the name of natures Enemy, and
Reasons Bastard. She works a change which is against natures Laws: for as this
common Mother is constant in all her actions, her productions regular, and
brings forth nothing but what is as perfect as useful to her Children, so she
abhors all debaucheries, she rejects all those motions that War against her
inclinations, and she cannot endure to have succors assigned her that deprave
her workmanship, and conspire her disorder or her ruin.

As this definition is different from that of other Philosophers, and as the
fidelity that I have vowed to the Stoics obliges me to abandon their
opinions, it must not be wondered if I consent not to them in the cause from
whence Passions do arise, and if, after I have discovered them to be of no use
to virtue, I consider them as the depravations of the mind and the will. For if
the residence of Passions as most modern Philosophers will have it, be in the
meaner part of the Soul, and that the imagination only informed by the species
she draws from the senses, stirs up the sensitive appetite; I do not see how a
man could afflict himself for the loss of his honors, and inrage himself for
the ruin of a benefit which the senses perceive not; and that before Passion
can make a man take resolutions of vengeance his mind must represent the matter
to him as infamous, and the will abhor it as injurious to his person. There is
such a subordination in the faculties of the Soul, that the inferiors seldom or
never stir but according to the motion of the superiors: and as Soldiers obey
their Commanders, or as the higher Sphere is followed by all them that are
Subalterne; so Reason and the will engage the sensitive appetite to side with
them, and cause it to embrace all as good, which they approve, and to reject
all as evil which they condemn.

So then we must conclude with Seneca that Passions reside in the will, it is
there that all the operations of the Soul are perfected; Affectiones nulla
naturae vi commoventur, omniaque ea sunt opiniones ac Judicia levitatis. Cic.
3. defin.
and the same powers which form our sins and crimes, comprehend our affections
and desires. For by the principles of this Learned Philosopher, our Passions
are not bare motions that arise from the appearance of good or evil which
receive their succors from the imagination, and finally stop in the inferior
part of the Soul; But productions of the mind, sentiments of the rational
faculty, and, to use the Stoic Language, opinions that deprave the mind and
corrupt the will, persuading them to be approvers of their advices, and to
follow their irregular motions. Also St. Austin, who I look upon in this matter
as Senecas warrant, intermixeth our Passions with our rational appetite, Omnes
affectus nihil aliud quam Voluntates sunt. Nam quid est cupiditas and laetitia,
nisi voluntas in eorum consentionem, quae volumus? and quid est metus and
tristitia, nisi voluntas in dissensionem ab his, qua nolumus. Aug. 14. de
Civit. Dei, cap. 5.
he gives but one name to the cause and to the effects, and well knowing that
we have no Passion but what is in the will, he assures us that the most
dangerous motions of the Soul, are but so many affections which draw their good
or their evil from the objects to which they have respect, our desire,
according to the words of this great Doctor, is nothing but a will to an absent
good which we pursue with much earnestness, our hope is but a will to a good
that flatters us and which we impatiently expect, and fear and sadness are but
wills, of which the one opposes the evil that threatens us, and the other the
mischief which we already feel, contrary to our good liking.

So that the matter must get into the will before a man can be said to be in
Passion; and pleasure could never seize our wishes if the will were not
consenting; neither would our desires make such extravagant fallies out of the
Fort, if the will did not bear them company in the pursuit of the benefits we
hunt after. Upon the authority of this great man, I think it can be no Error to
declare for the Stoic Party; and their Enemies are obliged to allow their
sentiments unless they will contradict the opinion of the most solid and most
enlightened of the Fathers.

Discourse II.
Of the Number of Passions according to the Stoics.
LEt Monarchs be absolute in their Territories, let their orders in Council
pass for Laws; and let the publication of their edicts be sufficient to require
obedience in the Subjects, let flattery persuade them that they are the Gods of
the World, that they hold their power from no Earthly Sovereign; and that the
Dominion they exercise over the People is nothing less then the mark of their
Independance; yet those that understand the nature of Government consider them
rather as Slaves then Freemen, they call them the Tutors, not Masters of their
Subjects, and demonstrate, that as private Interest rules the Fathers of
Families, that which we call public, commands Kings and Potentates. For
indeed, be it that they treat with their Neighbors, be it that they assist
their Allies, be it that they govern peacably their Conquests, be it that they
defend them that implore their Protection, and take up Arms to relieve the
oppressed from Tyranny, and the innocent from distress, self interest is the
end of their labors as well as the aim of their designs, and when they prefer
the good of their Subjects or the preservation of their Neighbors before their
own private contentment, it may be said that the same is but a tendency to the
increase of their Empire, or at least to the securing of their own Kingdoms.

That which is practiced at Court is but the constant exercise of the Schools;
and Cicero's testimony of Philosophical affairs is significant, when he
declares that to govern well, Kings should become Philosophers or Philosophers
Kings. For if these be truth's combatants, if they lay new Foundations, if they
form new arguments wherewith to establish the most probable methods, if they
return to the principles which they had once forsaken, and if by a liberty
permitted in the Schools, they invent new explications to disguise the sense of
their adversaries meaning; they are rather governed by interest then the
incitements of Justice, they seek not so much to instruct the World as to be
admired of men, they labor more to glorify their own fame, then to edify
their Disciples. When they declaim against the Reasons that support the Doctrine
of their Predecessors, it is that they hope for reputation from the novelty of
their opinions, or heighten their own credit by vanquishing the sentiments of
their Teachers and Antagonists.

This truth appears evident in the Subject of Passions, and if we examine well
the design of those that describe them, it must be owned that they are divided
among themselves touching their number: those that find it their advantage to
engage with Aristotle, and rather to lean upon his authority, then upon the
strength of his arguments endeavor to persuade us that they are in number
eleven, that nothing is to be added to or diminished from that division, and
that they are not to be multiplied without mixture of superior Species, nor
retrencht without wrong to their diversity. To ground their opinion, they
separate the Soul into two faculties, whereof one draws her name from Desire,
and the other from Anger. In the first they place those Passions that are least
violent, and in the other them that are never at rest. For they will have it
that the six contained in the Concupiscible appetite are divided, that some are
but little employed and others active, that some are sordid, and others
generous, that some wander abroad, and the other satisfied with their domestic
Entertainments.

In fine they tell you that Love follows the inclination of the Body which
tends to his center, that desire is the moveing Orb, and that Joy represents
him a place of content and rest, that Hatred resembles that aversion which he
discovers, when he is placed in an uneasy condition; that Flight imitates those
earnest endeavors used to get out of trouble and danger, and that Sadness
respects the dislike that appears upon a violent detention therein. But they
inform us that the five Passions that are placed in the Irascible powers, are
all impetuous, resembling the Heavens, ever in motion, that they create combats
and scorn to retreat, and that as they look upon good and evil as difficult,
they can delight in nothing but agitation, nor love any thing less then rest.
The truth is Despair is wretched, Anger is out rageous, Hope is negligent of
the things she possesses in aspireing to what she expects, Fear runs to meet
the evil, afflicts it self before it come, and Audacity finds its divertisement
in peril and dangers.

They divide all these different qualities, and establish their number
according to the diversity of their objects. For say they when the Soul moves
she has generally good or evil for her object, and that begets Love or Hatred:
she either considers them particularly as absent, and that is Desire or
present, and that is Joy or pleasure. When the evil she hates, makes her already
feel his incommodities, they commonly call it Dolor, or else vexation: and when
he is absent and though remote enough yet producing horror, they change his name
into that of Flight. Then if good be her object and she find it uneasy to
acquire, and that maugre all the difficulties that surround it, she promise her
self the possession, they name it Hope, when she sincks under the evils that
attack her, they give it a contrary title, and call it despair. When the
mischief she judges hard to repulse, torments her, and when she bustles to
overcome it, they call it Anger; and when it barely threatens and the Soul
employs her dexterity to prevent or give it Battle, it assumes the name of Fear
or Audacity.

Some others who are indebted to vain glory for their Eloquence, or to the
affection they bear St. Austin for straying from the common opinion of
Philosophers acknowledge but one Passion, they assure us that Love only is the
disturber of our quiet, and that our pleasures our pains, our fears and
wishes, our hopes and despaires, are but so many different shapes which love
assumes when he feels an evil or swims in content; when he pursues what
delights him, or fears what is contrary to him, and when he promises himself
some felicity, or loses the fancy of obtaining it. Although I have a
venerable value for the favorers of this opinion, and that the Reasons
wherewith they lay their foundation be sufficiently solid to command my esteem,
yet it seems to me as if they had not thoroughly examined the nature of Love,
when they make him the Author of Despair and Hatred, when they imagine that the
most generous of our Passions should become the Fountain of the most timorous
and violent: and that how ever they cannot make Flight and anger bear the name
of Love, without confounding the cause with its effects. For as Love is a
disposition of the Soul, resideing in the will, and as Sorrow and Fear, Desire
and Hope are Passions of the inferior part of the Soul, that immediately or
mediately are loves attendants; I think according to the rigor of Reasoning we
ought not to give them the same name, and that it is to injure the most noble
of our Passions, to bestow his characters upon those wild and savage effects
that have no coherence with his nature.

But without staying to contend this opinion, and to shun the uncertainties
that arise from Peripatetick divisions and to avoid the encumbrances that
enclose the unity of other modern instructors, I conclude with St. Hierom, that
there are but four principal Passions which comprehend all the rest, of which
some have respect unto good and evil as present, to wit Pleasure and Grief, and
the two other as absent, namely Fear and Desire. This distinction is not hard
for them to prove who place aversion and despair under fears, and who for
avoiding multiplication in unnecessary matters, reduce Hope Audacity and Anger
under Desire.

All the difficulty that can arise from this division, is that it seems lame,
that it comprehends not all the motions of the Soul; and that by the
distribution thereof made by this Doctrine, the two fountains Love and Hatred,
have no share in those great agitations. This objection that in Aristotle's
judgment has so much seeming weight, concludes nothing in the opinion of
Seneca, and it may suffice them that hold too violently with Aristotle, to know
that Love and Hatred are not so much Passions of our Soul, as natural
inclinations and aversions which we have for good and evil in General. These
sentiments are so powerfully ingrafted in our Soul; that it is not possible to
divorce them; we are carried to what is good by motion of nature alone, and we
abhor what is evil, without being thrust from it otherwise then by the
inclination we naturally have to preserve our selves. The will it self, as much
a Sovereign as she is in her operations, Natura intellectualis, scilicet
Voluntas, habet naturalem inclinationem ad suam perfectionem: Nec est magis in
Voluntate, quam in lapide. Scotus 4. did. 49.
works according to nature when she tends to her own perfection; she cease to
be indifferent when she regards her chiefest good, and in the opinion of the
witty Doctor when she respects her felicity, she is no more at liberty then a
heavy Body that runs to its Center, or then Beasts that hasten to the springs
of Water when they are thirsty. It is true that she indeed is absolute in her
Dominion, she can suspend her motion when the imagination offers her a pleasing
object, and she can shun or embrace a thing for which the mind has conceived
an aversion.

But then this good which she seeks must be peculiar, and rather her
divertisement then her felicity: for if her glory consist in it, she steers to
that by a natural motion, she approves it without choice, and she loves it
without having it in her power to make Election. Thus may we exercise Reason
upon the Subjects of Love and Hatred, and assert that they are not so much
Passions of the Soul as impulsions of nature, which engage us to pursue that
which is good, and fly from its contrary.

Discourse III.
That Passions are not Natural to Man.
PLato, who seeks Truth among poetical Fables, and draws the strongest of his
Arguments from the most wild Fancies of the Ancients, does, in my opinion, at
no time more dexterously oppose the Impiety or Sordidness of that age, than
when he renders Virtue a Stranger to Mankind, engaging Socrates to dispute her
Advantages with his Jupiter, and proves that she is not so much the Portion of
Heaven or of Nature, as the Daughter of the Mind and the Will. His Discourse is
shaped according to the ordinary proceedings of the World, and the same Maxims
that preserve Kingdoms and States, justify his Reasons, and confirm his
Doctrine: For if Virtue, says he, be natural, and the Country where we are
born, or the Climate under which we live, be sufficient to make us virtuous,
Rewards in Commonwealths are idle things, the Commendations given to them that
deserve them are unjust, and all the Laurels and Crowns wherewith the Heads of
Conquerours and Kings are adorned, will not be so much the Testimonials of
their Justice or Valor, as the Marks of their Nature and good Fortune. From
whence he concludes, that Virtues are voluntary, that they owe their Birth to
Practice, and that Perseverance which endures Grief, and laughs at Fortune, is
the chief Principle.

Though Passions be opposed to Virtues, and their humor rather contrary than
different, though some are insolent, and others modest, some irregular, and
others innocent, some contend to subject the Soul to the Body, and others to
make the Body servant to the Mind; yet they proceed from one and the same
Spring. Virtues and Passions have one common Mother, and though they have
different Objects when they are agitated, their birth is nevertheless from one
and the same Faculty of the Soul: For to join the strengh of Reason to the
Authority of this great Philosopher, and not to undervalue the ingenuity of his
Logic for proof of a moral Conclusion, if Passions were born with us, and if
Nature taught us to desire and fear, to grieve and to rejoice, we must of
necessity infer, that all these motions are good, that we may follow them
wheresoever they lead us, and that we cannot err in treading the steps of a
Guide, Si affectus a Natura essent, boni essent. Lips. 3. Manud. ad Stoic.
Philos.
who instructs us no less in particular than in our general Actions. Now the
Peripateticks confess that they are neither good nor bad, that they are capable
of good or evil, and that they may serve as well to Vice as Virtue: it must be
then concluded that they are not ingrafted upon our Soul, since they violently
oppose the Works of Nature, since they make war upon her Inclinations, and
seldom form any enterprise but to corrupt or destroy her.

Nature is so regular in all her Productions, that she brings forth nothing
superfluous, she abhors Monsters no less than Excesses, Nihil est natural,
quod nimium esse possit. Cic. 4. Tusc.
and when her Prodigies come to light, which cause so much astonishment in the
minds of men, it may be said that she is rather passive than active; indeed
where shall we find any thing of excess in the Creation? this sage Mother is
determined in her Operations, she produces nothing but by limitations as just
as necessary, and if we often find inventions, or take up customs to exceed, it
is when we become tyrannical or rebellious. But Passions delight in excess, the
bounds prescribed us by Reason irritate them; foreign aids must be called in to
stay their disorders, and if Virtue be not employed to vanquish or tame them,
we should see nothing in the world more monstrous and frightful than a man
possessed by those evil spirits.

As the Juris periti account that Law unjust which is not common, Lex communis
esse debet, ut authoritatem habeat. Bald. F. de Leg.
that a Prince would offend against Equity if he made not his Edicts universal,
and that those commands are to be had in jealousy wherein the Legislator does
not indifferently tie all his subjects. Philosophers hold that Nature ought to
be common, that she ought to be equally distributed to all men, and that as the
reasonable Soul is entire in all the Body, and undivided in each part, she
ought also to communicate her perfections and infirmities to all the Nations
upon Earth: mean while we find some persons subject to Passions which others
know nothing of, and of so many men as are contained in a Province or State,
few shall we see that are agitated by one and the same motions. Ambition which
tyrannizeth over Conquerours is not the Plague of all mankind; if some are
found to aspire to Grandeurs, we see others that despise them; if some hunt
after Honors, others have them in derision; and if some will reign over their
fellow creatures, others find their content in obedience: the Hunger of Wealth
is not the Passion of a whole City; some Citizens fill their Coffers, but there
are others that draw vanity from Expense: Gain renders not every man
avaritious, and if some amongst them build all their hopes upon their
Treasures, we find others of them that take pride in their disdain. Envy is not
so much a contagion as a peculiar evil; if some persons have been observed to
make war upon Virtue, we have seen whole Nations that have built her Temples,
and Orators that have presented her with Elogies. As powerful as Love is, he
has not yet been able to subdue an entire Kingdom, the most perfect Beauties
have gained but few Lovers, and those Faces that have thrown so many flames
into the hearts of Generals of Armies, were not able to touch the affections of
their Soldiers. Now if all these perturbations of the Soul were natural, they
would be found equally in all men; the Objects and the Sense would not make a
different impression upon their imagination, as these two causes are
necessarily active, they would every where propuce the same effects.

It Is then an error, says Seneca, to imagine that Passions are born with us,
and that these Children of opinion proceed from the marriage of the Soul with
the Body. Nature has not allied us to Vice, she may boast of having brought us
forth virtuous, though we were conceived in sin, the greatest part of our
disorders ow birth to our Education; and when Passions seduce our Judgments or
deprave our Will, it must be said that they follow not so much her inclinations
as our evil manners. Omnes nostris vitiis favemus; and, quod propria facimus
voluntate, ad Naturae necessitatem referimus. Hieron.
We impute them to Nature because we despair of Cure, and fancy them to be
necessary in as much as they favor our crimes, excuse our errors, and
authorize our injustice.

To support all these truths it is needless to make Pillars of Seneca's
Inductions, or to draw Maxims from Aristotle's Reasons which confirm them, it is
sufficient only to consider man in himself, to judge that Passions are
foreigners, and to teach us from the generosity of his Nature how great an
enemy he is to them. For what is there of a more quiet Nature than Man, and
what more furious than Love? This famous Tyrant takes force from all things
that oppose his designs, difficulties encourage him, An ira secundum Naturam
sit, manifestum erit, si hominem inspexerimus: quo quid est mitius, dum in
recto animi habitu est? quid ira crudelius, etc. Sen. 10. de ira cap. 5.
impossibilities increase his impatience, that modesty which preserves the
Chastitity of Women redoubles his strength, and that Council or Reason which
ought to regulate or allay his fury, renders him obstinate in his pursuit. Man
is a lover of Rest, and Audacity finds its Contentment in turbulence; the one
submits to the conduct of Prudence, and the other is governed by Temerity, the
one seeks to avoid Enmity, and the other takes pride in creating of
Adversaries, and the one delights in things facile to acquire, and the other
engages in nothing but matters difficult or impossible to compass. Nothing
upon earth is more affable than Man, and nothing do we observe more savage than
Anger; it is a fury that breaths nothing but vengeance, a plague that throws
division among friends, and a monster, who more cruel than the Tiger and
Panther turns his weapons upon himself, when he cannot force satisfaction for
injuries done him. Compassion, which seems so suitable to man's disposition, is
not less troublesome to his rest than Anger, she afflicts him with evils that
touch him not, she makes the Chastisements of the vicious his punishment; she
looks upon the Suffering, and considers not the Crime, and more unjust than
hatred, she would bribe Justice (if possible) to deliver the guilty person and
the murderer from his Sword. In fine, Passions are man's domestic enemies, and
unfaithful soldiers, who, undertaking to defend him and keep him in action,
trouble his Government, abolish his Empire, corrupt his Reason, disorder his
Will, and throw confusion into all the powers of his Soul.

It Is true, we meet with some men in the world whom Nature seems to have
produced to give the lie to this opinion, and whose inclinations constrain us
to believe that Passions are grafted in the Soul; for we see some so effeminate
that a word puts them into a rage, a sincere reprehension irritates them, and
in what method soever you deal with them their anger or indignation is not to
be avoided. Some from their youth are sordid, they affect Wealth almost before
they know what it is, and it would be more easy to change the face of a Negro
into the color of his Teeth, than to pull out of their hearts the desire of
heaping up Riches. Others are naturally bashful, as often as they speak in
public they blush, and what art soever is used to make them confident in
company they cannot hinder shamefacedness from altering their Countenance. It
is not hard to answer these Objections, and whoever is at the trouble to
examine the Nature of Passions, will be constrained to acknowledge that nothing
is proved though much be said. For, to proceed in order, Affectus non est
oblatas rerum species movere, sed se illis Idem 2. de ira cap. 3.
Anger is not that first motion that arises at the appearance of an evil, and
which owes its original rather to the Infirmity of the Body than to the
Strength of the Mind, but that fury of the Soul which by Aristotle is styled
rational, that motion which hurries us to take vengeance, and invites us to
contrive the ruin of him that has offended us. All those other emotions that
prevent the Judgment cannot properly be called Passions, and when they trouble
or seize the Soul, it may be said that she resents but produces them not, and
that she rather suffers than operates. Generals of Armies have been seen to
swoon at the approach of Battle, Commanders to grow pale at the sight of an
Enemy, Soldiers to tremble in putting on their Armor or their Headpiece, and
all that Valor wherewith they were animated could not hinder them from
beginning their Victories with quaking, and their Triumphs with signs that
brought their Courage into question. The most eloquent of Orators found himself
often taken with these surprises, and he was astonished that his Discourses
should chase Fear from the minds of his Auditors, and that his Reason should
not be strong enough to drive apprehension from the possession of his heart, to
hinder Fear from bereaving him of his Strength, to prevent his hairs from
standing on end, and to oppose his tongues cleaving to the roof of his mouth
when he was to speak. But all these sudden changes are but corporal, and
surprises which borrow their aids from the temper and constitution of the body.
If Riches make some men covetous, it is after the Judgment is seduced: Nature
has produced nothing in the whole universe that is able to stir their desires,
she hides the Gold in the entrals of the Earth, she leaves us nothing but the
sight of the Heaven and the Stars, and knowing that this mettle might corrupt
them if she discovered it in its splendour, she caused it to grow among the
Sands and the Dirt, to the end they might despise it.

True it is that Bashfulness seems more natural to man than Avarice and
Anger, and that he is become impudent and insolent that alters not his
countenance after the commission of a fault or an incivility: But this timorous
Passion is only the daughter of the Body, the Mind has no share in her
Production, and if the novelty of a thing occasion it, the cause thereof is the
leaping of the blood about the Heart: hence old men rarely blush, the furrows
in their front seldom receive a foreign color, and when heat declines their
heart, it cease to send into the Face that innocent Vermilion that makes the
Countenance of Children so amiable. As this motion is a pure effect of the
Bodies temperature, our Players could never yet get her to appear upon the
Stage, and the most ingenious of them despair at this day of adorning the
Countenance of their Actors with this curious color. They represent us Sadness
with all her shagrine humors, and as silent as she is, they find inventions to
counterfeit her follies. They show us Fear upon a pale Face, and imitate all
her actions so well, that they seem to tremble, grow wan and fall into a swoon.
Love is the ordinary subject wherewith they entertain their Spectators, and the
smallest Apes-face of the Society can act the Gallant, the Suitor and the mad
Lover; but none of them have yet been seen that could act the Shame-faced
person, and if some few have learned to stoop the Head, abase the Voice, and to
look downwards; we hardly observe any that have been able to call for Blushes
to testify that the Applauses given to them, or the Reproaches thrown at them,
were unpleasing. But as Passions depend on us, it must not be wondered, if they
be counterfeited with so much ease, if they can become sad and angry, audacious
and desperate, when they please; and that consulting the mind and opinion of
which they are formed, they represent all those outward signs which Passions
discover upon the Bodies of such as are possessed by them.

Discourse IV.
That the Senses and opinion are the two Principles of Passions.
AMong all the advantages which man disputes with other Creatures, and which
beget him so much reverence in them of his own Species, Philosophy owneth none
more glorious then that of knowledge, and although she be interressed when she
pleads her cause, she believes not that the praises given her are any thing but
due debt, she styles her the only felicity of them that possess her; she makes
her the image of the Diety, maintains that it is she that lifts man into
Heaven to contemplate there the perfections of her Author: and though she know
that her Body have need of health to preserve her, she is assured that her Soul
wants nothing but knowledge to participate of his Eternity. By these men's
discourse this quality is as immense as absolute present every where, including
all differences of time, coexistant with all Ages; and having regard to the
original, nature and end of every being, she finds nothing in the Univers that
can confine her but Eternity, and he only that is infinite. Man is a lover only
of what is good, and as free an Agent as he is, he suffers evil with violence,
the senses that seduce his imagination reverence his will, they cease to
provoke him when the understanding has showed him that the thing she seeks is
not suitable to him; and if sometimes she discover a displeasure, it is because
she has suffered her self to be deceived by the senses, or disordered by false
opinions.

But nothing escapes man's Curiosity, he will not be a stranger to any thing in
nature, the most hidden things stir him to make diligent search after them, and
if he find that the avoiding of evil is the beginning of his felicity,
Philosophy persuades him that knowledge is a part of his chiefest happiness. By
knowledge indeed he imitateth the immensity of the Creator, by his mind he is
present in all places of the World, he flies into Heaven, and descends into the
depths of the Earth, without leaving his Closet, and drawing an universal
notion from all particular things he comprehends all Creatures, and becomes a
true Microcosme by the multitude of his Idaea's. To conclude, in knowledge
consists all his glory, she is the most useful of his perfections, and if
Physicians learn of her to cure diseases, Statesmen to govern, and Judges to
distinguish the innocent from the guilty, wisemen confess that to her they owe
all their prudence, Soldiers their Conduct, Monarchs their Justice, and
Philosophers the Conquest of their Passions.

Happy should we be if we were instructed by no other guide then this, and more
fortunate then Conquerors, we should not need to give Battle to gain the
victory of our Passions. All their disorderly motions would be submissive to
us, we should prevent their fury by the knowledge of the benefits they hunt
after, and the evils they abhor: and having no traffic with the People for
their opinion in this matter, they would obey Reasons orders. But the greatest
of our misfortunes is that we go to the ignorant for Counsel, we rely upon
unfaithful sentinels, and against our own Judgments, give credit to the senses
who cheat and abuse us. For generally their reports are false, and though they
be obtained by knowledge, it is very rare if they do not engage us in Error.
They are blind guids that carry us a stray from truth, under color of leading
us to her, windows by which falsehood gets into our understanding, and
interressed Counselors who always plead the cause of the objects which please
them most. As the Soul becomes often a Slave to the flesh, takes the noise of
sounds for realties, and judges by their reports of things without her, it must
not be wondered if she be cheated in her distinctions, if she make blind and
precipitate Judgments, and if forgetting her own Grandeur, she fight under the
Banner of her Slave. For seeing these treacherous Ministers of her Government
deal falsely with her, plead always in favor of the Body, and slighting her
Counsels, follow the inclinations of their fleshly Companion, she sides with
them, she lets her self loose at their instigations, and solicited by their
importunities who present her the objects, she pronounces her fiat to all that
they Judge useful and pleasant.

From this unjust disorder arise our Passions, and of so many motions as
interrupt the quiet of our Souls, we find not any, that takes not his original
from some one of our senses, Love is the Son of the sight, the Eye conceives
him before the Heart, and though he terminate his Conquest by the will, yet he
always gives Battle by the look, The Poets were assuredly mistaken when they
represented him as blind; and they rather had regard to the effects then to the
original, when they cover his Eyes with a Muffler. For those lights which
nature has given us for our conduct, are the common Messengers of this furious
Passion, that which ought to discover the defects of a face hides its
imperfections: and by an unpardonable ingratitude the most splendid members of
the Body darken the Soul, from whom they receive their light. Desire ever
begins by the Eyes or the Ears, wealth corrupts not our minds but after
infection of the senses, and man would seldom form any wishes, if he were born
deaf and blind. Hope owes his original to them, the advantages wherewith he is
flattered are not so much principles as accidents, and the imagination could
never dazzle our understanding with their splendour without the intermediation of
those Organs. These are they who conceive Envy, who make him consider the goods
of his Neighbor with Grief, who cause his Joy to arise from other men's
misfortunes, and make them confess that their felicity is able to create their
torment. In fine, these faithless Ministers are the Fountains of all our
disquiet, and Love which is the most common of our Passions would want Slaves,
Hope would be without Lovers; and Envy without Martyrs, if these blind guids
did not prevent our imagination, seduce our Judgment, and deprave our will.

If sense begin our Passions, opinion gives them perfection, and if those give
us the objects disguisedly, these always deceive us in their choice. For
opinion being but the Picture of Reason, and a common noise that gathers
Authority from the increase of those that approve it, she deceives us by
semblance of Judgment, and without Examination of her Reasons she would have us
to esteem all for just that is approved by many. As she is concerned for
Privileges of the Body, she is always of that party, and as she is of an
Earthly Original all her motions and inclinations partake thereof. We are not
then to think it strange if they which follow such a guide never arrive at
generous things, if they stray from the truth in the greater part of their
sentiments and if discerning things no otherwise then through that false Glass;
they embrace an Error for its contrary. For as the Multitude are not so happy
in their opinions as to know how to judge favorably of Virtue or Reason; Non
tam been cum rebus humanis agitur, ut meliora pluribus placeant: argumentum
pessimi turba est. Senec. de. vit. beat. cap. 20.
and although all the men of whom they are composed have the same thoughts, it
hinders them not from falling into extravagance and Error, the more to be
lamented for being common. They affect only such things as are vain or useless,
they reject good and embrace evil, they applaud what they ought to shun, and
condemn what they ought to love.

Also with much Reason in my opinion does Seneca compare the case of the vulgar
to the condition of Fools, or Madmen, saying, that the greatest part of
mankind were not less extravagant then they which have lost their senses, and
that there was but this difference between the Phrenetick and the Vulgar, Inter
insaniam publicam, and hanc quae medicis traditur, nihil interest, nisi quod
haec morbo laborat, illa opinionibus falsis. Sen. Ep. 94.
they were actuated by folly or madness, and these by false opinions, that the
disease of the one was a corporal effect, and the distemper of the other an
Infirmity of the mind, that the one arose from the abundance of Blood or Gall,
and the other from the weakness of Judgment, and that the one came from a
disordered temperature, and the other from an ill governed Reason.

Indeed, What is there more extravagant then a man who rejects the truth to
embrace the noise of a biassed and interressed multitude? Who departs from his
own Reason to be guided by their Example? And who despises all the Counsels of
Reason to take the advice of one that is blind and ignorant? For from this
corruption proceeds all our faults: hence we take the objects to be other then
they are, hence we are deceived in our choice, and abused by the value, or
disesteem that others have of it, we call for our Passions to effect or avoid
it. To shun then all these disorders, and to hinder these turbulent motions
from acting without our leave, the mind must reign as Sovereign, he must
prevent the seditions that may* arise in the sensitive appetite, he must
command the imagination to act nothing in his Government without his Warrant,
and that she take care that false opinions seduce not his Reason, or abuse his
Authority.

In fine the mind must imitate those oppressed People who deliver themselves
from Tyranny by the destruction of the Authors, he must prevent the Birth of
Passions by the overthrow of false opinions, which are the causes and Originals
thereof.

Discourse V.
That Passions cannot be of use to Virtue.
ALthough superstition be an Enemy to Religion as well as to Impiety, though
the one contemn God, and the other own him not aright, and though one make
vanity of his Error, and the other be cheated in his Election, yet have there
been Orators that have given her Commendations, some Philosophers have pleaded
her cause, and some Kings who (by a Policy altogether extraordinary) have
received her into their Government. Numa omnium primum (rem, ad Multitudinem
imperitam, and illis temporibus rudem, efficacissimam) Deorum metum injecit.
Live. lib. 10.
Titus Livius labored to persuade Posterity that she was of use in a
Commonwealth, that she was serviceable to Monarchs in the conduct of their
Subjects, and that to keep under a rebellious or insolent People, it was often
sufficient to get them inspired with the fear of the Gods, and the
apprehensions of Chastisements. That she it was that procured them faithful
Ministers, that kept the Nobility in awe, that allayed the wild humors of the
Body politic, that brought the factious to Reason, and caused their persons
throughout their Dominions to be reverenced as the Gods of the Earth. In fine,
that it was she that supported Rome in its minority, and that the Worlds first
common wealth was more beholding to the superstitions of Numa for her
preservation, then to the wisdom of her Counselors or the Valor of her Captains.

Although Passions be almost as direful to man as* Vice, and that there is but
this difference between these two Enemies of his rest, the one makes him guilty
and the other depraves him, the one infects his will, and the other disorders
his Reason, yet the whole Body of modern Philosophy sticks not to approve them
with Elogies, and of so many sects into which it is divided, we find only the
Stoics that declare War against them. All Aristotle's Disciples applaud them,
they make them the Exercise of Virtue, and call them the aides of nature, they
will have them the common favors bestowed upon all mankind, and they think
they do not well prove the necessity of them unless they seek them in the
person of the Son of God. Affectus velut ubertas est naturalis, ad quam cum
verus cultor accesserit, statim cedentibus Vitiis, fruges Virtutis oriuntur.
Lact. 6. Cap. 15.
They say that man would be without motion if without Passion, that it is
necessary he should love and hate to avoid being as insensible as Rocks, that
he cannot be active but by their Motion: and that all his advantages would be
of no use to him, if he called not these domestic Soulders to undertake his
Conquests, and to preserve him from Enemies that both threaten and assault him.
That it were to deprive him of Life, to spoil him of his affections, that they
are a part of himself, and that, as we see no man but loves fertility in his
Fields, we can find none that would prefer the sterility of his Soul before the
most generous of his productions. That all our Virtues pine away if they be not
animated by their fire, and that the best ordered Enterprises would prove
fruitless, if these faithful Soldiers undertook not the charge of their
execution.

For they affirm that Fortitude without Anger is weak, and that she that laughs
at Tortures, brags of assaulting death, and makes little of all the terrible
things of this World, becomes spiritless if this Passion do not warm and give
her courage. Prudence borrows the greatest part of her Lights from Fear, and he
that should rob her of this succor would acknowledge her to be left as blind as
feeble. Temperance is let in governing her desires, in moderateing pleasure,
in appeasing the seditions of Hope, in allaying Grief, and in swallowing up
Fear.

In fine, that it is to destroy all our Virtues to deprive them of their
Employments, and to condemn them to perpetual Idleness, to strip them of the
Subject of their Combats and Triumphs. Where, say they, will be their Victory
if they have no Enemy to vanquish or tame? And with what Justice shall they
compel so many commendations from our Mouths, if they must always wallow in
rest? For if it be a Virtue to restrain Anger, to submit affection to Reason,
to limit our desires, to be moderate in Hope and Sadness, how can he be
virtuous that is without Passion? Victorious without Enemies to Conquer? And how
should Reason be a Sovereign in her Kingdom if she have no Subjects to Command?

Some men are so much the Enemies of their own happiness, that they boast of
their Torments, they invent curious words to make them necessary; and by an
obstinacy so much the more unjust as it is universal, they will have us esteem
that as the principle of all our generous actions, which is the Fountain of all
our disorders. They are not unlike men troubled with the Itch, who delight in
scratching the Sore that infects their fingers, they cherish Ulcers which
poison them, they abet the faction of Tyrants that oppress them, and by a kind
of superstition, they excuse their defects, and allow them benefits which they
have not.

I know that among the Lawiers a common erroneous custom passes for a Law, and
that an opinion received of many is often a sufficient warant to make it run
for a current truth among the vulgar Spirits, yet am I not afraid to oppose it,
and supported by Senecas Authority, I shall endeavor to demonstrate that
Passions are not of more use to Virtue then poisons and venomous things to our
Health. For to shun all the bumbast of Orators and to set forth nothing
unworthy of that Roman Philosopher; Who shall persuade himself that man must
necessarily be the vassal of his Slaves? That he cannot be active without their
help? That all his Enterprises must depend upon their advices? And that he must
hold his Authority over a number of Rebels that despise his Sovereignty? Who
shall believe that a wise man cannot be valiant, unless he be possessed of Anger?
And that to give his Enemy Battle or rout his Adversaries he must be heated by
the most furious of his Passions? That he cannot be prudent except he be
fearful, and that he must of necessity borrow aid of the most cowardly of his
attendants wherewith to establish his good Fortune, and to guard himself
against future Evils? That he cannot be provident for his Family without being
avaricious, nor govern his Children, command his Subjects, nor put his House in
order without tormenting himself about that which may happen in the future?
Nihil rationis est, ubi semel affectus inductus est, jusque illi aliquod
voluntate nostra datum est. Sen. 10. de ira Cap. 9.
Passions are not so submissive as to obey the Authority of Reason, and they
are of too ambitious an humor to quit an usurped Empire: they resemble those
Conquerors that rarely loose the Appetite of Dominion. They do also disguise
their Tyranny, they employ Artifices to render themselves acceptable, they
oppress us under color of succors, and never cease to humor us till after
they have violated the Laws of Reason and abused his Power.

For when the Soul has once admitted them, and that of strangers she permits
them to be her domestics, she is no longer able to set them bounds, they
contemn her Government, they seize her Throne, they become obstinate in
Rebellion; and, by an injustice not easy to express, they oblige their
Sovereign to take Laws of them. Therefore to preserve the liberty of the mind,
and maintain the rights of Reason, these seditious intruders must be allowed no
entrance, and we must imitate those prudent Governors that suffer not their
Enemies to approach their Borders under pretense of friendship and assistance.
For if the Soul permit them a share in her Authority and mistrusting her own
strength, Affectus quidem tam mali Ministri quam duces Sunt. Idem. Cap. 9.
she call in these Foreign Troops to opose or defend her against her
adversaries, she then cease to be an absolute Monarch, these pretended
friends turn tail, become Revolters, they stir up parties to bereave her of her
Scepter, they disturb her Judgment and her Rest, and having stripped her of her
Lights, they constrain her to take them for Counselors and to follow their
inclinations.

This Tyranny would be tolerable if it lasted but a few moments, and we might
draw this comfort from our misery to learn from their ill usage the difference
between liberty and slavery. But these Rebels have so many artifices, that
they cause their Martyrs to love them, the torments wherewith they afflict them
cannot procure their hatred, they will entertain them although they know they
are abused by them, and, by an humor which they would hardly wish to their
Enemies, they take delight in the conversation of Executioners that torment
them.

For though Passions be fickle yet are they obstinate, they resemble those
accidents that are not to be destroyed without ruining the Subject wherein they
reside, they are like ungrateful Guests that take possession where they are
entertained, and are of so malignant a nature that they never leave those men
that permit them to be their Counselors. They are Soldiers that will not be
disbanded but by Death, ivy of which the duration is equal with the Wall that
supports it, and diseases, against which Physicians have yet found no remedy.
What can then be more irrationally said then to affirm that man who is at
liberty in all his actions, had need of so many monstrous Beasts? That he
cannot perform generous things without their assistance? And that those which
ought to obey him must prescribe him Laws? A man must have lost his judgment to
run to his ruin for safety, and believe that his weakness can afford him
strength, that treachery will bring him ayds, truth a lie, and health a
multitude of diseases. Passions are too mutinous to render us any good service,
and they are too much man's Enemy to labor for his felicity.

I will admit that they sometimes disguise their malice, that they raise a kind
of contentment in his soul, that the most generous stir up the courage of the
more sordid, and that the more modest do curb the insolence of such as are most
savage: but all these good effects are produced by the war that is among
themselves, from their different inclinations, from a conspiration of some
against others: and, by a quite different method of working, some become
charitable to their Companions because their humors agree not.

But you will say, do we not see that they are often of use to us? That they
sometimes fight Virtues battles, and employ endeavors for her defense which
beget admiration? Truly that which seems to be the Reason of their necessity
gives us the suspicion of their imperfection, their good offices create a
jealousy; and who so knows well their nature will confess them to be
Hypocrites, and that they force their own inclinations so often as they take up
Arms in Virtues quarrel. They resemble that famous Murderer that preserved
the life of a Tyrant in designing to take it from him, and who breaking an
Impostume that threatened him with death, became his Cure, intending to be his
Executioner.

For if they oppose vice, if they side with virtue, and if they employ their
arts to preserve the rights of Reason, they betray their own disposition, they
commit good without premeditation, and, like unto storms that accidentally
conduct the Ship into her Port, they guide us to Virtue intending to turn us
into a contrary Path. No man in his right mind will conclude venims to be
wholesome for having removed a sick-mans distemper; and he that would be an
approver of Tyranny in a Kingdom because it has suppressed seditions reduced
the People to subjection, united different Interests, and banished rebellion
and disorder from the bowels of the State, would no less contradict the rules
of Policy then the dictates of Reason. We see some Physicians who expel one
evil by another, who Cure an Ague with Poison, and dissipate the Pestilence by
sweating which often procures it, and who allay the smarting pain of the Gout
with medicaments more proper to augment the torment.

A Fever did once so inflame the brain of a General that it made him undertake
the Conquest of a Kingdom, which in his sober mind he durst not have thought
on; and in the late Wars with Flanders, France had a Mareshal who was seldom in
action without first having liquored his resolutions either for life or death.
But who shall believe that these several sorts of cures or undertakings can
turn us to account; and that it is not more advantageous to man to bannish then
entertain such methods for his Conduct? It is a great unhappiness to find no
cure but in distempers and to be obliged for the recovery of health, to have
recourse to destructive remedies.

That man would be suspected of folly that should counsel the Mariners to set
sail in a hurry-Cane, and go about to persuade them that to make a prosperous
Voyage, they must stay for Storms and Tempests. But they that would render
Passions so necessary to man are not more unreasonable, they furnish him with
rebellious Aids, who violently oppose his Authority, Ministers of State who
contemn his Power, and treacherous guids that prove as bad Commanders as common
Soldiers.

Nature has sufficiently armed us in giving us the weapon of Reason, and I know
not that we can call Passions to our assistance without equally accusing her of
imbecility and blindness: for which way so ever we consider our selves we must
be deemed miserable Creatures, if we cannot be safe without the help of our
adversaries, and if we must undertake no enterprise but with Squadrons of
Mutineers who dare to dispute all our Commands. For to judge of their malignity
by their effects, and to learn from their operations the confusion of their
nature, if we be willing to succor our friends in their streights and if we
know by what we learn in natures School that we are bound to relieve our
Parents in want, Scis pro patria pugnandum, dissuadebit timor: Scis pro amicis
desudandum esse, sed deliciae vetabunt. Sen. Ep. 95.
and our Allies under oppression, covetousness will forbid it; if we know that
we ought to arm our selves in defense of our Country, fear disswades us from
it, if we remember that we have vowed fidelity to the companion of our life,
and that we cannot frequent dissolute Women without offending our Conscience or
our Honor, lust will authorize this sensuality. If we know that Tyranny is
odious, that usurpation is unjust, and that we cannot seize the Territories of
our Neighbors without breach of reputation, Ambition will furnish us with
excuses. So that all the succors that some would assign us for our defense are
the sources of all our disorders, and man would hardly ever commit an injustice
if Passions were not his Tempters.

This discourse runs the Peripateticks into despair, and the strength of
Senecas arguments is to them so irresistible that they are constrained to have
recourse to Logical distinctions, to arm themselves against his assaults. For
though they agree with us that the excess of Passions is dangerous, that they
cannot be employed without loss of liberty, and, that we cease to act as men
when they get possession, yet they affirm them to be useful if moderated, that
they may be formed into Virtues if we know how to manage their humors, and that
it is sufficient to render them profitable to us, if we do but correct that
fury which accompanies their violent comportment, that Physicians prepare
poisons and venims, and as nature qualifies the disposition of the Elements, it
is the work of morality to reduce Passions to a mediocrity, and stripping them
of their extravagant temper to convert them into wholesome motions fit for our
service.

What have you said ignorant Philosophers? In what School have you been taught
that nature is impotent, if she take not Passions to her assistance? Facilius
est excludere perniciosa quam regere, and non admittere quam moderari. Senec.
10. de ira. Cap. 8.
With what confidence dare you render my wise man a dependant of his Slaves?
What advantage do you give him above other men, if he have but a little more
courage then the greatest Cowards? If he be but somewhat more chaste then the
most unclean? Something more temperate then Drunkards? A little more modest
then the Ambitious? And but somewhat a better Governor in his Family then the
Prodigal and Avaricious persons? A man is not to be accounted healthy because
he is only subject to extraordinary diseases, to be deemed a sound person
because his maladies are but small, and he not able to exercise the functions
of life but by helps that destroy it.

A wise man must as well be without Passions as free from Vices, and exempt
from that which may render him miserable, as from that which may make him
guilty. If small offenses disturb his Conscience, Passions, how much soever
moderated, interrupt his rest; if inflammations hurt his sight defluxions
weaken it, if the Lethargy stupify his Senses, the fumes which assault his
Brain disorder him, and if extravagancy succeed the height of Fevers, weakness
is always left behind when their fits are abated. So that as to Judge of a sound
body all infirmities must be removed from it, likewise all Passions must be
banished from the Soul to make Judgment of her Tranquillity.

Discourse VI.
That no Man is more miserable, than he that is subject to Passions.
I Never well apprehended how human Policy could lawfully authorize subjection,
seeing she is so irksome; and how Aristotle could render her natural, since all
men so much detest her. Those that first labored to introduce her into the
world saw their designs opposed by all the Nations of the earth, and they were
taught to their cost, that Subjects were not to be acquired without becoming
their Tyrants or their Slaves: The Romans could not endure her in their
government, Libertati a majoribus tantum impensum est, ut patribus quibus jus
vitae and necis in liberos datum erat, non tamen licebat eripere libertatem. L.
ult. C. de pat.
they sought out all imaginable methods to preserve their freedom, and although
they equally made glory of subjecting both friends and foes, they would not
consent to the choice of a Sovereign to command themselves. They invented a new
mode of Government to secure them from servitude, they made their Empire
elective, they annually created two Emperors, and, to avoid the vexatious name
of Subject, they ordained that those to whom they committed the management of
their affairs should take upon them the Title of Consuls and not of Lords and
Monarchs. Man has in him (I know not what to call it) something so sublime
that he cannot endure violence, he imagines Servitude to be the greatest of
his evils, and he is so great a lover of Liberty that he often prefers a
dishonorable freedom to an advantageous bondage. That human prudence that
regulates things present by the knowledge of things past, teaches Monarchs to
stand upon their guard with Subjects, and lets them know that they are to make
the calculation of their enemies by the number of their vassals: as she
cautioneth Kings against the treachery of new conquered Countries, she bids
them be jealous of all that serve them, she shows us men in History that have
steeped their hands in their Masters blood for a remedy against their Slavery,
and others that have set Kingdoms on fire with a pretense of freeing them from
Tyranny. In fine, Liberty has so many Charms that so often as we are deprived
of it, we deem our selves unhappy, and its contrary is so burthensom, that
believing our selves freeborn, and therein equal to the most mighty Princes of
the earth, we are sufficiently stirred up to be delivered from it. Indeed this
latter condition is very odious, and it is not without cause that the greatest
number of men would rather die free under an apparent Slavery, than live as
bondmen under a visible Liberty. Nevertheless it must be owned that this evil
comes not near the miseries that we endure from Passions, and the Empire of
these insolent Usurpers is less supportable to man than the hatred of the
envious, the rage of Tyrants and the violence of his Enemies: For if these
torment or persecute him, they exercise their fury but on his body, they cannot
with all their malicious cruelty ravish the liberty of the most noble part of
himself: if they assault his innocence, if they deprive him of his friends, if
they cast him into irons, and if they attempt upon his very life by injurious
usage, his Soul preserves her authority, the fetters that restrain her slave
touch her not, and she acts with so much facility, that it may be affirmed she
is never more ingenious than in affliction. But Passions disorder both, they
extend their oppressions beyond the Body, they deal with the Soul as Men with
their Slaves, and without regard to Grandeur, they exercise their violence upon
all her faculties. They puff out the light of his Understanding, they corrupt
his Will, they seduce his Judgment; and, by a power not much inferior to
Magic Art, they throw illusions into his Spirit to trouble his mind. If men
account Exile cruel because it separates us from all the delights of our own
Country, who will not own that the Tyranny of our Passions is the most severe
of our torments, since they violently take us from our selves, deprive us of
the power of Reason, and rob us of that liberty which the most unfortunate
retain under a load of Irons? Fortune, which has set up that unjust
distinction amongst men, and created Lords and Vassals, has no influence upon
Passions; as she abandons great men to the fidelity of their Servants, she
commits the meaner sort to the discretion of their Superiors, and she is so
little absolute in her Government, that we often see the Slaves give Laws to
them that command: some find ways to be their Masters Companions by the
assiduity of their services, and others have been made free for their fidelity:
some others are comforted in their bondage that they have but one Master to
satisfy, and do easily persuade themselves that an ordinary ingenuity will
serve to please a man's humor with whom we daily converse. But the passionate
are subject to so many Tyrants as they have Passions, the agreement we hold
with them provokes their displeasure, our submission renders them insolent, our
fidelity augments their fury, and they are never more cruel than when we
observe their orders, or obey their commands. Sometimes Bondage is rather to be
chosen than Liberty, and there be some slaves that would not change conditions
with their Masters: for though these impose upon their Liberty, and permit them
not the disposing of their goods, or their persons, yet must they be charged
with the care of providing for them, they are responsible for their
miscarriages, they must take an account of their actions, and buy with money
that authority which they exercise upon their Wills; so that their pretended
dominion amounts to a specious subjection, and they ought not so much to be
styled their Lords as their Atturneys and their Stewards. But Passions are ever
savage, they form naught but evil designs against their subjects, they increase
their wounds instead of giving ease, they violently overrun Virtue and Liberty
together, and abusing all their faculties, they make their conditions equal
with the damned: sometimes they give them looks so frightful that the Earth
has nothing more terrible or more insolent, and anon they leave in the Soul
such a Fear and Grief that nothing is more unhappy. Their evil entertainments
have procured them the hatred of all Philosophers, and even they who out of
respect have countenanced the vice of their wise man, would not permit that he
should be subject to Passions.

Those to whom servitude is irksom may apply themselves to flight for their
deliverance, and forsaking the Masters whom they serve, betake themselves to
Countries where their pursuits cannot reach them: if the persons with whom they
live be difficult, or if the Law of the place admit no Affranchizement, they
may remove into another, and seek that liberty in foreign Dominions which they
could not obtain in the Land of their nativity. But they who serve Passions
carry always their masters with them, into what part of the world soever they
travel they cannot hide themselves from them, and so unhappy is their
condition, that they cannot sheer clear of them without danger of sinking their
Vessel. If they abandon their habitations, if they throw themselves into the
arms of Princes for protection, and if all the Provinces they pass thorough, be
so many Sanctuaries and places of freedom, yet are they shackled, they carry
their fetters with them, they remain slaves even in the very bosom of Liberty,
and the Tyrants under whose command they are listed are so outrageous, that
they spare them as little abroad as at home. All that pleases the sense stir up
their Grief, and that which would cure a sick man, is matter of their
punishment. For if in their Travels they observe spacious Countries, if they
measure the height of Hills, if they fix the Eye upon the current of Rivers, if
they contemplate the Flowers of pleasant Meadows, and meet nothing in their way
but what imploys or diverts their Fancy, they rather charm than heal their
Torments, and do not so much deceive their thoughts as their eyes and ears. By
an unhappiness that shows the misery of their condition, they often convert
their Remedies into Poisons, and change the Objects of their divertisements
into subjects of their Grief. The sight of remote Lands puts them in mind of
their own Countries, the Cities through which they pass represent them the
places where they began to suffer, the Inhabitants seem to discourse of the
passages of their former life, the things and beauties they find there awaken
their desires; and although they are far removed from all that can anoy them,
they forbear not to conceive Love, Hatred, Joy and Grief.

What greater Punishments can be inflicted upon Criminals than to expose them
to the Will of so many Tormentors? Servit quicunque vel metu frangitur, vel
delectatione, vel cupiditatibus ducitur, vel indignatione exasperatur, vel
moerere dejicitur: servilis est omnis coactio. Amb. de Vit. beat. lib. 2.
And what more cruel Vengeance can be drawn from an Enemy, than to see him a
slave in places of the greatest freedom? Tormented in the arms of Rest? And
unhappy amidst all that which ought to deliver him from it? Who is not touched
with compassion to behold Alexander when he cuts the Ocean, when he traverseth
all the parts of the world, when he enters the Indies, when he makes war upon
the Persians, when he had conquered Asia, when he turns Kingdoms upside down,
and makes the limits of the Ocean the Frontiers of his Empire? For if he
command his Army, he obeys a multitude of his Passions which act the Tyrant
with him, if he vanquish his enemies by the Sword he is overcome of his vices,
and if he be the only Monarch of the Earth, he is the subject af Ambition,
Anger and Impudicity. One while he bewailes the death of a Favorite whom his
own hand had massacred, another while he laments the loss of a Captain which he
left in the heat of the Battle; one while he retires into solitude to entertain
his misfortunes, another while deceiving his enemies he is contriving the
Conquest of a new World, and he whom flattery persuaded to be the God of the
Earth, tacitly confesses that he is the most miserable of all men. Who judges
not Hannibal very unhappy, when he forsakes the Command of his Soldiers to be
made obedient to his Love? and when in the midst of a victorious Army brought
back from Thrasymene, he could not defend himself from the allurements of a
Strumpet? All that warlike glory which he had acquired in Battle could not
divert his Affection, and the thought of Triumphs that were preparing for him
is not powerful enough to dissuade him from laying his Arms at the feet of his
captive Slave; her Beauty ravisheth his Soul, and stops in a Passage where a
hundred thousand men durst not have attended his approach without terror.

From these two Examples it is not hard to conclude, that Passions debase us,
that we cannot treat with them without becoming their slaves, and that we must
of necessity renounce our liberty when we obey such insolent Masters. To
prevent then this shameful servitude, a wise man must take Reason into his
Counsel, he must stay till she has examined the Nature of the Objects that
present themselves before he let in Love or Hatred; and he must conclude
nothing touching their perfections or defects, till this Sun have enlightened
his Will, and have approved or forbidden the pursuit.

Discourse VII.
That a Wise man may live without Passions.
I Wonder not that man should be so miserable, since he himself is a
Conspirator against his own Felicity, since he makes vanity of augmenting
natures defects, Aestimatio rerum non sumitur ab affectione singulorum, Sed
secundum quod communiter venditur. L. 33. F. ad L. Acquil.
since he takes pride in his own miseries, and emploies all her benefits to
make himself unhappy or guilty. Those that have exercised their Eloquence in
decifering corrupted nature, thought it sufficient to be the Sons of Adam to
render us disobedient, that the sin of that first revolter against his God, was
the spring of all our evils, whereof Passions became the Children after they
had been the Mother, and that man never committed an unjust act but by the
instigation of concupisence, which becomes the chastisement thereof.

Although the Authors of this Doctrine be to me very venerable, and though the
opinion which they maintain be approved by all Christians; nevertheless, I
persuade my self that they will not absolutely deny to allow me, that we derive
not all our defects from his crime, that we may as well bewail the perfections
which we still retain as those we have lost, and that we find orderly motions
in our Bodies which are rather arguments of the Excellency of the Soul then the
defection of nature. Some men would be innocent if Heaven had not honored them
with favors, their rare qualities occasion their misery, they are poor because
they are too rich, they run themselves into dangers by being too much
enlightened, and they engage not in Error but by being more perfect then
others. What ever renders a wise man accomplished makes them miserable, they
anticipate misfortune by their foresight, their memories call to mind the
injuries done them, their wits are busied about useless or hazardous things,
and all their qualifications become pernicious or disadvantagious.

To augment their own miseries and add to natures defects voluntary errors,
they take counsel from the noise of the People, they regulate their lives by
their reports, they act but by their example, and they approve all for
reasonable that has many Approbators, and not that wherein truth most
consists. Likewise they who have made so many invectives against the sin of
our first Father, have almost depraved the whole stock of mankind, by
endeavoring to explain the most difficult Principle of our Religion; and have
taught them undesignedly, to justify their defects and to form excuses for
their lewdness. For if that inhumane Father, say they, have bequeathed us death
with our being, if he have made us Slaves by the loss of his innocence, if the
Passions which arise in our Soul be the effects of his Rebellion, if they be as
inseparable as our members, and if we cannot shun their Surprizals but by the
aids of grace; who shall resolve to labor their Conquest, seeing they are born
with us, and proceed from the conjunction of the Soul with the Body, since the
seeds thereof are in us, and that that grace to which they have recourse, is a
bounty which God only bestows upon his Favorites? To avoid then all these
complaints it must be owned that human nature is not so depraved as they
describe her, that she yet retains some remains of her purity, and that man
has still a power to combat vice, follow virtue, and conquer his Passions.

When those famous men that laid the foundation of Romes Empire, would instruct
their Subjects by their precepts or reform them by their Laws, Parricidae cum
lege ceperunt, and illis facinus paena monstrauit: pessimo loco fuit pietas
post quam culeas saepius vidimus quam cruces. Sen. de clem. lib. 10. cap. 23.
they rather disordered then settled them, they taught them crimes of which
before they were ignorant, and they made many guilty persons in designing to
keep men innocent. Parricides, says Seneca, first began in Rome by the
prohibition thereof, the punishment threatened to those that should be found so
monstrous inspired them with cruelty; men became barbarians when they were
forbidden to be inhumane, and they feared not to murder them from whom they
had received life, after the Law had informed them that such a sin might be
committed. So that those men must be Enemies to nature who throw all their
faults upon her infirmities, and we must deny that we often employ our
perfections to procure our own unhappiness. This truth appears evidently in the
Subject of this discourse. We render Passions which are but the pure effects of
opinion and the will, to be the productions of nature, we fancy that they are
born with us, and we conclude from our weakness, that a wise man cannot defend
himself from them but by a Miracle. In fine, we deem all things difficult which
we fear to undertake, and judging of other men's strength by our own, we take
all for impossibilities which we our selves cannot perform.

Also I am of Senecas judgment, and do maintain with him, that there is as much
difference between the Stoics and other Philosophers as between men and women:
Tantum inter Stoicos and caeteros Sapientiam professos interesse, quantum inter
faeminas and mares merito dixerim; cum utraque turba ad vitae societatem
tantundem conferat, sed altera pars ad obsequendum, altera imperio nata sit
Sen. lib. Constable. cap. 10.
and as these two sex are necessary for the building of Families and States,
the one is born to command and the other to obey. For let Epicurus be
commended, let his Disciples protect him, and let them ransack the Body of
Morality to shape excuses for his opinions, yet it must be owned that he has
made no Scholars but Slaves, and that when he designed to create Philosophers,
he innocently formed vicious and impious persons. Aristotle Father of the
Academia, is not more virtuous then Epicurus, though he seem more reasonable,
for he makes but Bastard wise men, he moderates the violence of their
inclinations to render their conduct easy, and allowing them ordinary
distempers he has taught them that they cannot be healthy unless they have
infirmities, that they cannot become liberal without covetousness, that to be
valiant they must have the help of ambition, and that virtue would be of no use
to them, if they had not Passions to execute what she projects. This opinion
seems so little generous to Zeno's Disciples, that they cannot forbear
vigorously to oppose it, and Seneca has condemned it for so unreasonable a
tenet, that he thinks he pleads virtues cause so often as he is engaged in the
Combat.

Where, replies he, is the freedom of the wise man, if he may not act but by
the intermediation of his Passions? If he be obliged to fly to their Counsels,
and if he must borrow of them all the forms of his Government? Reason is
unthroned so soon as she admits an alliance with them, and their Communication
is so pernicious to her, that she cannot lend them an Ear without insensibly
mixing with their Party. For when she has once admitted them, they do what
they will, and not what she permits them, they follow their own inclinations,
though she contend for the Conquest, and they become in the end so insolent or
so wild, that they violently constrain their Sovereign to yield to their
discretion. For this cause he judges that the only means to be delivered from
them, is to prevent their assaults, and attack them before they threaten, and
according to the Rules of Policy, provide that those who are yet but foreign
Enemies, become not our domestic Tyrants.

It availes not his Adversaries to fly to natures imperfections for a reply,
and to say that Reason is become blind and weak, since she suffered her self to
be seduced by the Serpent. This reply, though true, proves nothing in morality,
and whatsoever foundations they draw from Divines to support it, yet must they
confess that it makes not so much for Reason as for Faith. For again says this
wise Roman, if Reason be not strong enough to hinder Passions from making
excursions into her Dominions, how will they have her to keep them in order
when they have entered her Territories? If she sink under their violence when
she is disposed to expect them, how shall she be able to give them Laws when
she is become their Captive? And if she cannot repulse Enemies at the Gate, how
shall she repel their fury when they have gotten possession? We must then infer
either that a wise man may prevent their assaults or that he cannot moderate
their inclinations, that he can hinder their sudden swellings, or that he
cannot stay their disorders when they have made Head.

Tranquillity is one of the qualifications of a wise man; men cannot rob him of
it till he change his condition, and he may boast of happiness so long as he
preserves it: but Passions violently bereave him of it in every of their
assaults, and he cease to be his own when he has any thing of dispute with
them. He is their Slave without being conquered he mourns in opposing them, and
he is constrained to part with the most precious of his Benefits, so often as
he takes resolution to fight them.

For be they never so well moderated they cease not to disturb his quiet, they
throw dissension among the Parties that compose it, Quid si sanum voces leviter
febricitantem? Non est bona valetudo mediocritas morbi: quomodo oculos major
and perfecta suffusio excaecat, sic modica turbat. Sen. Ep. 85.
and they so much occupy his mind, that nothing is left him but a weak and
languishing liberty. The Peripateticks are not so just as to abate him any of
his evils for the elevation of his Grandeur: they render him subject to all the
maladies of the Soul, they allot him all Passions, to vanquish or tame: and
without considering that many times one violent evil is preferrable to a
multitude of wasting diseases, they will that he have fear, but it must be
moderated, that he be spurred by ambition but it must be restrained, that he
form desires and hopes, but they must be limited, that he be moved by Anger,
but it must be easy to recall, and that he have Love and Audacity, but they must
not run into folly and fury. But who does not easily see that this Tyranny
strikes directly at his Liberty, that these motions howsoever moderated annoy
his Peace? And that it would be more easy to conquer one powerful Enemy then
give Battle to a multitude of smaller adversaries at one and the same time.

Virtue is so delicate in this point, that she could never yet suffer Passions
to be assigned her for Companions, Non quia difficilia sunt, non audemus, sed
quia non audemus difficilia sunt. Sen. Ep. 104.
as she knows that they hold intelligence with vice, she rejects all their
proffered services, she believes that he unjustly-Tryumphs that owes Victory to
any thing but his Valor; that he is unworthy the name of Conqueror, if he may
be reproached that in the combat he mixed Cowardice with his Courage, and did
not overthrow his Enemy, but because he was somewhat fearful and imprudent. She
is jealous of all their Labors, she will have no Soldiers that esteem their
own Counsels more then her Commands, and she would think it injurious to her
own Grandeur to make use of their Services.

Truly what art soever has been used by humane prudence to allay their fury
the method of reducing them to Reasons obedience is yet to seek, and which way
soever they be considered it wants Dexterity to subject them to her Empire. As
we find no Animals that yield obedience to this Sovereign, and as the tamed
hearken as little to her Counsels as the wild; so, man has no Passions that
will obey his Commands, they make head to oppose his decrees, they conspire to
lessen his Authority, and by a faction as unjust as insolent, they dispute the
Government he pretends to have over them. Their nature resembles that of the
Tygre and Lion, which never forsake their savage humor, which are as ravenous
in the House as in the Forest, and can never be so well tamed, but they return
to their first fury when least suspected. In fine, Passions are faithless
subjects, and domestic Enemies, with whom a Peace is no less to be feared when
War and persecution.

But to return to my matter, if Passions be inevitable, and if all our prudence
be too weak to prevent the assaults of fear, the attacks of grief, the snares
of Love, and the surprizals of Anger upon our will, who can assure himself of
staying their Carreer, and of obliging them that prepare for Battle without our
leave to proceed no farther then we shall direct? One of these two extremes
must be chosen, either to stiffle them in the Cradle, or resolve to become
their Slaves: to give them Battle before they make head, or resolve to
surrender our liberty: to deprive them of means to gather their forces, or take
up a resolution to submit to their violence. For as those things which stir
them up are without us, and the good and evil which they respect are not in our
power, they imitate the nature of the objects that employ them, they increase
according to the causes whereof they partake, and they become more violent or
moderate, according as things seem pleasant or dissatisfactory; desire
redoubles his strength when hope appears of his Party, and flatters him with
the possession of the benefit he hunts after. Fear is augmented when the
apprehended evil shows it self with more then ordinary horrors, or when working
her own misery, she describes it more terrible then it is.

What I have said of desire and fear may be applied to all our Passions, and as
they arm without our command, and the objects that support them depend not of
us, it must be confessed that it is not in our power to bring them to Reason, to
moderate their fury, or hinder their running into excess. It Is a sort of folly
to think that we have an Enemy at our command whose insolence we may suppress,
and to imagine that that Governor is able to keep Rebels in awe, who was not
prudent enough to prevent their taking up of Arms, putting into the Field, and
forming an Army to offer him open Battle.

Although this arguing be bold yet it is unanswerable even in Aristotle's
opinion, and they that would enervate it must have recourse to their own
weaknesses to lessen its force. They say it is very difficult for a man to gain
so absolute a power over himself, as to command all his inclinations, to see
beautiful Faces, and to be insensible of love, to look upon a threatening evil,
and not to fear its arrival, to have Treasures laid before him, and to have no
desire to them, to be injuriously and despitefully used, and not to let Anger
arise, to have his pleasant Edifices destroyed, his Lands violently forraged,
and his goods plundered, and he not afflicted. Such favors are only bestowed
upon beatified persons, we must be separated from humane commerce to obtain
them, and we must mount the Heavenly mansions to consider the glories of this
World with indifference, and to behold all the revolutions that are wrought in
it without disturbance.

If this Objection be the chief foundation of the contrary opinion, yet is it
not very strong but in show, it reproves our practice, but diminishes nothing
of our abillity, it declares the faults of fools, and hides the perfections of
wisemen, and without survaying man's nature, it excuses his sordidness and
considers not his advantages. Man is naturally generous, he has not yet
attempted any thing but what his industry has overcome, and all those
difficulties which the Academia opposed to his undertakings, have only served
to augment his glory and admire his courage.

The most wild and savage Passions have yielded to his power, and all that fury
wherewith they were animated, could not hinder his constraining them to the
obedience of his Laws; his power is equal to his will in this point, from his
own courage he obtains what ever he desires to execute, and all his faculties
are so subservient, that he has often drawn services from them, that seemed
impossible to nature. Some humorists have refrained smiling, and pursuing their
resolution have banished from their countenance that pleasant property which
distinguishes us from other Creatures. Temperance has taught others to
suppress their appetites, and has so much forced their own inclinations as
never to taste Wine. Some have defended themselves against the violent assaults
of love, have had in derision all those pleasant Faces that have made so many
Idolaters in the World; and have so much conquered themselves as to become
Masters of a Passion that has all men for Slaves. There have been others that
have so far commanded themselves as to live without sleep, and have made
watching so familiar to them as that they have not been seen to close their
eyelids. In fine, man is absolute in his Government, he has not undertaken any
thing which he brought not to perfection, difficulties have discovered his
strength; and we have seen nothing so irksom which he has not surmounted when
he joined perseverance to his courage.

The labors then which he ought to employ to gain this perfection, ought not to
divert him from so glorious a design, and without hunting for many reasons to
prompt him to it, it will suffice that he reflect upon his own life to be
taught, that it is as easy to Conquer as to moderate his Passions. The greater
part of his actions are real punishments, all that he does is mixed with
disquiet; and I know not but it might be more easy for him to live without
Passions, then to act what he daily performs. For what is more delightful then
a virtuous vacation, and what is more toilsom then Anger? What is more tranquil
then clemency, and what more turmoiling then cruelty? Continence begets
content, but Love is unsatiable, modesty loves to be at quiet, but desire
delights in trouble, humanity is quiet, but confidence is ever busied.

In fine, Virtue is treatable with sattisfaction, but Passions are not
conversable without hazard of Conscience rest or liberty. From all these
discourses it is not difficult to conclude, that a wise man may be without
Passions, since they are not natural to him; since sense and opinion are their
springs, since their services are dangerous, and that he cannot employ them in
his necessities, without injury to his liberty or courage.

THE SECOND PART, OF PASSIONS in particular.
THE FIRST TREATISE.
Discourse I.
Of the Nature of Joy.
PLeasure has made so deep an impression on the Minds of men, that few there
are that plead not her Cause; the Philosophers that condemn her in their
Writings pursue her in their Studies, and in private they make love to her whom
publicly they persecute; the severest of them court her, they are easily
overcome of an enemy that entertains them with nothing but Delights; and they
confess they are not valiant enough to resist the Charms of a Mistress whose
Perfections are proclaimed by so many famous Authors, and who adorn her with so
many Reasons to invite men to seek her. Epicurus whom we may call the
Panegyrist of Pleasure has so beautified her in all his Works, that men have
not scrupled to declare themselves her Lovers, being informed of her
Advantages, and they thought they might lawfully consecrate their affections to
her in whose service all virtues are employed, Virtus voluptatis ancilla and
locum famulae obtinet. Athen. lib. 12. de sin.
and to whom all Passions are slaves. If we give credit to the most eloquent of
Orators, that Philosopher never made any thing so glorious in all his Writings,
and he discovered himself much captivated by her Love, when he permitted his
Pen such ridiculous extravagancies, so disadvantagious to his honor. For he
creates her the Queen of Virtues, he sets her on a Throne so glorious as he can
hardly afford his Gods to be equal to her; he places all those noble habitudes
at her footstool, he gives them in charge to observe all her Commands, he
forbids them to undertake any thing without her order, and he fancies that
Virtues are sufficiently honored when he assigns them employments in her
service; he directs Prudence to be careful of her preservation, to prevent all
things that may annoy her tranquillity, and to use her utmost skill to
strengthen her Power. He commands Justice to be liberal in her favor, to divide
Estates with Discretion, not to let her suffer an injury, and to make all men
her friends by doing good to every one. Fortitude must defend the Body against
Grief, she must not suffer that choice Companion with whom she commonly makes
her abode, to be assaulted by sickness; and if she cannot totally hinder it,
she must, at least, endeavor to moderate the rigors thereof by the remembrance
of past delights. Temperance must regulate her inclinations, prescribe the
seasons, quantity and quality of her Meat and Drink; and must so use her to
Sobriety, that she must abhor debaucheries, and love nothing but what is easy
to acquire. But above all, care must be taken so to correct the qualities of
the Elements of which she is composed, that one entrench not upon the other,
that Grief or Anger discompose not the constitution, and that health, in which
her greatest happiness consists, be no way interrupted by diseases.

The erection of so unreasonable an Empire alarmed all Philosophers. They that
had before allowed Pleasure a seat in their Schools, could not now suffer so
unjust an usurpation; and judging it to be the most insolent act of a shameless
man to put Virtue under the subjection of her enemy, they all made head against
the Author; and although they had no other weapons but Tongue or Pen wherewith
to assault him, yet did they charge him with so many reproaches, that his
Disciples are at this day in despair of procuring his justification. True it is
that Aristotle makes an excuse for him, when he mixeth delight with human
actions, when he makes Joy the companion of our occupations, and assures us
that Pleasure is not less useful to the Body than necessary to the Mind. That
Joy sweetens our toyls, recruits our tired vigor, administers comfort to the
miserable, and gives us all those advantages which other Passions promise us.
That Nature stands in need of refreshments, that she becomes weary by continued
labors, and that she must be comforted by divertisements, if we expect renewed
services from her. He adds, that the enjoyment of a benefit becomes irksom if
it be not attended with Delight, and that it is an abuse of our Faculties and
Sense not to employ those aids that Nature has given us to bring our Travels
to perfection. In fine, that Joy is natural to us, that she is nourished with
us from the Cradle, that she is mixed with all the actions of Life, and that it
is a self-cruelty to employ her otherwise than that common Mother intended.

I know that this Doctrine is not to be condemned without being accounted
stupid or savage in the Peripatetick Opinion, and that it is a kind of temerity
to attempt the destruction of a Passion whose Lovers are all the Poets, whose
Panegyrists are all Orators, and whose Advocates are most of the Philosophers.
Yet must we declare that in Seneca's Principles she is of no use to Virtue,
that Virtue is too generous to seek her satisfaction out of her self, that she
is happy in her own deserts, and esteems it even a dishonor to look upon
Pleasure as her end, and to use her as a means to accomplish it: likewise those
that make love to her pretend to no other Rewards but the enjoyment of her
self; they esteem themselves happy enough when they can obtain her; and though
Death or Envy be sometimes the price of their fidelity, they cannot be
persuaded to forsake her. But then their motive is unlike that of other men;
for besides that these undertake nothing but what they are hurried to by their
self-interests, setting up Pleasures for the recompense of their Labors, and
love not Virtue but because they hope to find Delights among her attendants;
they lay hold on benefits that are but such in show; and, abused by common
opinion, they seek their felicity amongst things that are the causes of their
sorrow. Some imagine that Wealth is able to procure their happiness, and
leaning upon the esteem that most men make thereof, they promise themselves
Pleasure by the acquisition of Riches. Others are pleased with Honors, and
persuading themselves that praises are often the fruits of Virtue, they place
their felicity in airy Titles. Some are so sensual and effeminate as they
affect only infamous or superfluous things, those Feasts that were invented for
their recreations become their whole employment: they take delight in the
conversation of dissolute women, and they would deem their lives miserable if
they should be deprived of those objects that flatter their Taste or their Lust.
Some others more generous aspire to Grandeurs, they draw vanity from the
multitude of Subjects, and as if their felicity increased by the number of
their Slaves, they please themselves only in the sacking of Towns, in the ruin
of Countries, and in the conquest of Kingdoms. Others there are that vainly
boast of their Learning, they employ the fairest part of their life in
contemplating Natures wonders, they think there is nothing more noble than the
knowledge of their Essence; and although they cannot but know that such skill
will not render them more virtuous, yet cease they not to lodge their felicity
in it.

But all these delights have so little coherence with Innocence and
Tranquillity, that we cannot engage with them without losing the one and
hazarding the other; their brevity is an evident mark of their fallacy, and
Seneca said most truly that as intemperance charmed the misery of Drunkards by
a delightful madness that lasted for a moment, so those objects afford
divertisement only to make men the more sensible of Sorrow when the vanity that
attends them is discovered. To make judgment of a man's happiness we must know
if he be of an even temper in all his actions, if his Joy be as constant as the
Virtue from whence it proceeds, if he change not his resolution with the
variety of objects, and if he preserve the same measures in time of prosperity
as in the state of adversity. A wise man ought to imitate the stars fixed by God
Almighty in the firmament, he ought to consider the sublunary revolutions
without alteration, and the evil that assaults him ought no more to discompose
him, then the splendid favors of fortune to swell his mind.

It must not then be wondered if the Stoics maintain so fierce a war against
Pleasure, since they find it void of Reason; if they condemn the use thereof
since it runs always to excess; and if they banish it from the Court of their
wise man, since it most commonly proceeds from causes as unjust as imaginary.
For, to speak properly, Opinion is the Fountain, this Fantastic which seduceth
our understanding, corrupts our Will, and disguising the nature of the objects,
leads us into delights that either abuse or make us guilty. For which cause
Zeno thought it no offense against Truth, to describe Joy, An inclination of
the Soul against Nature, occasioned by the opinion of a delightful thing, that
seemed to afford us Content: for what advantages soever Aristotle invents to
feed our Delights, it must be said that opinion is their Mother, that the
objects are the Authors, that the principle, and their use would never please
us if we were not perverted by the report that opinion delivers of them. From
thence it comes that a sick man takes delight in things hurtful, that a vicious
man rejoices in Debauchery, that a Lover takes pride in his Servitude, that
Princes build their Glory upon the Honors given to them by their Subjects, and
that the vainly curious make Idols of Flowers, Pictures and Images.

Likewise we see that when the mind becomes disabused, that truth succeeds the
outward shows, and that Reason discovers all these Pleasures to be but the
effects of opinion, and the employments of sick or idle persons, they soon
alter their minds; that which before flattered their sense, they now despise,
those Grandeurs that limited their pretensions become void of Charms to stay
their desires, they cease to admire dangerous Beauties, and they finally turn
Persecutors of them whom before they adored. Saint Austin in his Confessions is
astonished that God should be satisfied with his own felicity, that his Will
should be unchangeable, and that one and the same Essence should always be the
cause of his happiness: that the Angels should be eternal in their Affections,
that their Love should be as constant as their Knowledge, that they should be
inseparably knit to the Subject of their Glory, and that man only should
delight in Change, that the enjoyment of benefits which he has violently
purs^ed should become nauseous to him, and that he should so much love Novelty,
as often to convert his greatest Pleasures into Torments. Some Philosophers
thought they had satisfied this doubt, by alleging that man drew his
inconstancy from the Heavens, and that being composed of a mixed body, which is
always in agitation, he cannot but partake of its qualities. Some others have
thrown this defect upon Nature, they say that his condition is incompatible
with Rest, that his greatest content is in variety, and that as he is seldom in
one and the same mind, it ought not to seem strange that his temper so often
differs. But what Reasons soever they assign, we must conclude with Seneca,
that Opinion is the only cause of this inconstancy, that it is she that alters
his Resolutions, that runs his Understanding into error, that makes him approve
what himself condemns, and persuades him that without sinning against his own
Judgment, he may prefer a greater before a smaller benefit.

Discourse II.
That the Love of Beauty is an Enemy to Reason, and that it is not so much an
effect of Nature as Opinion.
BE silent lascivious Poets, profane no more our Altars with your false
Divinities, this God to whom you sacrifice is but the work of your own frothy
imagination, and this Monarch whom ye make to have so great a dominion upon
Earth is but a Chymera by you formed, to lead us into the Paths of vice, or to
Authorize your own Extravagancies. Forbear the abasement of your own Grandeur
to magnify the power of an imaginary Tyrant. Forsake your excellent art of
Rhyming, if you cannot make Verses but to seduce us; and finally learn from
Reason that that Love whose frequent Victories you proclaim is but the
destemper of Madmen, and the Passion of indiscreet persons. Quid aliud est
vitia incendere, quam authors illis inscribere, and dare morbo, exemplo
Divinitatis, excusatam licentiam? Sen. de brevit. Vit. cap. 16.
It will henceforth avail you nothing to dedicate Temples to this false God, to
make all the Kings of the Earth his Slaves, to Subject all your Gods to his
Government, and to load him with all the Titles which the extravagancies of
Antiquity invented to distinguish the immortal Diety whom they worshipped. All
those delightful lies are now out of credit, it belongs no more to the
impious to speak your Language, and it must be the loss of Conscience and
Reason to become either your Disciple or Protector. What is there in fact more
ridiculous then for an idle prattler to make Heaven a partner in his
debaucheries, to excuse his crimes by the Example of his Gods, to give in their
Incests for Bail to his Adulteries, and setting up Love as superior to his
Jupiter, persuades us that he is transmitted into a Swan to enjoy Callisto,
that he is changed into a Bull to ravish Clytemnestra, and that he is tempted
to assume the form of a Satyr, the better to act the part of a Buffoon. We may
say that malice is arrived to an extrem, when infamous things do not only
divertize us, but delight us, when vices become our manners, and that we
increase our miseries by the remedies that should be their cure.

Love is not so pleasing a Passion as to invite men to erect him Altars, and
they have plainly discovered that they knew but the meanest part of his nature,
when they went about to make him the glory and delight of Lovers. For although
the other motions of the Soul be irksom, that their violence quarrels Reason,
and that their humor be not less opposite to Justice then Temperance, yet have
they this advantage upon Love, that they allow us respite, and that after
having made us feel their fury, they leave us in a condition wherein we taste a
kind of rest. Desire does not always torment us, and so soon as Hope makes but
show of leaving him, he falls a sleep. Sorrow does not always throw us into
despair, and by giving her but the least assistance you may draw her from her
abasement.

Anger, that wild and untreatable Passion, is not always in the persuit of
vengeance, she will take her ease when she has troubled us a while, and when
she has gnawn the Bit she is at quiet. But Love will grant us no cessation, he
persecuteth his Slaves at all times, his favors are as fatal as his disgraces,
and it is not easy to judge whether his scorns or his carresses be most
dangerous. Those Beauties for which men languish, are the cause of all their
miseries, if they flatter their Hopes they increase their flaming desires, and
they tumble headlong into insolence and extravagance if they answer not their
expectations. The liberty which that glorious sex vouchsafes to man to approach
their persons proves as pernicious as their commands not to presume to come
into their presence, they fight against the one and are vanquished by the other;
and our condition is so miserable, that we cannot practice them without being
their Slaves, nor endure difficulty to obtain their favors, without becoming
their Martyrs. What greater torment can an Enemy be condemned unto, then to
love a Creature that derides or makes her Triumphs of his liberty? What greater
cruelty can be invented then to make Men idolize a Mistress that either
maintains her rigor, or perseveres in her kindness? Both one and the other are
as dangerous as dishonorable: and if a man be unjust to bestow his affection
upon a person that disdains his adaddresses, he is mean spirited when he
submits to her who ought to obey him. Likewise they that discourse most solidly
of loves essence, are in doubt to believe that it is natural to man, they
assure us that there is another Principle in him which the art of Physic has
not yet discovered, and that a Passion which overthrows the order of nature
cannot be of her production: Si naturalis amor esset, and amarent omnes, and
semper amarent, and idem amarent; Neque alium pudor, alium cogitatio, alium
satietas deterreret. Petr. dial. 69.
for, say they, If love be born with us, it must be common to all men; that the
Objects by which some are ensnared ought to make impression on the minds of
others, that the shame and infamy that attends it ought not to divert them, and
that by a necessary conclusion, one Woman should have all men for Suitors, or
one Man should have all Women for Mistresses.

But because the inclinations of Men are different, that one and the same
object procures Love and Hatred to diverse persons, and that one views with
indifference what another beholds not but with Admiration. They infer that love
is not natural, that opinion is the Mother of this diversity of wills, who
represents us things other then indeed they are, and makes us conceive a Love
for that which is unworthy of it. Those Faces to whom Heaven has not been
liberal in favors, are not altogether freed from suspicion, some men fall in
Love with Baboons in feminine habits. Uncleanness is sometimes as ugly as
shameful, and it is not more ordinary for the deformed to love, then common for
the beautiful to be courted.

All the parts of the Body unite when they are employed in the work of Nature,
the senses that are incapable of conduct, constrain their assistance to succor
or enlighten her, and the faculties of the Soul are so subserviant to her, that
they always abandon their private differences to execute her orders.

But Love dispiseth all her Precepts, weakens her vigor, corrupts her
inclinations, opposes her dictates and by a fury as blind as unjust pours
confusion into all her Dominions. Never is man less reasonable then when he is
seized by this Passion, and he never appears more indiscreet then when he gives
ear to his Counsels or admits his suggestions. The most noble of his habitudes
vanish at the appearance of this Tyrant, his courage flags, his Counsels are
uncertain, his strength transmutes into Temerity, and having no thought for any
thing but the Subject of his Passion, he becomes as useless to his friends as
burdensome to himself.

The Poets had some Reason to feign that their Jupiter intermitted his own
felicity when he descended from Heaven to be a companion of women, Amare simul,
and sapere ipsi Jovi non datur.
that the conversation of Creatures so little valuable, debased his condition,
that the Empire of Love was incompatible with his Person, and that he did
necessarily cease to be a God so often as he subjected himself to his Slaves.
Although these wise Prattlers might think that their God was unchangable, and
that they had more in design to publish the power of Love, then to make him a
Sovereign of the Diety to whom they paid Divine adorations; yet may it be said
that this fable is become a real truth upon Earth, and that the Passion which
they feigned to prescribe Laws to their Gods, swallows up mankind, and guides
the inclinations contrary to their Nature. He is so powerful upon their minds
that he changes all their faculties, he makes the fearful audacious, he
inspires the Niggard with liberality, he engages the most generous to serve in
vile and ridiculous actions, he abaseth the proud, he makes wise men carry
Fools baubles, and by a new Metamorphosis he turns Dunces into Poets and
Orators.

But as these are strained disguises, which ought to be rather attributed to
the force of Fancy, then to the power of the thing loved, they easily return to
their first inclinations, they renounce their Amors to pursue what is more
suitable to their humors, they become at last the Persecutors of those Beauties
which before had made them Idolaters: for as soon as the Sun of Reason begins
to dart forth his Lights, that the judgment examins his first decrees, and that
the will acknowledges his Errors, then he learns without much preaching, that
Love is imperious, that he cannot be obeyed without hazard of liberty, that a
man is a Slave so soon as he becomes subject to his Laws, and that Kings ought
to think of laying down their Crowns from the hour that they become Amorous.

Let Plato exercise his Oratory in favor of Love as much as he will, let him
make it the Governor of Arts and Sciences, and let him give it, if he please,
the glory of having submitted the whole Earth to his Empire, he shall be
constrained to acknowledge that it is the most sordid and the most blind of our
Passions, and that he must have lost both his sense and his Reason that becomes
his advocate. For what can be showed us more unworthy of a Man, then to subject
him to a Woman, to make him forsake his understanding to follow her fantastic
humor, and to creep so far into her Dominion, as to have no desires but what
are hers, no resolutions but what proceed from her lips, nor any Authority but
what is confirmed by her decrees. Sometimes, as if the Beauty he adores were a
Diety, he grows pale in approaching her Person, he trembles as often as he sees
her, his Tongue gets the Cramp, when he would speak to her, and his Soul
distracted with excess of the Passion, can form nothing but nonsensical and
imperfect words. We must truly say that Love is an Enemy to nature, since it
violates all her Laws, changes the constitution of the most noble part of her
Workmanship, and that leaving him in a condition where he has no more the
command of himself, he can undertake nothing that is not ridiculous or
irregular.

To avoid them all these disorders, and to defend our Selves from the Tyranny
of so malignant a Passion, Reason must timely prevent his assaults, and we must
consider before we engage with such an Enemy, that the object to which he would
draw us is not in our Power, that it is a benefit that cannot contribute to our
felicity, and that the greatest Beauties are Heavenly presents placed upon
Womnes faces, only to punish the folly of indiscreet and curious Persons. That
this delightful proportion of parts is an advantage of as small continuance as
of great danger, that it is a flower that fades in few days, and a favor of
Nature, to which all the accidents of life may prove injurious.

In fine, that Beauty is but a Sun that borrows all his Virtue from our
opinion, and which would be void of light if it drew not it is splender from our
blindness. Indeed, if Love had not found the way to put out men's eyes he had
long since been a King without Subjects, we should have been no more Soldiers
listed under his command, those who fight under his Banners would become his
greatest Enemies, and they would disdain to prostitute their affections to a
Mistress whose chiefest excellence is nothing but what she has borrowed from
the vain esteem of foolish men. But Love knows so well how to disguise her
defects, that he sees not any thing in her of which he raises not the price,
he makes her apparent blemishes to pass for current perfections, and though she
be often endued but with ordinary Charms, he forbears not to give her excessive
praises. He ravisheth the Lilly of her whiteness to color her face, he steals
the Blush of Roses to embellish her Cheeks, he dims the glistering of the stars
to increase the brightness of her eyes; and to hear him speak of her, Nature
has nothing wonderful in the Creation which is not summed up in her Person. He
resembles those Idols that have eyes and see not, he sees notable defects, but
observes them not, and although his sight be continually fixed upon her Face,
yet can he not discern her spots from her perfections.

Man's condition were very deplorable if this Passion were without remedy, and
if the Fountain whence it springs were as necessary as common. But as it draws
its original from opinion its duration is equal to that which supports it: the
same cause from which it has its original stifles it, and Lovers most commonly
find the Cure of their distemper in the cause that procured it. Some have
Conquered their Amors by seeing their Mistress in a morning undrest; those
whom they beheld in the day time as Goddesses, seemed Monsters at the escaping
from their Beds, they could no more consider their aspects without disdain, and
they began to learn without the consultation of Philosophers, that Women owe
their glory to the splendour of Ornaments, and the greatest proportion of their
Beauty to the opinion of their Slaves. Others have prevented the love of this
Sex by that of Arts and Sciences, Plato amore contemplationis abstinuit ab omni
delectatione Venerea. D. Thom. 22. q. 152. Artic. ad 3.
they have withdrawn their senses from pleasure to employ them in the
contemplation of Nature, and, charmed by the attractions of truth, they
preferred the study thereof before the possession of the greatest Beauties of
the Earth.

The consideration of the shortness of the Pleasure has made others treacherous
to their own affections, and they became the Enemies thereof by the remembrance
of the Pains which they caused them to suffer: they could not resolve any
longer to cherrish a Mistress whose conversation furnished them with nothing but
shame and Repentance; and who after a moment of divertisement plunged them into
a condition equally shameful and unhappy. Alexander the Great was cured of this
evil disease by Ambition, the desire of fame begat him the Title of Continent,
as his Valor did that of Conqueror of the World, and in St. Austins sentiments,
it is not easy to decide whether he was prouder when he fought against himself
or when he gave Battle to his Enemies.

But every one sees that Reason is more effectual then these several ways of
curing this distemper, that she is more absolute in man then Ambition* that her
Power is beyond that of Curiosity, and that she that regulates all his Actions
may more easily become the Sovereign of Love, then opinion and covetousness.
For as man's will is free he may cease to love when himself pleases, he may
recover his liberty as often as he loses it, and even as to love a thing he
need but will it, so to chase away the desire of it, it is sufficient not to
will it.

Discourse III.
That Learning is vexatious and the Pleasures of Knowledge are mixed with Grief,
Danger and Vanity.
PHilosophy owns nothing in Nature more glorious than her self, all her
Participants take share in her Grandeur, and although she suffers not her
Suitors to draw vanity from their applications, she dares commend her self
without fear of offending against the good manners she makes profession to
teach them. The Delights she promises to such as court her, seem to her too
innocent not to attract their Love, and she concludes that a man must be
without Courage or without Reason to refuse her his affection, when he has
discovered her merit. She is so noble in her pursuits that she is busied only
in the contemplation of the chiefest Good, and she is so delightful in her
employments that her conversation is never without satisfaction; for besides
that she is the Companion of Virtue, that she shows us the secrets of Nature,
that she lifts us up into Heaven to inform us of her Wonders, and that she
anticipates our felicity by the knowledge she gives us of our future happy
estate, she fills the Soul with content, she unites our spirit to the object
which it seeks after, and opening wide the Gates of Truth, and disclosing all
her Charms, she seems to transport us from darkness to light, and from
Bondage to a glorious Liberty. The contentment which man receives from the
enjoyment of other things is always imperfect, the frailty of their nature
threatens him with their deprivation, the crimes that usually follow it make
him doubt their possession, and the difficulty he meets with to preserve them
leave him but a mixed satisfaction of fear and grief. But understanding is a
benefit which fortune cannot reach, the oppressors that rob him of his Wealth
cannot touch it, it remains with him when his goods and honors are sled away,
and a wise man may boast of being happy so long as he preserves it.

The utility of wisdom gives place in nothing to the contentments she
promises, and if she have attractions to draw our Love, she has benefits to
satisfy the hopes of her Suitors. The Prince of Orators is not deceived when he
styles her the Nurse of young men; the stay of the aged, the succor of the
afflicted, and the Protector of the virtuous. He assures us that Religion would
be doubtful if she were not enlightened by knowledge, and that necessarily the
Spirit must disunite from the senses by understanding, to conceive her
mysteries; that their is nothing more dangerous in a state then an Ignoramus
who emploies himself in explicating that Doctrine that is above his reach, and
that a Kingdom looks toward it is ruin when Philosophers cease to command, and
the people to obey them.

But though Antiquity make so high an esteem of knowledge, and that the honors
she bestowed upon the Ancients obliged them to give her such glorious Titles,
yet the Professors of Divinity make her the most rigorous of their Torments,
and the most ingenious among them have confessed that her pains surpass her
pleasures; and the labors that must be undergon for her, do much exceed the
delights she affords us. Her greatest business is to entertain us with matters
as vain as useless, all her instructions are little more then eloquent words
invented by subtilty to amuse us, and doubtless, a man is not much wronged, if
he be denied that learning which he may be ignorant of to his advantage, and
which he cannot know without danger.

Truth is so gentle that she permits all that court her to take her by the
hand; not to despise her, is sufficient to be admitted into her presence, and
as the Sun imparts his light liberally to all men, she comunicates freely to
all those that seek her: she is obscure only where science has bemisted her.
Those Tracts which art has beaten to come at her have made her inaccessible,
that which ought to conduct us to her, has turned us out of the way, and man is
assured to miss her so often as he emploies learning to find her. Nature had
endewed us with more ready helps to become better; she has fixed our felicity
to our will, as she condemns all those habitudes which fill our heads with
wind, she approves no skills that direct us not to virtue, she rejects all that
sublime knowledge whereof the learned make their boast. She esteems them the
inventions of ease, and delights which after having a while entertained our
fancy leave us in despair of finding her.

Those arts which we style liberal, are but the pass time of youth, Schoolboys
must learn them, and a man is not to converse with them any longer then while
he is incapable of more excellent knowledge. For if they be the beginning they
are not the end of his studies, if they make part of our Apprentiship, they are
not to be our employment: and if they help to make us knowing, they contribute
nothing to our virtue. Also Seneca acknowledges but one science that leads us
to wisdom, that teaches us modesty with the art of good Expression, and that
putting us into a state of liberty, at once inspireth us with the Prudence of
Politicians, the Valor of Conquerors, and the constancy of Philosophers.

But she is so excellent that she admits no rival, she endures not inferior
Allies, and she would think it a Treason against her own Grandeur if she should
vouchsafe them her company. As the designs of Princes are not formed from the
wild opinions of their People, and as Commanders banish from their Counsels
those advices which conduce not to the end proposed, virtue rejects all that is
not for her purpose, she retains but what is necessary; and as she esteems it
an injustice in a covetous man to wish for superfluous Riches, she concludes
that it would be a kind of intemperance in a wiseman to desire the knowledge of
more then he needs.

We must not judge of the wisdom of a man by the multitude of things he has
learned; Admitti non debet quis ad probandum id, quod probatum non prodest.
Lib. 10. Cod. de probat.
Religion takes offense when we study her Mysteries rather for knowledge than
reverence, she commands that practice should be the end of our Travels, and she
permits us not to be of the number of them who spend their whole lives in the
search without the love of Truth. When God placed man in the terrestrial
Paradise, he inspired him only with the knowledge of things needful for him,
although the favors wherewith he honored him were excessive. He limited his
Science, He would not he should learn what could not profit him; and, in the
opinion of Tostatus, he sent him not the Animals made of Corruption to give
Names unto, but for that the knowledge thereof was not of use to him, too much
Learning is always insolent, and edifieth not; as we find no Conquerors that
are not proud, we see no learned men that are not puffed up, Divines can tell
us that the proud Angels strayed not from their Duty but by having too much
knowledge.

Aristotle was of opinion that the famous men of old were often guilty of
fantastical actions, that they made small sallies which were little different
from great follies, that their Ecstasies surpast the strength of their Reason,
and that they could bring forth nothing above ordinary men which was not akin
to fury. Those great Wits which Antiquity puts amongst the number of Prodigies,
have not always been the wisest men, their Works are not irreproveable no more
than their Lives, if they have written some things worthy of honor, they have
left us others as ridiculous, and their Disciples confess they had intervals in
which they were not more reasonable than mad men. Although this Language be
opposite to the common opinion of the people, and that the benefits of knowledge
oblige men to give it reverence where ever they find it, yet I think it not
hard to draw them to the contrary sentiment, and to obtain their assent, that
the knowing men at this day are but delightful dotards who act the fool by
authority, and teach impertinencies with approbation. For what is it that our
Professors of Learning do when they instruct us to define all things by their
chiefest attributes, to separate their nature from their properties, and, by
the aid of propositions infer that Virtue is a Gender, that Justice and
Prudence are the Species, and that Virtue is separable from Temperance, but
that Temperance is not to be divided from Virtue? What profit do we reap from
these formalities? Of what use is it to know how to compose a formal Discourse?
to reduce an Argument to an impossibility? to frame Sophisms to ensnare the
unlearned? and to use Dilemma's and Inductions to surprise the unskilful? What
advantage can we hope from the knowledge of Natural Philosophy, to be informed
that the Earth is solid, that God by his Power can separate the form from the
matter, that he unites at his pleasure two substantial forms into one compound,
and directs the substance to produce a third by the intermediation of
accidents, to which he communicates his efficacy? What serves it us to discover
the Influences of the Heavens, to know that the Planets are corruptible, that
the Sun is a mixed not a pure Element, that the Stars are void of Life, and that
the whole Earth is but a Point compared with the Firmament that surrounds it?
In fine, what advantage do we acquire when we are taught by Divines that God is
infinite? that the Unity of his Nature agrees with the Trinity of his Persons?
that the Father begets the Son from all eternity? and that the holy Spirit
proceeding from the Father and the Son has the communication of their
Perfections? Were it not better that all the Arts were banished the Schools,
than that they should entertain us with so many unedifying things, that they
should teach us to regulate our Wills rather than our Fancies, and how to live
virtuously, rather than to dispute well? Were it not to be wished that Logic,
by which we flourish our Harangues, by which we examine the property of Speech,
and which boasts of laying open Truth by the subtilty of Arguments, taught us
to reform our Manners and to reject all these vain amusements of the mind,
which benefit a wise man as little as they are troublesome and insignificant to
the simple.

Were it not better that Geometry, taught the rich to bound his Desires, to
divide a proportion of his Revenues amongst the poor, than to show him the Art
of taking the contents of his Parks, the height of his Palaces, and the extent
of his Lands? Were it not to be desired that the Professors of Divinity would
discover to us the way to love rather than define the Creator, and instead of
informing us of his Essence, and laboring to make us conceive the mysterious
Trinity of his Persons by the Unity of his Nature, to teach us the ^wful
adoration of Him whom we are not able to comprehend, and to make us forgo all
that is dearest to us in the world, to be united to him, who alone ought to
possess all our affections. But the delight of all Arts is the pleasure of
discourse, they are swallowed up of the words that compose them, they are the
minds diversion* and not the employment of the Will, they polish our Speech,
and our Actions remain unrectified, and all the witty things they propose are
but to divertize their Lovers; so that the greatest part of our Sciences are
properly but specious trifling imaginations, and I do not think that he could
offend the learned, who should define Knowledge to be the Dreams of them that
watch, and Dreams to be the Knowledge of them that sleep. These defects in
Knowledge would be tolerable, if other more dangerous consequences did not
follow them, and that after having held their Martyrs in hand with things that
fall out to be of little use, they did not make them impious or insolent. For
as she is of an imperious humor, suffers no opposition, pretends to understand
all things, and would no less be thought to dive into the mysteries of Faith
than into the secrets of Nature; she is made use of to uphold Vice, and is
conversant about what has most of show, and not about what has most of Truth,
and, by an injustice contrary to that of Idolatry, she employs the most sublime
part of her skill, to bring in question or to overthrow the Maxims and
Principles of Religion.

But not to discredit Knowledge without authority, is it not she that has so
often changed the face of Christendom? Misera orbis Christiani facies sub
Constantio, ob frequentes Ecclesiasticorum disceptationes and conventus.
Ammian. lib. 21.
Did not Philosophers become the first Heretics? Did not the ages of the
greatest Learning lean more to Atheism than to Religion? And was the Church
ever more dismembered than when Ecclesiastics undertook to raise Arguments upon
her Dignity and Decrees. The diversity of their Opinions stifled that Charity
which ought to have united her, and they ceased to be Christians when they were
become learned men, the Desire that possessed them of out-arguing their
Antagonists made their designs scandalous even to the Heathen; and those men of
Darkness were sufficiently enlightened to see that they who were looked upon as
the Pillars of the Church, robbed her Faith of Assurance, her Doctrine of
Evidence, and her Councils of Authority. Does not all Europe complain at this
day of the Art of Physic? Mutatur ars quotidie, toties interpolles and ut
quisque loquendo pollet, imperator illico Vitae and necis fit. Plin. lib. 29.
Are not her Remedies as cruel as hazardous? The Disputes of her Doctors, have
they not been the destruction of the greatest number of them that are gone down
to the Chambers of Death? Do not Physicians make traffic of human Bodies
without being arreigned at the Tribunals of Justice, when forgoing the
Instructions of their Masters, they try the experience of new Medicines at the
price of our Lives? And see we not daily that they send Death to their Patients
with the Drinks that ought to cure them? The Churches and Churchyards are full
of their victims; the Marbles that cover them publish nothing but their
injustice; and if the Stones, under which they lie were not insensible, they
would openly accuse them of Temerity and Ambition: they would proclaim to all
the world that they are deprived of Life by using too much means to preserve
it, that Art hastened their Sepulture, and that the multitude of Medicaments
was the only cause of their Death. So that Science which was invented to divert
or comfort us, is turned into our chastisement, and it were to be wished for the
common good, that as she is banished from amongst the Turks and Barbarians, she
were also unknown to Christians. For as she maintains that the Cause from
whence she proceeds is infallible, she becomes obstinate in her determinations,
she approves of no waters but what are drawn from her own fountain, and
building upon the certainty of her own Authority, she from thence forms
Consequences no less dangerous than to her they seem evident. In fine, Knowledge
is an immortal evil, her fury is without bounds, her malice exceeds the limits
of time, and she is not less pernicious to man in the discovery of false
Doctrine, than when she invents Reasons to entice him to defend or embrace it.

Discourse IV.
That the Buildings and Gardens of Grandees are not so much the Inventions of
Necessity as Vanity.
ALthough in the precedent discourse, I declare war against Philosophy, and by
Arguments drawn from Senecas Authority do discover plain enough the vanity and
deceit thereof, yet should I think it an offense against that Justice so
religiously observed in the Schools, if I permitted not her adherents to stand
up in her defense, and to make their appeals from that condemnation, to plead
her cause, and bringing their bill of review, to set forth her perfections to
cover her defects. Her advantages are so considerable that we must be ignorant
of her merit if we slight her too much, and Reason must forsake us if we esteem
not the most noble and most delightful of her rational productions. Some have
thought that we owe all our felicity to the observation of her maxims, that our
glory consisted in her enjoyment, and that if our life were sustained by the
aids of the Gods, we became virtuous by the help of Philosophy. In fine, they
were not afraid to declare that we were more obliged to her then to nature
which gave us being. That if we received this from Heaven, we obtained virtue
from that, and that a virtuous life being much above that which we hold in
common with the Beasts, we were more beholding to her instructions then to the
bounty of the Gods, if they were not as well the Authors of knowledge as of life.

It is easy to confirm this discourse by the Grandeur of her Employments, and
to judge of the excellency of her nature by the different effects of her
operations in the World. For although the most glorious of her exercises tend
to the discovery of Truth by her lights, to teach us the adoration of God as
our Sovereign, and to respect our Neighbors as members of our selves. Though
she take upon her the care of instructing Princes, of leading their Subjects in
the paths of obedience, of showing Fathers how to educate their Children, and
of furnishing Statesmen with those excellent rules by which to retain the
people within the lemits of respect, and to make themselves dreaded of their
Enemies: Yet would she think her labors ineffectual to their purpose, if she
had not first allured them from their Caves and Forests, to give them the
discipline of good manners; and preserving to every one their right, taught
them to erect Houses, Castles and Citadells. Indeed it is she that invented
Architecture, that contrived the first Mansions, and who raised sumptuous
Palaces for Kings after she had built Huts and Cottages. It Is she, says an
illustrious Stoic, who taught our forefathers to mix sand and lime, to square
Marbles with Iron, to hew Timber with Steel, to erect walls by aid of Lime and
Plummet, and to spread Lead and Copper upon our Houses. The proud Buildings
which at this day we behold with so much applause are the operations of
Philosophy, the Architects that raised them are but the Ministers, and what
industry soever they have employed to polish them, they stood in need of her
rules both to begin and to finish them.

We must be ungrateful not to honor her for so many good offices, her use binds
us to esteem her, and it would be a kind of obstinacy to remain her Opponent
after having learnt how necessary she is. Nevertheless by the principles of
Seneca we must say that she was not more successful when she found out the art
of Building, then when she formed the figures of Sillogismes, and that she was
not less fatal to man when she taught him to build Palaces, then when she
instructed the Logicians to deceive the simple by sophistries, the Physicians
to commit Homicides without punishment, and the Lawyers to rob men of their
Estates and good name without fear of chastisement. Indeed the Mansions of
great men are not always the retirements of innocence; Vice there reigns
commonly by Authority, and what care soever the superintendant takes to
preserve them from disorder they cannot in such families hinder the commission
of those Crimes which in Huts and Cottages are unknown. Theives take the
advantage of their Woods and Coverts to surprise the harmless unguarded
Traveller, the domestics lead a disorderly life, the Masters spend their time
in Play and Riot their servants become lazy, their Stewards grow rich, and
their Lords poor, and the frequenters of such Houses, insensibly become vain
and insolent. It is with families as with Cities, the greatest are commonly the
most vicious; because men live in Palaces more at their ease, they do not
therefore lead more virtuous lives, vice attends plentiful Tables, and be it
that liberty or abundance facilitates the way to sin, experience shows that
they who enjoy them seldom escape undepraved.

But we likewise see, that Divine Justice gives Commission to the works of
great men to become their tormentors, they tremble in the midst of their
Palaces, they are afraid of death under the covert of their gilded Ceelings,
the cleft of a wall puts them into a fright, the clattering of a shutter drives
their courage to a Nonplus, and they fear their days to be at an end every
time the wind breaks a pane of their Windows, or puffs up a Tile from their
Roof. The places of safety are not secure to them, and they are as much amazed
to see the tapistry slip from the wall as if an Earthquake had violently thrown
up the foundation of their Dwelling.

How much more happy do I esteem the condition of our forefathers, who
neglecting the art of building, contented themselves with the Lodgings that
nature had made them, those Chambers which she had indented in the Rocks served
them for places of retreat, the open Fields were their floores, a large heap of
Earth cased with Moss, was their Bed, and as Vanity had not yet taught them the
art of adorning their Dwellings, they retired to the Caves of the Earth as to
the places of their recreation. If they found a necessity of building Houses,
art had no share therein, the Earth without opening her Bowels, served them for
foundations, mud mixed with straw was the matter, the spoils of Trees furnished
the Roofs and Covering, and two forked poles interlaced on each side supported
the whole structure. The small accomodations that secured them from the
outrageous influences of the weather, were also their defense against ravenous
Beasts, and they lived more happily in those their Huts, then Princes do at
this day in their glorious Palaces. For they were free under straw and moss,
and these are Bondmen upon Thrones of Gold and Ivory; they found the
contentment of happy men in their poverty, and these meet with the miseries of
the damned in their Plenty. Though they possess all things, yet are they never
satisfied, and it seems as if Heaven had granted them the temporal blessing
of abundance, only to render them eternally miserable.

Those men that were ignorant of the use of Noble structures, who lived in
woods and forests, who built not but to defend themselves against the
intemperatures of the Air, past their time with content, their nights were not
interrupted with vexatious thoughts, they awakened as cheerful in the morning
as they contentedly laid themselves down to rest over night. Our cares
commenced with the art of Building, the Edifices that enclose us ravish our
rest, and it may be said we became unhappy, when knowledge persuaded us to
forsake our Dales and Cottages to inhabit Palaces and Lordlike Houses.

A wise man that knows the vanity of our structures, despises them, he uses
Houses as places of refuge, not as apartments to dwell in, he looks upon them
as fortresses invented by necessity to warrant him from injurious seasons, and
without being concerned for the matter whereof they are composed, he lodges
his felicity in his virtues and in his conscience; he esteems his habitation
sumptuous enough, when he has virtue for his Guest, he considers the mansions
of Noble men as the Sepulchers of the living, Illud humile tugurium nempe
vertutes recipit, jam omnibus templis formosius erit. Sen. Cens. ad Helu. cap.
9.
he calls them the retreats of men that know how to hide themselves but not how
to live, and whose spirits are mean enough to love their Prisons, but wanting
courage to despise them.

They who delight in Gardens are not more excuseable; and what pretext soever
they lay hold on to authorize their practice, they cannot escape the censure of
Philosophers. The pleasures which these men boast of tasting in such exercises,
seem not to them sufficiently pure and innocent to rob them of their time; and
though they have promised to themselves great advantages by their fruits or
beauty, yet could they never entice those reasonable men to approve such
employments. They pass the sentence of blame upon them for that they conclude
them unserviceable to wisdom, and they inveigh against their Authors, because
they entertain us only with things vain and foreign. Socrates, who so
perfectly understood the injustice and sordidness of our divertisements,
banisheth this employment from his School, he prefers the City before the
Country, he advises his Scholars to be Citizens and not Peasants; and well
knowing flowers and Trees are speechless things, he persuades them by his own
Example not to consult those Tutors, who if they be able to recreate their
Eyes, cannot satisfy their Ears.

I know that the Romans made esteem of Gardens, that the most famous amongst
them made such their abode, that they disingaged themselves from the care of
the Empire to exercize a Gardening life, and that a great number of their wise
men retired to such places, the better to apply themselves to the study of
Philosophy. I know that the curious walks and plots of Gardens, are friends to
the Muses, that the refined wits take pleasure in them, that the greatest part
of those works we admire at this day, had their conception there, and that
their shady retirements have often been of more use to the learned then the
Schools and conferences. There I know that the Poets composed those verses that
animated many men to glorious Actions, that the Orators there made their
Panegyricks in virtues favor, and that Philosophers there taught us quietly to
attend our change, to resist misfortunes with a resolution, and to expect death
without fear.

But I also know that Gardens were made but for diversion, that they are the
ordinary employments of insignificant men, and that the greatest number of such
spend their time therein but for recreation. Some are so linckt to them that
they make it their whole business; they pass away all their life in the
observation of party colored flowers, they form and contrive spacious walks
only for delight, they invent mazes and labyrinths only to have the pleasure of
being at aloss; and if they adorn them with murmuring Rivers, and reflecting
Fountains, it is but to renew their Pleasures, to be charmed into a sleep by
the noise of the waters that run from them. They spend a proportion of their
revenues to buy Onyons, they turn Merchants of foreign Plants, they value
nothing but what was unknown in the Gardens of their Ancestors, and they would
never be content if they thought they had not comprehended in their ground all
the rarities that the Earth produces.

What an ecstasy of joy are they in, when their Garden has brought them forth a
new flower, when a Tulip is curiously streaked, when an Emony is finely
doubled, and that a Pinck has delightfully colored her leaves with the
mixture of blood and milk? But then again how are they distasted when the Worms
have got into their onion Beds, when the Sun has withered a Plant which they
had carefully cherished in a curious Pot, when the wind or the cold has killed
a young wall Tree? We shall see some as much afflicted for these losses as
others for a Kingdom, and I cannot tell whether they would not better bear the
death of the dearest of their friends, then the miscarriage of a fine Tulip, or
a curious Emony. What more vexatious occupation could curiosity have invented
to torment us, then to affect us with the art of Gardening, to exercize a man's
care to preserve flowers, and to convert the most innocent of recreations into
matters of grief and vanity?

If then Heaven have permitted us the delight of Gardens, let us use them as
places of refreshment, and not as retreats for idleness, let their shady beds
and seats serve to unweary us, not to sleep in, let their obscure Arbors put us
in mind of the habitations of the dead, and not serve to act our private
debaucheries in, and let all that we there meet with serve modestly to divert,
not to employ us. Let us not bid more for things then they are worth, let us
judge of the beauty of our Gardens by the report of wise not of curious men, and
let us learn of them that all these odoriferous stars which we so much esteem,
are but party colored knots of Grass: and, to use the words of a Greek-Poet,
Zephyrus breaths, that last a few days and flatter our sight the better to make
us bewail their loss, when they have changed their glory into corruption.

Discourse V.
That the gaudiness of Apparel discovers the impudicity or pride of them that
use it.
MAn has so great an affection for that which is good, that he cannot forgo
the desire of it, the impious seek it, in their dissolute actions, the damned
who live altogether in despair, wish for it, and they cannot forbear to hope
the enjoyment of that which is not possible for them to possess. As the
presence of good is the cause of happiness, the absence thereof procures their
Torment. The impossibility of obtaining abates not their desires, they are
constant to it in the midst of their punishments, and what pains soever they
take to loose the love of it, they cannot banish it from their will, without
the extremity of Violence. They love God though they be his Enemies, and they
reverence his Excellence in the person of his Children, though they are not any
more in a condition to communicate with him. This violent Passion is an evident
proof of their wants; they affect what is good because they are indigent, and
they desire not their Creator but because he only is able to supply their
necessities.

Although the love we have for beauty be not so natural as that which we bear
to goodness, that the one be affixt to our substance and the other attend upon
our will, that the one be an inclination of nature; and the other but an effect
of opinion, it is therefore not less universal, and I know not if there be any
Nation under Heaven that have not therewith been attainted. The Meridionals who
banish formal courts and reveling from their assemblies, despise not gay
clothing, they put on rich apparel so often as they desire to be seen in
public; and deeming that their vestures set off the beauty of the Body, they
array it with their choicest ornaments. They set tufts of Feathers on their
heads, they fix Diamonds and Pearls to their Ears, they dress the skins of
Beasts to cover them, they set off the blackness of their Bodies by the
whiteness of fish bones, and as if the Pomp of their apparel made their Persons
more honorable, they draw vanity from the costliness of their attire. This
Passion, though guilty, is not by them condemned as criminal, she has some
qualities that make her glorious, her manner of operating is a Copy of that of
the Diety, and adding to the Body a beauty which before it had not, she gives
us to understand that our seeking to her is not so much the mark of our
indigence as of her liberality. She beautifies the Body as the Temple of God,
and she is of opinion that she pays respect to the Divine Power within it, so
often as she bedecks it with foreign Ornaments.

The Politicians who boast of state conduct, imitate nature in this point, and
as she distinguishes the Animals male from female by exterior marks, Auratas
vestes aut murice tinctas nulli licet far, and gravi animadversione
plectitur, quisquis vetito se, and indebito, non abdicaverit Vestimento. Cod.
de vest.
they beget a difference of Persons by the diversity of Garments. They array
Kings in Purple that they may seem the more Majestical to their Subjects, they
give Robes to Senators as tokens of their Employments, they separate the
Nobless from the Yeomandry by the fleece and the garter, and they will have it
that ornaments shall be as well the rewards as the signs of valor, but this
judicious manner of clothing is at present out of use, opinion has abolished
the motive.

At this day we apparel our selves only for show, the noble men wear their
ornaments only out of vanity, and as the low Estate is despicable, so the
common people put on Genteel habits only to dissemble their condition. It is
hard now adays to distinguish a Merchant from a Gentleman by his Apparel, one
cloth covers them both, and if it were lawful to judge of the quality of a man
by his Garb, I know not whether ordinary persons would not often prefer a
Citizen before a Knight. The Citizens Wives are as exquisitly dressed as our
Ladies, the Pearls and Rubies which were formerly the ornaments of Princesses,
now magnify their necks and fingers; the Indies have nothing precious but it is
to be seen about their Bodies: and some amongst them are such flebergebits that
their attire must not be inferior to the Rings and Jewels of Dames of the
greatest quality. But as the one and the other are inexcuseable they will not
be angry if I place them together, if I make it appear that they cannot adorn
themselves without sinning, and that they become not less suspected of
impudicity then Pride, so often as they bedeck themselves to Excess.

Nature does so much resemble truth, that nothing upon Earth can corrupt her:
Art which brags of being her Ape, could never debauch her works, that Purple
which makes a King and the Cowl that makes a Hermit, alters not his Face, and
what artifice soever industry emploies to raise or abase it is beauty, she is
not able to disguise the Air and lineaments thereof. We see some Women so
charming that they dart love into men in despite of the Rags that cover them;
and some are by nature so ill proportioned, that all our Court inventions
cannot render them pleasing, the splender of their Attire increases their
defects, and they are never more deformed then when they are best accoutred,
all that should set them off makes them ugly, and they cause their beholders to
confess, that if ornaments do sometimes diminish the graces of the beautiful,
they always augment the imperfections of the unhandsome. Ladies, if this
Principle be true, and if experience constrain you to own it, though with some
difficulty; wherefore waste you so much time in your attire? What is that
Spanish red with which you force your Cheeks and Lips to blush good for? And of
what use are all those Jewels which rattle at your Ears? If you are deformed
all these ornaments increase your defects, your faults are more visible when
they approach the glory of your attire, and you carry nothing of less use about
you then that which you employ to hide your unhandsomness. Deles picturam a Deo
datam mulier, si vultum tuum materiali candore oblinas, si acquisito rubore
perfundas: illa pictura Vitii non decoris est, fraudis non simplicitatis. Amb.
Exam. lib. 6.
I know that you will fancy your selves to be beautiful, and that it would be
an offense against that civility which you imagine to be due to your sex, not to
think as you do. But if you believe it, why do you betray your own judgment by
your practice? Why seek you after ornaments to adorn you, and thereby silently
confess that ye are unhandsome, seeing ye have need of a foreign beauty to set
off your own: innocence and purity are Enemies to disguises, impurity and
unworthyness seek Coverts and off sets: things decent suffer not concealment,
and a Woman becomes doubtful of her own perfections when once she calls to her
Jewels and her Silks for their assistance to purchase the vain Title of
beautiful.

It Is true that what some of the most witty of the sex have to say for
themselves is ingenious; For they plead that it is to please their Husbands,
and as their happiness consists in the enjoyment of their good graces, they
ought to employ their utmost skill to obtain and preserve them. But they forget
that in designing to preserve the love of a man, they loose the favor of God,
that in contenting their Husbands, they beget impudicity in others; and these
committing Adulteries upon their Faces, they are the cause of unlawful desires.
What a folly is it for a Woman to prefer a bastard complexion to her own? To
drive nature from her Cheeks by Vermillion, and forfeit her own judgment for
fear of her Husbands censure? Quanta haec amentia, essigiem mutare naturae,
picturam quaerere; and dum verentur, maritale judicium perdere suum? Aug. lib.
4. de Doct. Christ.
It must be concluded that they esteem themselves deformed, since they falsify
their own faces, and that they are first unpleasant in their own Eyes, since
they seek matter out of themselves wherewith to delight others.

In fine, All that they alleadg for their excuse, tends to their condemnation,
and without a formal Philosophical Process they may easily be found guilty by
their own Arguments. For if they be handsome, wherefore do they disguise
themselves under so many different forms? And if they be unhandsom, why do they
betray their defects by smug pots and ornaments? This Dilemma puts the less
extravagant to a Nonplus, those that are not become shameless do own that they
cannot adorn themselves without sinning, that their attires offend their
Conscience, as well as their honor, and that if Adultery be odious because it
is a violation of Chastity, the Luxury of apparel ought to be abominated, for
that it corrupts our Nature.

Those Christian Ladies that lived in the Primitive Church, were far from this
vain humor of Apparel; they despised outward ornaments because they were the
Testimonials of sin, they never clothed themselves without consideration of
their Mothers nakedness, and as they were chaste and penitent, they would not
make use of attires that should not put them in mind of her disobedience. They
thought they were going to their own funerals, so often as they were obliged to
dress themselves; and making judgment of the misery of their condition by the
greatness of the punishments inflicted on them they believed themselves
condemned to dye, because they were constrained to carry about them the marks
of their crime. Being the daughters of Eve, they were content if their shame
were but covered, a piece of Cloth served for that; they thought it a sin
against Justice to be more richly clad then their Parent, and glorying in the
meanest of their Apparel, they taught the Dames of our days that there is no
beauty but that of virtue, no comely white but that of purity, no lovely red
but that of shame-facedness, no handsome or graceful behavior but that of
modesty.

If the Women of the World would take the pains to consult their guides upon
this Subject, and if these had candor enough to lay open their injustice, as
they have sordid flattery to hide it, they would long since have learned that
they cannot have recourse to artifices without fowling their Conscience, and
that they become guilty so often as they make use of gaudy attire and painting
to set out their Earthen Vessels, Quantum a nostris disciplinis aliena sunt,
quam indigna nomine Christiano, faciem fictam gestare, quibus simplicitas omnis
inducitur? Turtul. lib. 16. de cult. faem. cap. 7.
and to imbellish their complexions. It Is not to be a Christian, says the
learned Tertullian, to falsify the Work of that God whom we pretend to adore,
to preprefer fraud or art before that simplicity which he teaches us, to cheat
a man under pretense of pleasing him, and to disguise the face with design to
ensnare him.

Doubtless our vain Women must have given themselves up to the Tempter, since
he has so much power over their will, since he draws services from them so
disadvantageous to their own Salvation, and has so much the ascendant of their
understanding, as to induce them to break the Oath which they made in the day
of their Baptism. For if they will look back into that, they shall find there
that they dedicated their liberty to the Son of God, they promised to be his
spouses, they protested the renounciation of all worldly vanities, and to have
respect unto his Commandments at the hazard of their lives. Yet as if the
corruption of the times gave them a dispensation from that Oath of fidelity,
they despise his Laws, they oppose their own wills against his commands, and
making a mock of the simplicity of his Doctrine, they walk in all the Paths that
are contrary to it. We permit not our servants to hold correspondence with them
against whom we stand at defiance, that Soldier is chastized that keeps
intelligence with the Enemy, and it is a punishable crime in an Army, to go out
of the Camp to parley with an adversary. And yet our Christian Women are not
afraid to consult the Devil, who is their common Enemy, they take pride in
being his Disciples, they prefer his advices before the Counsels of Jesus
Christ's, and without being sensible of the hazard they run of their Salvation
in following so dangerous and malicious a guide, they are content with a Tutor
that instructs them in impudence, vanity and prostitution.

Let those that Idolize them bring what Reasons they can for their excuse, they
are not able to acquit them of sin, their intentions cannot be innocent, they
are sufficiently guilty when they begin to delight in gaudy attire; the
aversion they have against keeping at home renders them suspected, those
Courtships and Revels with which they are pleased, bring their pudicity in
question; and I might say that they cease to be virtuous from the time that
they desire the company of men to see and to be seen; beauty is exposed to
Temptation, it is an advantage as dangerous to them that enjoy it, as to them
that behold it, and it suffices to know that she is of no use to the Angels,
that she brought a scandal into Heaven, that she caused the second sin in the
World, to persuade Women to neglect, and men to disesteem it.

THE SECOND TREATISE. OF DESIRE.
Discourse I.
Of the Nature of Desire.
AS a wise man's content is from within, he finds his felicity in his own
Breast, he draws his confidence from the sincerity of his Conscience, and
discovers nothing upon Earth that is able to satisfy him but his own Virtue,
it ought not to be wondered if he reject his Passions, and if after he has
examined their nature and properties, he finds them as disadvantageous to his
rest as useless in his conduct. Their ill usage has procured his hatred, and he
drives them not from his soul, but because they breed seditions and disorders.
The discourses which the Peripateticks have formed to undeceive Seneca in that
belief, could not persuade him to receive them into his service, and what
excessive commendations soever their Writings have afforded them they could not
bribe this generous Spaniard, they hinder him not from declaring war against
them; and he considers them as the evil spirits that set themselves in
opposition to Virtue, as Tyrants that conspire her ruin, and insolent Subjects
who brave her Authority and despise her Government.

Posidonius, who was not famous amongst the Ancients but because he sided with
the Stoics, thought he pleaded the Cause of his Gods as often as he opposed
their Adversaries, when he exhorted his Disciples to scorn their assistance,
and when he proved, by Reasons drawn from Morality, that Passions were but the
diseases of mad men, and the opinions of the ignorant. To hear this
Philosopher's discourse, the Earth bears nothing more miserable than a
passionate man, and, in his opinion, to restore Virtue to her Dominion, we need
but banish her Enemies which are our Passions. This sentiment for being
somewhat severe, is no opponent to Reason, we find Philosophers at this day who
maintain it in the Schools, and are not afraid to incur the censure of some
Divines by defending the Doctrine of Infidels. Seneca blames Love for that he
is always interessed, because he seeks his own advantage in the object he hunts
after, because he respects fortune and not the person, and for that his
duration is no longer than while he is fed by pleasure or profit. He condemns
Fear because she is umbragious, she hastens our misfortunes by her foresight,
she is tormented before the afflictions touch us, and unites the present with
the future to make us unhappy. He opposes Sadness because she is injurious to
mankind, she wounds his Body, she troubles his Understanding, and is not less
offensive to one and the other in her moderation than in her excesses.

But he is never more animated against Passions than when Desire would be
admitted into employment, and he demonstrates by Reasons as evident as
efficatious, that he cannot lawfully act any thing for us: and that that man
must not give him any business who will not hazard his liberty and rest. To
apprehend this Doctrine well, we must suppose with Zeno, that no action can be
good which is not agreeable to Nature: in the Morals of this great Philosopher,
Omne quod contra naturam est, monstri meretur notam penes omnes; penes nos vero
etiam elogium Sacrilegii in Deum naturae and authorem Tertul. lib. de coron.
milit.
whatsoever strays from this universal Law is vicious, and a man cannot boast
of being virtuous any longer than he governs himself by her rules. For as all
her Instructions are divine, she ordains nothing but what is equitable, and
every man ought to obey her, that will not set himself to overthrow the purpose
of her Author. Kings, who are the Gods of their People, are subject to her
Laws; among Christians we accuse them of Sacriledg against God, who transgress
her Ordinances; and no man becomes guilty of their violation, but he is deemed
a monster in the judgment of all men. The justice of her Laws renders such as
offend against them more guilty; as she is the Disciple of Truth, we cannot
violate her Commands without offending her Master. What ever issues not from
this spring is vicious, and we may be assured of falling headlong into danger
every time we shut our Eyes against this Light.

From hence it comes that Philosophers maintain so bloody a War against Desire,
because he slights her precepts, he is insatiable in his pursuits, and contrary
to Nature, who is content with little, nothing but infinity must be his bounds;
Philosophy, as ingenious as she is, has not yet found the way to give him
satisfaction, he is insolent notwithstanding her precautions, the remedies
which she has composed to heal him, have only served to inflame his fever,
and she is not cleared of the imputation of having taught him to long for
excessive things, by permitting him to seek after supposed necessaries. For as
he is ambitious he always meditates new Conquests, the Riches he already enjoys
content him not, he aspires to them that are out of his reach; and as if he
were immortal and infinite, he gains new strength from that which one should
think should stifle him. A man who thinks of nothing but what yet is to be
received, easily forgets what he has already obtained, he cease to take
pleasure in present enjoyments, and having all his thoughts bent upon the
future, he confesses that he is needy in the midst of his Wealth. But his
poverty proceeds from his ingratitude, Quisquis de accipiendo cogitat, oblitus
accepti est, nec ullum habet malum cupiditas majus, quam quod ingraest Sen. Ep.
73.
he is indigent because he is unthankful, and he is not miserable but because
he slighteth the benefits he has received, to hunt after the things which he
expects.

An ambitious man was never seen to be content with his condition, he
languisheth under the hopes of renewed Grandeurs, those which he already enjoys
are but the Ladder by which he climbs, he looks upon them which are above him
and not upon those of a meaner state; and he has less pleasure to see many
behind him, then disquiet to behold one before him. His Desire increases with
his Power, and as he considers not from whence he came, but whither he tends,
it permits him not to stop in that to which he had imprudently aspired. A
lascivious person loves diversity, he stays not long upon one Beauty, one and
the same object delights and displeases him in a few days, and as if his Love
made him lose her allurements, he forsakes her to seek another. A covetous man
is never satisfied, he resembles the bottomless pit which swallows all; the
wealth which he gathers augments his appetite, and who so could sound the depth
of his thoughts would see that he wishes for the death of all men, that he
might become Master of their Treasures. The study of our own inclinations is
sufficient to confirm these Truths: We never lose the desire of augmenting our
Estates, we can hardly believe that we have wealth enough, our fortunes
displease us when we make comparison with our neighbors. Sometimes, by a
strange humor, we deem the favors that are done us to be injuries, and,
suffering our selves to be surprised with suspicion, we think our selves
offended, Divum Julium plures amici confecerunt quam inimici, quorum non
expleverat spes inexplebiles. Sen. 3. de ira c. 30.
when the things given us are not correspondent to our expectations. This
disorderly Passion caused the death of the first Emperor; that valiant Prince
was massacred for not being able to satisfy the Desires of his adherents; the
Pride and Covetousness of his friends were more fatal to him than the Rage of
his Enemies, and he saw himself pierced thorough the sides in the midst of the
Senate, by those whom he had obliged but was not able to satiate. Although he
managed his Conquests liberally, and reserved nothing to himself but the power
of dividing the spoils amongst his Soldiers, he could not render them content
because they altogether demanded that which one could but wish for.

If a man who desires be insatiable, he is not less inconstant; and though he
covet all yet is he irresolute in his designs. He changes his wishes according
to the objects that present, he abandons a real good, to choose one that is but
such in show; and as he is at liberty in his Will, he expaciates himself upon
all that he fancies to be of use or delight to him. The Hope of a fresh
advantage stirs up his faculties, and raising diversity of Desires in the
reasonable appetite, he is so much the more inflamed as he meets with
difficulties in the obtaining. The Good of another appears to him attended with
more charms than those which himself possesses; and it suffices him to
apprehend that a thing is out of his power to make him affect it. For as he is
unlucky in his choice, and seldom finds that benefit that fully contents him,
he esteems what he has not, he doubts of the reality of what he enjoys; and,
being not much taken with it, he easily forsakes an ordinary benefit to aspire
after a better. Our Desires have so much coherence with the things we covet,
that they follow all their motions, they alter their humors when these change
their faces, they abate of their violence when these lose any thing of their
advantage; and, by a contrary faculty, they increase their eagerness when these
put on new Beauties.

From thence it comes that we commonly differ from our selves, that our last
resolutions make war upon our first designs, that we aspire to the things which
we despised, that Repentance succeeds our Vows, and that we are as little
satisfied in Prosperity as in a low estate.

But although that the objects feed our Desires, Nihil habet ita magnificum,
quo mentes in se nostras trahat, praeter hoc quod mirari illa consuevimus: non
quia concupiscenda sunt, laudantur, sed concupiscentur, quia laudata sunt. Sen.
Ep. 18.
that they are the first causes of their agitation, and that they may bear the
imputation of our disquiet and disorder, yet have they need of opinion to
procure the esteem of men; their charms are not powerful enough to seduce the
understanding without our own approbation; and they would make but light
impressions upon us, if that fickle Counselor were not retained for them. All
those advantages which we so much prize have nothing praiseworthy but our own
admiration, they are not valuable but because we esteem them so: wealth and
honors are not in vogue but because they are reverenced of the common people,
and men would never become proud and covetous, if they hearkened not rather to
the bruit of the World than to the instructions of Nature. In most of our
sentiments we are unjust, we measure the worth of things by other men's reports,
we seek them because they are esteemed; and, to say all in few words, we
commend them not to love them, but we love them because they are commended.
Also the Stoics define Desire to be an eruption of the Soul toward an absent
Good, upon which Opinion has set a price, and which she hunts after contrary
to the Laws of Nature. For what dexterity soever Morality makes use of to keep
him in order, he is equally blind and insolent. He is inexorable to Virtue, he
despises her maxims, and is so much an enemy to Reason, that he always
forsakes her Party to join with her Adversaries. Though hope be the succor of
the miserable, she is nevertheless unjust; she abandons solid benefits to seek
after perishable advantages, she promises what she cannot perform, and against
Natures oeconomie she affords nothing more delightful than perpetual agitation.
Audacity which is a desire of combat, is not more reasonable, she undertakes
things above her strength, she atacketh danger and knows it not, and she
often precipitates her self into destruction, designing it for her enemy. Anger
is a Pestilence to Nature, she maintains enmity amongst men, she looks upon the
offender and not the offense, and as she is as savage as proud, she torments
her guests before she gives them vengeance for the outrage they have received.
But as the calamities which these three Passions bring us into are too great to
be comprehended in this Discourse I, have assigned them the three last of this
Treatise after I have showed in the two following the injustice of Desire in
Ambition and Covetousness.

Discourse II.
That the Desire of Greatness and Wealth, plungeth men into Misery and Sin.
Sovereignty is so ancient and her Conduct so necessary to Government, that she
is not to be dissolved without sending nature back to the Chaos, she is the
only pillar of human affairs, Jure naturali regna edita. D. de just and jur.
the line that unites all the parts of the Commonwealth, and the vital Spirits
which animate all the members that compose it. For, as man is a friend to
Society, and that Society cannot subsist without Peace, as Peace follows
union, as union is inseparable from good order, and as good order cannot be
without dependence nor dependence without Authority. Policy has happily
invented Government, she got the people to be subject to Magistrates, she
placed Princes at the head of the Nobles, and according to that instinct that
is common to all men, she made servitude necessary to us, and obedience
delightful. Isaac, who is looked upon in Scripture as the model of Politics,
thought he did Esau no wrong when he commanded him to obey his younger Brother:
this preference according to the words of Philo was not so much a maladiction
as a testimony of his love, he satisfied the Divine Justice by hearkening to
the solicitations of his wife; and knowing that a man that lives by his weapon
is subject to many Passions, he judged he might appoint Jacob to be his
Governor without injury to his primogeniture. It was with this Reason that the
Roman Common wealth justified her usurpations; Ut domiti se melius haberent,
quum indomiti se deterius habuerant Aug. 19. de civit. cap. 21.
that she persuaded the World that her Conquests were lawful, since their
Empire became beneficial to the people whom they overcame, and that giving them
Philosophers to instruct them in virtues, they made their subjection of greater
advantage to them then their liberty. That as the Body obeys the mind, and
Reason commands our Passions, they alleadg that the weaker ought to submit to
the stronger, Cowards to Valiant Men, and the less perfect to the more
accomplished.

This feeble argument has made so strong an impression on the Spirits of
ambitious men, that they thought they might lawfully aspire to greatness, that
the desire of honors was not so much a mark of Pride, as of generosity; and
that the most excellent thing in this World might be sought after without
scruple. They affirmed, with much Reason, that man was born to command, that
nature had given him extraordinary parts for that purpose, and that as she had
granted strength to wild Beasts to offend or defend, policy to some to avoid
the Hunters, and swiftness to others to fly from their Enemies; she had: placed
in man a generous Spirit fit to command, which delighted in Dignities, and
which esteemed all things below himself but Government and Empire: In fine,
that the Passion that made him affect greatness was natural to him, that
Sovereignty was approved of all Nations, that the Son of God proposed it to his
Disciples, when he promised they should sit upon Thrones judging the Tribes of
Israel. But what colorable Reasons soever are formed by Historians and Orators
to excuse the desire of greatness, they cannot deny but that it is fatal to the
ambitious; and that if it be not always sufficiently unjust to render them
guilty, it is too extravagant not to make them unhappy.

For besides that they aim at that which is out of their power, Magna servitus
magnae fortunae est. Sen. consol. ad Polib.
that they are enclosed with Enemies that oppose their designs, that they see
themselves often deceived in their hopes, that their friends forsake them; and
that they are forced to confess, by the Travels that attend their Projects,
that it is no less difficult to arrive at dignity then to preserve it. Besides
that, envy is inseparable from their condition, that men often conspire against
their Persons; that their Subjects hate them, and that their equals suspect
them: they endure miseries that give the lie to the opinion of the World, the
honors they hunted after with so much earnestness, procure their disquiet; and,
by an inevitable misfortune, they meet with grief amongst those things from
which they expected their joy and felicity.

Fear assaults them at every turn, they suspect the countenance of their
friends as well as the looks of their Enemies, all that approach them create
their jealousies; and, by a suspicion that discovers their Calamities; they
have often an apprehension of the Valor or virtuous comportments of their
successors. They are afraid that they which are one day to sit on their Throne
should contrive their ruin; and as they know that the people delight in novelty
they fear least their Children should become their Sovereigns. Indeed, Rato quam
justus quisquam fuit, ut non charior populo successor soret. Petr. de remed,
utriusq. fort.
goodness is not the object of the love of all men, if some reverence it in the
person of their Prince, others grow weary of it, or despose it. What integrity
soever Kings bring to the Throne, they become guilty enough by reigning long;
and it is sufficient to know that they have successors, to render them odious to
their Subjects. The vulgar are so fantastical in their affections, that their
greatest constancy lasts but a moment, they hate the blessing which they enjoy,
they desire it when it is expected, and never truly esteem it but when they have
lost it.

What contentment can a man have amidst so many apprehensions? What felicity
can he taste in the Government of an ungrateful people, who are never satisfied
with his Conduct, who expect his death every time he is indisposed, who wish it
under the shadow of enlarging their liberty; who find fault with the favors
they have obtained from him, and magnify them only which they expect from his
heirs?

Without doubt these Reasons made Augustus think so often of a Retreat, and
which inspired him with the despicable thoughts of an Empire, which exposed his
actions to censure, his safety to hazard and his life to perils. For although
he gave Laws to the greatest part of the world, held the Roman fortune in his
hands, and saw the wisest Senate upon earth pay reverence to his Commands, yet
he sighed after retirement, he ceased not to request the Senate for leave to
surrender; his most serious Speeches ended with these pleasant expectations,
and he styled that his happy Day that should strip him of his Dignities. He had
learned, by a long experience, how toilsom a public Charge is, how many
hazards were to be undergone to obtain it, and how many cares were required to
preserve it; having been often obliged to arm himself to tame his Subjects,
give Battles to supplant his Competitors, and bring Armies into the Field to
warrant him from the surprises even of his friends. How often was he seen
constrained to abandon his Frontiers, to march into Sicilia, travel into Egypt,
carry Armies (yet covered with Roman Blood) into Asia, to bring the factious to
obedience? When he is busied in reconciling the Alps, when he is drawing the
Rebels to their Duty, when he is making Slaves of his Enemies, and is
projecting new Conquests, beyond the Rhine and Euphrates, even then they
contrive plots against his Person, they prepare Weapons in the City of Danube,
for his Assassination: and, he that was coming triumphant from the subduing of
all the Rebels of his State, finds himself designed for death by a Band of
seditious men. Hardly had he escaped these Ambuscades but his own Daughter,
attended by a company of young Gallants whom she had gained by her
Prostitutions, renewed his fears, and by alarms that seldom gave him rest,
threatened to send death to him, through the thickest of his Guards that
surrounded him. Thus being wearyed with the Dignities of an Empire, and tired
with a load that exposed him to so many dangers, he seeks for rest, and charmed
his misfortunes with that hope: he conjures the Senate to discharge him of this
burden, and, by an imbecility affixt to the condition of Kings, he
supplicates that of others, which himself could vouchsafe to all the Slaves of
Rome. He shunned the Court as the Enemy of innocence, and sought for solitude
as the habitation of rest, Funes ceciderunt mihi in praeclaris. Psalm. 15.
and the mansion of Virtue. He knew that men could not reign without being
unhappy or guilty, that the hatred of the people or the displeasure of God were
the ordinary portions of Monarchs; and that as they could not command well
without the dissatisfaction of men, they could not govern unjustly without
attracting the Anger of God. With what Authority soever Kings are flattered,
they never can be said to be absolute in their Governments, they are obliged by
the Civil Right as well as their Subjects; Quod quisque juris in alterum
statuerit, ipse eodem jure utatur.
and if they have Power to establish Laws, they are not permitted to violate
them. Their Liberty is an illustrious Bondage, they can do but one half of what
they desire, though they pretend their Power to be equal to their Will, they
can scarce do any thing for being able to command all things: and an Orator
told Trajan excellent well, that if it were a mark of great felicity in his
person to be able to do what he desired, it was an act of Grandeur to command
no more than what was just. Authority destroys not Justice, and a Prince
renders himself incapable of governing his Subjects, from the time that he
discredits his Laws by his own actions.

Though it be easy to conclude from all this Discourse that Greatness is a
state of Servitude, and that that Puissance that attends it is as deficient as
dangerous, yet are there but few men that do not seek it, and who care not for
becoming guilty or miserable, provided they may but appear to be great. The
Ages past, have showed us some so degenerated as to violate all Laws for the
obtaining of Govenment; who have mounted the Throne by Murders, who were not
afraid to commit a homicide to acquire a Kingdom, and who held it for truth
that if it were in any case lawful to pervert Justice, it was to be done in
matters of State, and to arrive at Command. The Poets who in their fables have
so wittily described the inclinations of men, observe well that an ambitious
man must needs be insolent, since he spared not the blood of his nearest
Relations, that a Kingdom was dearer to him than his Gods and his Children, and
that he often sacrificed the one and the other to the flames, Sceptra Thebarum
fuit impune nulla gerere. Sen. in Thebaide.
to bring his designs to pass. Polinices, whose tragical Story we read of, was
of this humor, although his mother assured him that he could never arrive at
the Command of others without renouncing of his own liberty, that a Kingdom was
a laborious Bondage, that a Scepter was not so much a heavenly favor, as amark
of Gods anger; and that it was sufficient to inform him that Cadmus and his
Heirs had been unhappy, to purge him of so evil a Distemper as the desire of
Sovereignty: he made her this answer, that he was resolved to be superior,
that the misfortunes of his Ancestors frighted him not, that death was no
terror to a man that despised it, and that he was not careful what his end
should be, provided he might but die possessed of a Scepter and Diadem.

That Divine spoke wittily, who said that Ambition was Charity's Ape, that the
most insolent of our Passions imitated the most excellent of our Virtues, and
that their manner of acting had much resemblance, though their motives were
different. Charity, says that eminent Doctor, is patient, and suffers
generously the injuries done her for the love of things eternal, and Ambition
passes by affronts to arrive at the Honors of the Earth; Charity is merciful,
and distributeth liberally of the Riches she possesses; Ambition slights them,
and esteems only those she aspires after; Charity endures pain and death in
defense of the Truth, and Ambition shuns no Combat for the establishment of her
own Glory. Both believe and hope all things; and amongst all their resemblances
this difference only is discernable, that the one pursues that which is good,
and the other hunts after that which is evil; that the one makes her Lovers to
become the Disciples of Jesus Christ, and the other causes her Martyrs to be
the Slaves of Satan. Indeed who shall believe that a man who makes war upon his
Neighbors, who breaks into the Frontiers of his Allies, who violates the
sacred bounds of Nature, and tramples under foot those Alliances which that
wise Mother has made among the Nations of the Earth, to arrive at the
accomplishment of his designs, is not possessed of an evil spirit? Who shall
think that a Prince, who is never content with his Fortune, who drives the
blessing of Peace out of his Territories, who prescribes no limits to his
Desires, who esteems nothing unjust but what he cannot compass, is not a Slave
to the Devil and a Martyr of Vanity? Who shall judge that a man who descends
into the Seas, who traverseth all parts of the terrestrial Globe to gain a
piece of Earth, can be in his right mind, and can be other than his own enemy,
and the Tyrant of the people whom he has conquered? Pride has nothing of
Justice but her own miseries, and without the invention of Punishments to
chastise her, to leave her to her self is sufficient to make her unhappy: For
although all the Passions strive to afflict her, Hope to seduce her, Fear to
perplex her, Grief to distract her, and Anger to throw her into precipitous
Battles; she cannot obtain what she desires from the vanquished. If she make
them her Vassals she cannot procure their Love, and what Art soever she employ,
she cannot oblige those freeborn men to give her their Affections or
Venerations. The desire of Riches for being more common amongst men than that
of Honors, is not more reasonable: for if that be insolent, this is impatient,
if Ambition render men arrogant, Covetousness makes them sordid; if Pride make
impious Proselites, Avarice begets Idolaters: and in Seneca's Morals it is
difficult to resolve, whether we become more guilty by pretending to be above
our equals, or when we make a God of that metal, which we ought to place among
things of the meanest consideration.

It must be confessed that this Passion is in some sort natural to us, that our
Parents taught us the use of it from our infancy, and that recommending to us
the acquisition of Gold and Silver, they have left us the desire thereof for
our inheritance. Admirationem nobis parents auri argentique fecerunt: and
teneris infusa cupiditas altius sedit, crevitque nobiscum. Sen. Ep. 16.
For although men are seldom in one mind, that novelty robs us of that
happiness, and that we change our opinions as often as the objects vary; yet is
it certain in this point that Gold is profitable to man, that it assists him in
his wants, that it opens him the Gates of public employment, and that he
raises his fortunes by honorable Alliances. Private men who are governed by
public Example, pay it respect, they wish it to their Children; and as if
Heaven comprehended nothing more precious then Gold, they convert it into
presents and offerings for their Gods. In fine, the possession of Wealth is so
advantageous, and want is accompanied with so many calamities, that she is
become the scorn and fear of all men: the poor hate her as well as the rich;
and without seeking for a man's greater faults, it is enough to know that
fortune has used him ill, to make him odious to such as frequent him.

If all the Nations upon Earth have entertained these opinions, they are not
therefore the more reasonable, and nothing makes them more suspected of
deceit, then the great number of their approbators. For as the people are
equally blind and of interressed judgments; they commend wealth as the only
ornament of life, and in their fancy Heaven cannot make a better demonstration
of favor toward them then by tumbling Treasures into their laps. But truly, it
were to be wished that they who seek them with so much eager affection, would
consult with the rich; and that they would insinuate themselves into the
conversation of these splendid Slaves, to be taught by them the disquiet and
restless torments which they find inseparable from their Possessions. Without
doubt they would soon change their desires; and I know not if they would not
make vows to hinder the obtaining of any part of that which they had so
earnestly sought after. All those benefits they so much admire are good but in
show, the comforts they promise are more faulty then specious; if they promise
honors they make payment in torments; and they resemble those savage Beasts
which can neither be caught nor kept without hazard. Likewise, when they come
to themselves and consider the deplorable state of their condition, they cannot
retain their tears, they complain that their affection has been the cause of
their chastisement, that they find more trouble to preserve their Treasure then
to get it, and that they are become miserable by having obtained what they
demanded.

But that which increases yet more their punishment is, they dare not disclose
their miseries, they hide what they cannot discover without shame or danger:
and be it the remorse of unjust gotten goods, or the trouble they find in their
enjoyment which tyrannizeth them, they grow pale at the sight of Gods
judgments, they tremble at the thought of the threatening evil Spirits, of the
accusing Angel, of friends to whom their deeds are detestable, and of the
rigorous judge who is to condemn them.

It is then without cause, avaricious men! that you take so much Pride in your
Riches, since they procure you so much torment, and that by the aid thereof you
promise to your selves the accomplishment of all your designs; since you cannot
enjoy them without becoming their Slaves: you would be your own Masters, if
they were not yours, you might make use of your own advantages, if they were
not in your power; and, to say all in few words, you might be freemen if you
were not laden with abundance. Learn, from the travels you suffer your own
infelicity, that you serve, in stead of commanding your own covetous appetite;
and that as says the Scripture ye are men that can desire but know not how to
possess Riches.

Discourse III.
That Audacity is of no use to Wise men in assaulting or defending of Evils.
NEver do Orators appear more splendid then when they describe the Lives of
Conquerors, when they give renown to their Valor, when they admire their
Conduct, when they represent them in combat with their Enemies, and when they
render them triumphant over fortune and death. It seems as if they exceeded
themselves every time they recount their Battles and Victories, and that they
design their own commendations in magnifying their victorious Soldiers. For of
all the advantages they find in their persons, none so much stirs their
eloquence as their courage, they pass by all their other qualities to render
this valuable; and if sometimes they find a necessity of bestowing some praise
upon them also, it is with so much faintness, as is easy to conjecture that
the notice they take thereof is but because they would not be reproached with
being ignorant of any of their endowments; when they speak of their Justice
they cloth it in such ordinary language as puts the Reader in doubt, whether
they ever knew the merit thereof, they discourse of their clemency as if it
were always mixed with meanness of Spirit and inconsiderateness; and although
Science be the most excellent ornament of Monarchs, yet amongst them it is
accounted but as the exercise of Cowards, and the employment of idle persons. A
man must have nothing but valor to make him the subject of their Elogies, he
must be guilty of Murders to merit their esteem, and must be as little sparing
of his own, as of the life of his Enemies to deserve the honor of their
commendations.

As audacity is the cause of all these effects, she draws admiration from all
men; Historians never mention her but with veneration, Philosophers recommend
her to their Disciples; and Poets are so much concerned for her honor, as to
assure us that if Kings be indebted to fortune for the happy successes of their
Armies, they owe the original of their victories to the bold attempts of their
Captains. In fine, they affirm that without her aid we become faint hearted,
that all our actions borrow their splendour from her strength, and that a man is
no longer to be esteemed then whilst he is hardy and adventurous.

The mind of man is so depraved, and the vulgar opinion has so much corrupted
him, that he values nothing but those things which procure him worldly glory,
he finds nothing delightful but what is beyond the common achievement, ordinary
virtues affect him not, and by an obstinacy full of imbecility, he considers
not so much the prudence of a General as the defeat of the Enemy, he speaks of
a victorious Captain with admiration, he swells his praises into Volumes; and
as if the honor of a Commander consisted in seeking Battles, in routing
Armies, in razing Cities, in desolating Countries, he strains his industry to
the highest pin to compose his Panegyric.

But surely he does not in any thing discover his blindness more then in this
Subject, the badness of his cause disparageth his judgment: and to proceed to
condemnation without a formal examination of his intentions or motives, let it
suffice to know, that all the employments of audacity tend to the ruin of our
fellow Creatures; that undauntedness which invented or procures them is too
much defective in justice to make them warrantable, and she whom we adore as
the mother of Noble attempts, is too fatal to the sons of men to be obeyed
without danger. For what did she ever do in the World that turned not to the
dishonor of the Conqueror, or the disadvantage of the vanquished? Was she ever
seen to be moderate in combat or modest in Victory? Was she ever merciful to
the innocent in assaulting the guilty? Do not all Kingdoms complain of her
injustice? And had we ever heard of Revolts and Treasons, Murders and
Parricides, if audacity had not therewith inspired the rash and Cowardly? Vice
would at this day be covered with darkness, if this Passion had not taught us
to bring it to the Light; infamy would be a stranger to Society if it were not
mixed with unclean persons; no uncomely action would appear there, revenge would
be as little practiced as homicide; and with reason we may doubt whether sin
had ever been publicly acted if audacity had not opened the way.

All the crimes which we read of in History, and which we yet detest in our
Age, had no other Author but this Passion: all Philosophers assign her to be
their mother, to her they attribute all their malice; and although they own man
to be sufficiently enabled, to contrive evil designs; yet they assure us that
he would want resolution to execute them, without being animated by her
incitements. If we believe a certain Orator, it is she that throws division
amongst States, that inspires the ambitious with Tyranny, that prompts
lascivious persons to acts of violation, that incites coveteous men to theft
and rapine, that desolates Kingdoms; and that making small account of whole
Armies, causes Monarchs to loose their Kingdoms, and Subjects their Liberty.

For who shall believe that Julius Caesar had ever attempted the Roman
Government, if he had not been as hardy as ambitious? Who shall think that
Alexander had ever aspired to the universal Sovereignty, if he had not been
ridden and spurred as well by his courage as amibition? The one and the other
are guilty before men for unwarrantable undertakings; and they are not looked
upon as Monsters in History, but for that they suffered themselves to be
commanded by the violence of a Passion that overturns all natures Laws. They
likewise became, the terror of all mortals, dreaded they were by all foreign
Nations, the arrival of their Armies has often caused their Enemies to fly,
their progression put the whole World to a stand, their own Soldiers were
afraid of them as well as their adversaries, and Seneca doubted whether their
valor were more fatal to their Enemies or to them of their own party: the one
had vowed the ruin of his Neighbors, and the other the destruction of his own
Country; the one caused Greece to groan, and the other threw horror into the
City of Rome, the one trampled upon Kings, and the other made breach upon the
Rights of the most famous common wealth of the World. But all those disorders
own no other principle then audacity; if ambition were the occasion, boldness
was the principal cause, and that desire of vain glory in Alexander and Caesar,
had remained unknown or ineffectual, if it had not called this complice to its
assistance. But for fear of being deemed partial in this Subject, and that I be
not blamed for dareing to condemn a Passion that has received so much
commendations in the Writings of Philosophers, I agree with them, that her
undertakings are sometimes generous, she assaults death without fear, she is
the only Passion which beholds evil with stedfastness, and which dares
undertake to oppose and overcome it. For, though fear be prudent, she is not
courageous, she looks not upon evil so much to meet, as to avoid it, she draws
her confidence from her amazement, and if she sometimes admit Reason of her
Counsel, it is rather to prevent then to expect it is arrival. Anger is ever
concerned, she does not so much consider the affront as the vengeance, and the
hope she has of obtaining satisfaction alays her grief, and affords her
content. But audacity seeks the evil directly, she offers him Battle in all
places, and, without regard to the hazards that surround her, she thinks her
self sufficiently honored when she obtains Commission to assault and fight him.

Although this discourse be true, and not easily rejected without being
ignorant of the advantages which this Passion is Master of above his
companions; yet does it not prove any thing in the Stoic Doctrine, and it is
easy in their opinion to demonstrate that her enterprises are as useless to
the wise as her attempts and combats.

For as they acknowledge no evil but Vice; and that which the vulgar do so much
dread, passing with them for an indifferent thing, they have no need of other
helps to surmount it then Reason, this Enemy is always in their Power, the will
which forms can stifle it, and even as a man, to be innocent, need but will
good, so it is sufficient to will evil, to make him guilty or vicious.

It is not then without cause if I banish audacity from my wise man, Temperatus
sit sapiens and ad res fortius agendas non iram, sed vim adhibeat. Sen. 2. de
ira cap. 17.
and if I permit him no use of her upon any occasion, since she is so unjust,
and if I judge her of no use to his Government, since he owns no Enemies he has
to fight with but himself, nor other Monsters to assault but Vice. A true
Philosopher must be valiant, but neither rash nor fearful; let him be as little
under the command of Passion as of Fortune, let him judge of things according to
Reason, and let him not fear danger as a Coward, nor seek it as an audacious
person.

Discourse IV.
That Hope is ungrateful, fearful and uncertain.
THere is nothing in the World more hid, nor any thing more evident then time,
it is the Labyrinth of the learned. Astrologers, who from the motion of the
stars on which they gaze, calculate their duration, are at this day in a
laborious sweat to express what time is; and if there be some Philosophers in
our age that disagree not touching it is subsistence, we shall hardly find any
that differ not about it is nature. If they allow it to be the measure of all
human things, the rule of rest as well as of action, and that the Sun and the
Moon were ordained by the Creator for the division of days, years and Ages, yet
they differ in describing their property, or defining their essence; and do
consider them with formalities so remote the one from the other, that they put
us in doubt whether they be not void of other reallity then the witty conceits
of the describers. Firmiter existimo tempus non dicere aliam rem absolutam,
ultra motum, sicut qualitas dicit aliam rem a quantitate, sed eandem rem
simpliciter. Scotus. q. 18. de rerum Princip.
The most ingenious of our Divines wittily confounds time with that motion that
measures it, he asserts that nothing is to be discovered in the one, that is
not to be observed in the other, that the imagination or the mind begets all
the difference, and if Natural Philosophers give them diverse names, they cease
not to be one and the same thing. From hence it comes to pass that his
Disciples separate it from Aristotle's Reports, look upon it as a bastard
extention, banish it from the number of things subsisting in nature, and render
it so much dependant on the Body, be it in action or at rest, that they confess
it has no dilatation without it.

Some cannot imagine that it has any real parts, since those of which it is
composed admit it not, that the past is irrecoverable, that it cease to have
any subsistence in nature when the present succeeds it, that the memory must be
employed to fetch it back, and that when we have made her use all her skill,
all she can do is but to entertain us with an imaginary time. Neither can they
conceive how the present can compose it, since it is but an individual point,
an instant that separates the praeter from the future, and a moment that flies
from us as often as we think we have it, for it runs so swift that nothing can
retard it, the Sun standing still stays not it is course, it goes on when the
course of the stars is arrested; and, as if it were fatal to it self, it cannot
gain but by it is own loss, and it increases only by it is own diminution. But,
with much more reason do they doubt whether the future can make any part of
time since that is yet to come; since the first motions thereof are concealed
from us; since its coming is uncertain, and since (in proper terms) it is but
an Idaea in the mind of the Creator.

Yet this latter part of time is the only object of Hope, which we judge so
necessary for the execution of our designs, she feeds us only with the
expectation of benefits that are hid from our Eyes, she considers things to
come, and not them which are past; and, by an ungrateful injustice, disposes
of those good things which she has obtained, and thinks only on the favors
which she promises to her self shall yet be received. She slights the past and
values only the future; and aspireing to all things out of her possession, she
cares not for being styled ungrateful, provided she can but merit the title of
Provident. Indeed let an ambitious man look never so well upon his Benefactors,
and what submission soever he renders them in assurance of his gratitude, he
considers not so much what he has received as what he expects from them, he
easily steps over the obligations received, and remembers only what he hops
for, and, according to the nature of the Passion that possesses him, he
forgets all the Grandurs that have raised him friends, to contemplate only the
advantages that may render him equal to Kings and Potentates. As lasciviousness
is a lazy Vice, and the slavery that bears it company strips it of the power of
any generous action; she also quickly loses the remembrance of past
pleasures, the charms of novelty drive away her fleeting joys, she deemeth them
lost that have been; and although her present contentments may by accidents be
interrupted, though they which are to come be as hidden as uncertain, and that
no comforts are solid but those which cannot be taken from us, she causes
unclean persons to despise them, to feed upon the new delights which she
holds forth to their expectation. The desire of Wealth, which arises as
often from our indigence as from our infirmity, looks upon nothing but the time
to come, it considers the future and reflects not on the past, it becomes the
numerator of expected Treasures, but cares not to cast up what it has in
possession, it receives all and pays nothing: and without hunting for many
Reasons to condemn it, it is sufficient to know that it is insatiable, to judge
it unjust and ungrateful. Hope, which is the soul of all these Passions, has
inspired them with this odious quality; she teaches them ingratitude, in
showing them to make excursions into the future; her forgetfullness causes her
shame, and as that man is accused of unthankfulness who disowns a benefit
received, who dissembles it for fear of repayment, or who does not requite it
but when he is forced. He that forgets it ought with much more reason to be
deemed ungrateful for suffering a favor to escape his memory which he ought to
have retained to his last hour. But Hope is sufficiently odious since she is
unthankful, and if we ought to hold her promises in suspicion, because she is
faithless to her friends, and ungrateful to her Benefactors, the unquietness of
mind which waits upon her does not render her less to be rejected, and we need
but learn of Seneca, that she is the Enemy of our rest to persuade us to shun
all her employments.

For according to the words of that eloquent Philosopher, Fear pursues Hope:
Spes metum sequitur, nec miror ista utrumque pendentis animi esse, utrumque
futuri expectatione solliciti. Sen. Ep. 6.
although these two Passions be contrary, they rarely part company; a man must
be fallen into despair to be void of fear, and as it often happens that one
faculty perishes by the ruin of another that is it is opposite, Fear never
forsakes us till we cease to Hope; from thence it comes that the Criminals
that are lead to execution, are without apprehension, that they look death in
the face without terror, that they are more confident on the Scaffold then at
the Bar, and have no aversion for leaving the World because they have no
expectation of life.

This truth is so constant, that a certain Stoic was of opinion that nothing
could be more insupportable then a long suspense, that we suffered more easily
the deprivation of Hope, then the deferring thereof; that an extended desire
was a tedious torment, and that if in a wise man's judgment the loss of a
benefit proved sometimes our advantage, the expectance was always attended with
fear and grief.

But truly we ought not to wonder that he that hops should fear, since the
benefits he waits for are doubtful, since the Passion by which he is lead is
defective in her promises, since, for the most part she deceives all that rely
upon her word; and often flatters them with the enjoyment of pleasures that
have nothing more in them then a bare show of truth. As man is not the cause of
what is to come, it is not to be expected that he should be able to dispose of
the future; and what knowledge soever he have acquired in the conduct of
Kingdoms or the economy of Families, he is not able to foretell the event of
things: this part of time is equally uncertain and out of his ken; Quis enim
pollicetur serenti reventum, militanti Victoriam, marito pudicam uxorem,
patripios liberos? Sequimur qua ratio non qua veritas trahit. Sen 2. benef.
cap. 5.
and he must have been of the Almighties Council, who is able to render a
perfect account thereof; for who is sufficiently enlightened to assure the
Husbandman that his fields shall be fruitful after a certain time, that the
following year shall be more profitable to him, then the foregoing; and that
after a barrenness of his Lands, a Harvest shall come in which he shall find
the reward of his toiles? Who can assure the Mariners that their voyage shall
be attended with smooth Seas, the winds favorable, and their Navigation
prosperous? Who can warrant the Soldiers that their Arms shall be victorious,
and assure them of the Rout of their Enemies? Who shall be able to promise a
lover that the Marriage he designs shall be happy, that the Woman he courts
will be faithful to him, that the Children she shall bring him, will be
obedient, and that they shall honor him as their Father, and that she shall
love him as her Husband? We reason according to outward appearances, and not
according to that which shall happen; we look upon that which is profitable,
but we examine not the difficulties that surround it.

Our arguments are rather grounded upon our Opinions then upon Reason, and
according to the good liking we have to the objects, we easily promise our
selves the possession, although it be sometimes impossible.

From thence comes that we live always in instability, that our resolutions
are various, Omni vita pendent, and inhonesta se ac difficilia docent coguntque
and ubisine premio labor est, torquetillos irritum dedecus, nec dolent prava
sed frustra voluisse. Sen. de trancq. anim. cap. 2.
that we add injustice to danger, and that we are but little afraid to become
guilty, provided we can but obtain what we desire. But we see likewise that
when fortune opposes our designs, that the success of our affairs answers
not our Hopes, and that our toilsome labors have only served to increase our
unhappiness, we fall into sadness, we leave the event to chance, we condemn our
own easiness to hope, and we are troubled that the injustice of our enterprises
was not able to give us possession of the good we had in pursuit.

This caused Seneca to say, that our parts were fatal to us, and that our good
qualities rendered us miserable or guilty. The ingenuity of our Spirits serves
to discover the evils before they come, our memory calls them back when they
are past, and the will often shuns them before they make show of assaulting us.
In fine, we convert all our faculties into torments; and, as if we had made a
conspiracy against our selves, we turn all the distinctions of time to our own
affliction.

But the wise man that is a friend to Tranquillity, and whose felicity
consists not so much in the calmness of his Spirit, Nos venturo torquemur and
preterito, nemo tantum presentibus miser est. Idem. Ep. 5.
as in an innocent assuredness, despises all the counsels of Hope, he laughs
at her promises, he braveth Fortune, and, finding nothing out of virtue that is
able to content him, he as little desires her presents, as he fears her
disgraces. He considers indifferently all the advantages of the Earth, he
builds all his glory or pleasure upon the innocence of his actions; and,
satisfied with virtues merit, he avoids the delights of the unchaste, the
Grandurs of the ambitious, and the treasures of coveteous men.

Discourse V.
That Anger is blind in taking of Revenge, Rash in Quarrels, and insolent in
Chastisement.
ALthough I were not obliged to follow Seneca, and betraying the opinion I have
conceived of his Doctrine, I were disingenious enough to forsake his party, or
so unfaithful as to side with his adversaries, yet would it be a repugnance to
me to believe that Anger can be serviceable to Virtue; and that she must
necessarily be employed by Commanders in giving of Battles, by judges in the
condemnation of the guilty, and by Kings in the chastisement of the Rebels of
their State. Her fury is too much suspected, to approve her Conduct, her manner
of proceeding is too much void of equity to justify her decrees; and the
punishments which she ordains, are too rigorous to clear her from the
imputation of injustice, and cruelty. If our other Passions be sufficiently
odious because they rebel against Reason, and that it is not for nothing that
we so much apprehend their Tyranny, since they drive us from our selves to the
subject of their fury, the benefits wherewith they keep us in hand, do alay
their rigor: if their defects beget our hatred, their fair proffers cause us to
affect them, and all savage as they are, they have charms that tempt us to give
them employment. Desire does not at all times torment us; if it disturb our
mind, it tickles our imagination; this languishing humor is mingled with
delight; and if it sometimes ravish our rest, it labors to give us possession
of the advantages we stand in need of. If love pitch his Tents in our Souls, if
he break in upon our liberty, and if, by an injustice which gives the lie to
his name, he give us our Slaves to be our Mistresses he unites us to the o^ject
we affect, and so much delights us with her perfections, that we prefer her
enjoyment above all the Grandures of of the Earth.

If Hope hold us in suspense, and by a too ingenious foresight, she redouble
the measure of that time which we remain in expectation; she gives us with it
the promise of fortunate success, she assures us that our Travels shall not be
in vain, and our reward shall bear proportion to our patience. If fear darken
our judgment, if it fling horror into our Spirits, and cause us to apprehend
mischiefs contrary to our hopes; she teaches us moderation in prosperity, she
foretells us of our evils to come, and prepares us to bear them with constancy,
when they have laid hold on us. So that all our disorders have some charms: if
they persecute us, they do us good service; if they are violent, they abate
sometimes of their cruelty, and give us intervals, that cause us the more to
esteem our liberty, but anger is ever insolent, and take her which way you
will, she is equally savage and precipitate. If she punish the guilty, her
blindness causes her to commit excess, if she force satisfaction for
outrageous actions, she her self becomes guilty of the profanation of all
natures Laws; if she assault her Enemies, she often runs headlong into their
ambushes, and like unto those tumbling ruins that throw down the houses on
which they fall, she finds her own punishment in her revenge, her own defeat in
her victory, and her own execution in her condemnations.

But that which yet better discovers her blindness, and makes her injustice
less supportable is that she makes fuel of all wood, Tam ex amore nascitur quam
inter lusus and jocos. Sen. Ep. 18.
she proceeds from love as well as hatred, takes up Arms against friend and
foe, and falls not less violently upon those that have obliged, then on those
that have done her injury. Those pass times which heal or charm the other
Passions, discompose this, she is as much displeased at play as at serious
business, as much offended at a jest as an afront, and it matters but little
whether the motives which excite her be considerable, if the person who has
them in apprehension be but susceptible of her violence. For as the fire
operates but according as it finds the disposition of the matter, and its
activity is not always the measure of its working; as we find bodies that
endure not its heat, and others that retain a spark till it amount to a flame,
Anger waits upon cowardly Spirits, she burns them up in giving them courage,
and seldom forsakes them, till she has made them scornful, temerarious, and
insolent.

To know well the ground of all these disorders it ought to be known that Anger
is not of the nature of other Passions, which gently make their way into the
soul by insinuations, which flatter the imagination at their entrance, and by
less vigorous accesses disguise their violence. But Anger runs in with
impetuosity, seizes on all the faculties in a moment; and being at full
strength from her very birth, she does that at once which others do but by
degrees. So that if these court us, she violently constrains us, if they make
us stray from the paths of Reason, she leads us into the ways of madness, and
if these be slow in their formations, this Passion takes growth all at once. In
fine, nothing is more blind then she in her undertakings, more violent in
revenge, proudly vain in Victory, nor more enraged in defeat. For which cause
the most wholesome Philosophy banisheth her from the soul of the wise man, and
she judges that a Passion so little subject to Reason, and which has so much
affinity with fury, cannot have any useful qualities.

Though injuries be vexatious to man, though they break in upon his reputation,
and equally wound the innocent, and the guilty; though there be nothing less
sufferable, though great Spirits hardly bear them, though the most ingenious
feel them, and though the one and the other do often want strength to stand
under them; nevertheless nothing so much demonstrates their cowardice as the
resentment they show of injuries, nor does any thing more discover their
pusilanimity, then the meditation of revenge. It belongs, says Seneca, to
men of mean Spirits to avenge one afront by another, to sharpen our teeth
against them that have bit us, and to hurt our selves because an other would
have hurt us; they resemble Rats and Emmots who make head against such as only
look as if they would hurt them; and persuade themselves to be wounded every
time they are touched. But if the injury be excuseless, and if the person
offering it had design to rob us of our honor, yet ought we to abstain from
Anger, and take care of being carried away by a Passion which instead of
abateing increases our grief: contests are ever dangerous or to no purpose:
and as we cannot contend with them above us without deserving the Title of Mad
men, Si vis ulcisci injurias, tace and ultus es. Chrisost.
nor with our inferiors without being sordid; we cannot hope to be avenged of
our equals without the hazard of being worsted. Anger is too malignant or too
precipitate to be employed in such an adventure: Reason must be our judge, we
must receive her orders before any thing be undertaken; and we must learn of
her, that it is more glorious by silence to avoid an injury, then by words to
overcome it.

When we feel our selves offended, let us lay our hand on our breast, let us
examine whether the harm done us be just, and whether we drew it not upon our
selves by our own indiscretion: if so, it is very reasonable that we should
bear it patiently, and receive it as the chastisement of an evil which we our
selves caused in the offender. But if the outrage be unjust, if we are
wrongfully persecuted, and if our Conscience assures us of the innocence of our
actions; why are we conconcerned, and afflict our selves for an act of
injustice, which ought to make him that has committed it to blush? Let us not
always believe the reports of men, let us set aside the circumstances that
might help to prove them, Dandum est tempus, Veritatem enim dies aperit ne sint
aures criminantibus faciles. Sen. 2. de ira. cap. 22.
let us mistrust our own conjectures; time will tell us the truth, and it may
be, that which to day we take for certain, to morrow may be void of all
likelihood. Let us raise our selves above the common sort; let us believe
nothing of the unpleasant things that are told us, let us look upon injuries as
things out of our power, and conclude that no man is offended but by his own
consent.

To speak truly nothing puts us into so much agitation as opinion: it is she,
says Seneca, which measures offenses, which magnifies their injustice, Causa
iracundiae, opinio iniuriae est. Idem. 16.
and which seducing our judgments, renders them more heinous and sensible then
they are. We see servants that endure blows with patience, but cannot bear a
sharp word, that take a bastanade more willingly then a box of the Ear, and
fancy that death would be less insupportable then a reproach or an abuse. It is
not always the injury that torments us, but our imagination that we have
received it; and therefore a man of a large Soul, and who knows his own
innocence or desert, derides all the offenses that can be offered him; he looks
upon them as other men's extravagancies, he forgets the injury before it be
received, he stifles the resentment bebefore it touch him; and as he feels it
not, he is in no perplexity how to be revenged.

If Anger be dimsighted in revenge, she is unjust in chastisement; and if she
violently break the Laws of Charity in constraining reparation for an abuse,
she sins against the rules of equity when she forces satisfaction for the
injury, all her proceedings are irregular, the punishments she ordains do
always exceed the greatness of the crime, and without a formal process, it is
easy to condemn her by the very sentences which she her self pronounces
against the guilty.

For as she is rash, and the flames which she throws into the Soul of a judge or
a King, Iratus ad paenam qui accedit, nunquam mediocritatem illam tenebit quae
est inter nimium and parum. Cic. 11. de ossic.
puts them into a fury; she prompts them to punishment, she swells the crime to
justify the penalty, she invents new torments for the punishment of offenses;
and causeing them to act according to the greatness of their Authority, and not
according to Justice, she puts it out of their power to keep within the bounds
of that moderation which teaches to distinguish between too much and too
little. For she will have it, that all her proceedings are regularly equal,
that the vengeance which she directs is necessary: and contrary to Reason,
which esteems that only just which is agreeable to equity, she deemeth all
that to be equitable which is suitable to her humor: she regards not so much
the offense as the cause, she considers not so much the crime as the criminal,
and, by a fury as strange as common to her, she is not less heated by the
things which serve to the offenders advantage, then by the circumstances which
make for his condemnation. She is angry both with the innocent and the guilty,
she perverts the integrity of the one, and inlargeth the faults of the other,
she is for nothing but punishment; and, obstinate in her error, she thinks it
more honorable to persist in evil then to show any sorrow for it.

The example hereof produced by Seneca in his admirable Books of Anger, is an
evident proof of this; and without giving our selves the trouble of searching
into History for any other, let it suffice to relate the particulars of this,
to make known it is injustice. He says that one of the Piso's being in Anger,
espied a Soldier of his returning from a party Convoy without his companion:
this return served him for a pretext to punish him, he thought it warrant
enough to pass the sentence of death upon him, to have him but suspected of
murder; and to cause him to be led to Execution, for not having his fellow
Soldier in his company. This unhappy condemned man, stoutly denies the crime,
calls the Gods to be witnesses of his innocence, craveth some time to justify
himself; and assures him that by his diligence he would bring the man to light
who he said was massacred. The General refuses him this favor, is angry at the
request, and without farther delay, commands him to be put to death. He is
carried out of the Trenches; and the Heads-man had already hold on the sword to
strike off his Head, when the Soldier who was supposed to be slain, appeared
suddenly in the midst of the assembly: the Captain that attended this
Execution, at the sight of this Soldier, directs a stop, commands the
Executioner to unloose the Felon, and not to proceed without new orders from
the General. He brings the Prisoner then back to Piso, to put into his hands an
innocent man, whom error had caused him to condemn as guilty. The whole Camp
concluded that this Prince would let himself be overcome of Justice, that
clemency would succeed his rigor; and that being undeceived in his belief, he
would make no difficulty of pardoning the man a crime, which he had not
committed. But seeing the Soldier yet alive, and taking his return as a
contempt of his Commands, he goes back to the Tribunal all in a fury,
pronounces sentence of death upon both the Soldiers; and that they should be
Executed upon the place. Excogitavit quomodo tria crimina faceret quia nullum
invenerat. Sen. 2. de ira. cap. 16.
What can be imagined more unjust then to condemn two innocent men because one
of them was not guilty? Or to make too men Felons because one of them was found
innocent? His Passion carried him yet farther, and violently throwing him from
one Precipice to another, adds to these two a third, which was the Captain,
that had brought back the Prisoner. His ingenious rage had furnished him with
Reasons to justify this proceeding, and examining their offenses, helped him to
raise from the diversity of their fortunes, the different causes of their
punishment. I caused thee, said he to the Soldier, to be lead to Execution,
because thou wast thereunto condemned, and thou, speaking to his Companion, for
that thou wast the cause thereof, and thou, looking upon the centurion, for
that having received command to put a Felon to death, thou have not done it. He
subtly invented the way to make them all guilty, and to commit three crimes
at once, because he could not find any in the persons he condemned.

From this Example it is easy to discover the cruelty of Anger, and to learn
how insolent she is in chastisements and dangerous in courts of judicature,
Habet iracundia hoc mali, non vult regi; irascitur veritati ipsi, si contra
voluntatem suam apparaverit. Idem. 16.
and great Councels. For as she is proud, and takes no other advices but her
own, she pursues the dictates of her own fury and can endure as little to be
governed, as reprehended: likewise we see that none but Barbarians and men of
mean Spirits, make use of her, who know not how to forgive an injury when they
have it in their power to revenge it.

It is true that Anger seems in some sort more useful in Camps then in Courts
of Justice, that her violence has some thing of agreement with a Martial
humor, and that her aspect better becomes the face of Commanders then the
countenance of a Judge and a King. For if we credit Aristotle, nothing
contributes more to Valor then Anger: she it is that swells the courage of
Conquerors, that animates them in the thickest of the combat, that awakens
their generosity, and causes them to hazard their own, to become Masters of
the life of their Enemies.

Fortitude by the Doctrine of this Philosopher, is feeble without her company,
Extollit animos and excitat, nec quicquam, sine illa, magnificum in bello
fortitudo geris, nisi huic flamma subdita est and hic stimulus peragitavit,
misitque in pericula audaces. Arist. apud Sen. 2. de ira. cap. 7.
this virtue must be asisted with her fury, to make her despise the dangers
that threaten her; and she must be warmed with her fire, to be able to give
Battle, and gain the Victory. For although man be naturally of a generous
Spirit, and endued with dexterity sufficient, to cope with, or defend himself
against such as would oppress him; nevertheless he is faint hearted when
destitute of this Champion, he is weak without this succor; and he cease to
bring forth any thing that is great, from the time that this forsakes him.

But surely if this Rule were true, that virtue owes the happiness of her
successes to Anger, and that Soldiers are Cowards unless they be furious; I
know not why, we may not infer that drunkenness is a necessary Martial virtue,
since it often makes them fearless, since it renders them bold, pusheth them
into the Battle, and causes them to despise both wounds and death it self.
Some have been seen, that could not be got into the engaged Camp but by the
animation of Wine, they had forsaken their Post, had they been sober, and the
sight of the Enemy had put them to flight, if the vapors that clouded their
Brains, had not been the Author of the greatest part of their Courage.

Who knows not that the most timorous of our Passions sometimes inspires us
with valor, Aliquando metus fecit audacem, and morbus; sed ira, ebrietas, timor
aliaque ejusmodi faeda and caduca irritamenta sunt, nec Virtutem instruunt, sed
segnem aliquando animum and ignavum, paululum allevant. Idem. cap. 13.
that fear will make us adventurous, that necessity stirs up our courage, that
despair finds us weapons to fight with, and often changes our timidity into
audacity. Good successes are not always the works of Valor and Wisdom;
oftentimes fury does not less triumph over the Enemy then virtue. And the
Politics do tell us, that there are Rencounters wherein unadvisedness proves
more lucky then prudence. But there is no man who confesses not that these
qualities are weak and unbecoming, that they excite the Soul without giving it
strength, that they corrupt virtue in stead of informing her, and that they
make no impression but on the Spirits of them that want resolution when they
are deprived of Angers aid. Likewise we see not a valiant man, that draws not
his Courage from the depression of Anger, that is not stout without fury; and
who becomes not more courageous when he is heated by her fire, but because he
himself is of a generous nature.

This Passion is too rash, to have any service from her; her headiness brings
her prudence in doubt, she is too impetuous to observe the Maxims of Battle,
and she seeks danger with too much heat, to avoid the perils into which she
would draw the Enemy.

In fine, her service is as fatal to us in War as in Peace, since in the midst
of Peace she is the Image of War, Nec in pace nec in bello unquam bona fuit,
pacem enim similem belli efficit: in armis vero obliviscitur Martem esse
communem, venitque in alienam potestatem, dum in sua non est Sen. 2. de ira.
cap. 12.
she Acts there but her furious part, she forgets the vicissitude of Arms, and
she falls into the Power of her adversaries, because she cannot contain her
self within her own.

THE THIRD TREATISE. OF FEAR.
Discourse I.
Of the Nature of Fear.
I Know it is accounted a Crime amongst modern Philosophers, to say any thing
in favor of the Stoics, and that a man cannot undertake to plead their Cause,
without attracting their hatred and censure. I know that the severity of their
principles is had in suspicion of many persons, that their Sentiments are
disliked by popular spirits, that their Doctrine surpasses the belief of
Aristotle and Plato; and that they both declare nothing more extravagant than
that which we admire in their Writings: those that side with these, laugh at
the others paradoxes, and affirm that they are glorious but in show, that their
words are fuller of ostentation than Reason, that the world admires them
because they understand them not, and that learned men do not esteem them, but
because they raise their thoughts to a higher pitch of sublimity. They protest,
they cannot comprehend, that a wise man can be the only rich man of the world,
since he often falls into want, since fortune reduces him to Ambsace, since he
is often without things necessary, and for the most part has neither Clothes
to cover him, House to put his head in, nor Servant to attend him, that he can
always enjoy himself, since he is sometimes at a nonplus, making vain
eruptions, forsaking his discretion in discourse, and acting at certain times
the part of mad men. That he should be the Monarch of the World, since he has
seldom any Subjects to command, being often constrained to serve ignorant
Masters, and do such work for them, as is opposite to that Sovereignty he
pretends to have over them. But amongst the absurdities wherewith they charge
their Paradoxes, they admire none so much as those which exempt him from
opinions, which disintangle him from the knowledge of uncertain things,
affirming that it is as impossible for him to doubt of a truth as to be
ignorant of it. What, say they, is a wise man infallible in his conjectures?
Can he not err in his Judgment? Do we not see that he discourses of things he
understands not? And, descending to particulars, does he not undertake to
render an account of the influences of the Stars and Planets, of which he
comprehends as little the nature as the power? Would you make a God of him,
after you have filled him with Pride? And would you make him partaker of the
Almighties secrets, after you have assigned him the Knowledge of Angels, the
Power of Kings, and the Government of the Creation.

But their astonishment will cease if they take the pains to examine the Sense
of their Paradoxes, and to learn from the explication which they give them,
Ista paradoxa, quae appelluntur maxima, videntur esse Socratica, longeque
verissima. Cic. praefat. in parod.
that they are grounded upon Reason, that they are not so much contrary to
Truth as to their opinions; and that they teach nothing but what may be
received by the greatest Critics of our Age: For if they say, that their wise
man is the only man without want; and make him Master of all that Wealth which
causes covetous men to be indigent; it is for that he acknowledges no other
Benefits but those of the Soul, he expects nothing from Fortune, what he has
he uses with discretion, and judiciously dispising those foreign things, he
knows how to enjoy what he contemplates, though he possess it not. If they
affirm that he is not deceived in what he does, it is because the Light is ever
his Companion, and because Reason is his Counselor in all his enterprises. If
they make him a King in this world; and if without the load of a Scepter or
Diadem, they give him the charge of States and Empires, it is for that he being
in tranquillity knows how to regulate his Passions, he is alone capable of
commanding his equals, and his integrity makes him not less in humane society,
than the Pilot in a Ship, the Magistrate in a City, the General in an Army, the
Soul in the Body, and the Spirit and Reason in the Soul. If, in fine, they
banish opinions from his mind, and if they will that his knowledge be as certain
as himself judges it to be true, it is because he rejects all doubtful
propositions, approves no conclusions but what are drawn from infallible
principles, and forms no Arguments, Zeno and Stoici opiniationem repudiarunt
opiniari enim te scire quod nescias, non est sapientis, sed temerarii ac stulti
Lact. 3. cap. 4.
but what he knows before hand, bear a conformity to the matter whereof he
discourses. Knowledge is the portion of the wise, and he is simple or
temerarious, that persuades himself that he is Master of a Truth which he
knows not.

For this cause it is, that Seneca maintains so bloody a war against Fear, and
informed of the disorders with which she entertains her guests, he gives her
battle wherever he finds her. For as she is but a doubtful knowledge, and the
opinion of an absent evil which threatens us, he condemns her foresight, he
forbids her the Counsel of his wise man, and he would think that he robbed his
Soul of tranquillity, if he permitted him to entertain her in his service. To
speak truly, nothing so much distracts our quiet as this Passion, and nothing
so much abaseth our Courage, as her provident curiosity. For, as if she were
ingenious at nothing but our destruction, she assumes all imaginary forms, to
make us miserable. One while she advances our disasters, to make us feel them
before they come, anon she makes us look upon them through a magnifying Glass,
Plura sunt quae nos terrent quam premunt, and saepius opinione quam re
laboramus. Sen. Ep. 13.
to render them less supportable to us; another while she represents them
inevitable, to run us headlong into despair, and already overwhelmed with the
evils she gives us to expect, she causes us to wish for Death, that we may be
delivered from a Passion, which constrains us to suffer it with tedious and
diverse repetitions: she is of so timorous a nature, that she is afrighted at
every thing she fancies to be able to hurt her, she forms monsters that will
never be brought forth, she confounds imaginary with real evils, and suffers
her self to be so much surprised by the Senses, that without knowing the cause,
either of the one or the other, she is equally afraid of both. Hatred in this
particular seems more reasonable than Fear: for if she resist an evil, if she
employ all her dexterity to oppose the violence thereof, it is because it is
real, and its presence obliges her to Revenge. If audacity swell against her
enemies, and puts her self in a posture to oppose all their fury, it is for that
they attack her, and danger or honor constrains her to a self defense.
Sadness, all melancholy as she is, regards nothing but the evil that hurts her,
she complains of its rigors, for that she feels them, and sinks not under their
weight, but because it is not in her power to avoid them: But Fear multiplies
our sorrows, she sees them as soon as they threaten us, she seeks them before
they come; and by an ambitious industry, she makes use of the past and the
future to torment us. What greater folly, says Seneca, can be observed in a
man, than to run to meet his disasters, to feel them ere they touch him, and
lose the present by fear of that which is to come? A man must be extravagant,
to afflict himself before the time, to suffer himself to be surprised by an
evil, which it may be shall never come nigh him, and to make himself miserable,
because he fears one day to be sofor to show her vanity, and convince her of
folly in her foresight, we need but to examine the object which she
apprehends, to know that her cares are always as hurtful as dishonorable.
For either she respects a real or an imaginary evil, if it be real, it is in
our power to avoid it, and nothing is able to draw us to Vice against our Will:
if it be but imaginary, and of the number of them which fortune sends us, we
know already that it is not an evil, and that it is to do her injury, to give
her the imputation of that which the most sound Philosophy attributes only to
sin.

To prevent then these vain terrors, which cloud our Reason, let us not judge of
things rashly, let us examine the nature of the objects which cause our
astonishment; let us pull that vizard from their faces, which gives them so
frightful an aspect; and let us consider them nakedly in their original: then
we shall find, that they are not so opposite to our humors as we imagine them,
that they are troublesome to us, because we are seduced by opinion, and that
they have nothing terrible but the apprehension we have of them. Lenissima fere
ingenia in tantum venere formidinis ut sibi exciderent: nemo quidem, sine
aliqua jactura sanitatis, expavit, similisque furenti, quisquis timet Sen. lib.
6. Quest. not. cap. 29.
We see some men, who fall into a swound at the report of evil tidings, who
grow pale at the thought of an accident that threatens them; who tremble when
men go about to prepare them to bear a misfortune; and are so much divided
between Fear and Sorrow, that they would sooner be taken for furies than for
rational men. As if Fear had carried away their Reason with their stabillity,
they are afraid without cause, they are affrighted at enemies which they have
not, they fly from them before they appear; and, by a blind timidity, they
often leave a beaten Road to choose a doubtful Path. Opinion has nothing of
quietness in it; she is afflicted by every thing which she fancieth capable to
hurt her; she assures us as little of Heaven as of the Earth, and frighteth us
as well with a remote evil, as with that which is ready to assault us.

But a wise man that knows perfectly the difference between real and imaginary
evils, stands fast against all accidents; he is armed against fortune, he
considers afflictions as the exercises of virtue, he sees them coming without
disturbance; and, supported by the greatness of his Courage, he waits for them
with design to oppose and vanquish them. Poverty does as little touch him as
the misery of his friends, he looks upon tortures with the same countenance as
he does injuries; and he knows as well how to defend himself from adversaries
that threaten, as from those who prosecute him. It is too great an effeminacy
to run to the Doctor before we be ill, to bind up the Arm before dislocation,
to complain of the Headache ere ever the pain come, and to lay our hand upon
the part which has yet no hurt. But if that Fear did not disguise our
disasters, and were faithful enough to represent them truly to us, when they do
come, yet would she be of no use to us, since she cannot divert them, and it is
always a kind of cowardice to complain of grief before the cause, which
produces it, have overtaken us. How often have we seen, that events have
deceived our hopes, that our Fears have abused us to no purpose, that we
anticipated misfortunes that never came at us; and some have befell us which we
did not expect? Let us not be afraid of the things that may arise without our
leave; and, by a prudent deceit, let us promise to our selves, that those
which give us so much horror will be favorable to us. As some fair appearances
produce bad effects, sometimes troubles turn us to account. Some have gotten
out of Prison by the means of Women, who had brought them to the utmost
farthing, and have preserved their Liberty by that which might have cost them
their Lives; others have escaped shipwreck by help of Rocks and Precipices;
some have found their preservation in the Ruins of a House; others have
survived their Executioners, and have seen them put to death, who designed
their destruction. Evil fortune does not always persecute us, she has her
cruelties and her clemencies, and it is not necessary to be a great Philosopher,
to know that there are times wherein her disgraces are more advantageous to us
than her favors.

From all these Discourses it is easy to conclude, (me thinks) that Fear is
unnecessary to us, that she can be of no moral good use to us, since she throws
us into misfortunes before they come, torments us by her foresight, deceives us
by false reports, abuses us by misapprehensions, and ravisheth our
tranquillity and rest, so often as we give our selves up to her conduct, which
we shall see by the following Discourse.

Discourse II.
That Tortures are not terrible but in opinion, and that Fools or Cowards only
are affrighted at them.
THose Philosophers who so much contend for the gratification of Sense, who
make Pleasure the end of their Labors, and put no difference between the
felicity of Man and the content of a Beast, Quod si vita doloribus referta
maxim fugienda est, summum profecto malum vivere cum dolor. Eudoxius apud
Arist. 10. Eth.
have so much love for their Bodies, and exercise so much particular care for
its preservation, that they are not ashamed to establish its happiness in its
health, and to attribute thereunto all those glorious qualifications which
Aristotle bestows upon the knowledge of the chief Good, and which the wise Roman
assigns unto Virtue. That pain which incommodeth the Body seems to them the
most cruel of all evils; and they have so much given way to ease, as to affirm,
that no life is more miserable than that which is mixed with pains and diseases:
for if our other evils, say they, beget our disquiet, if ignominy offend us, if
poverty afflict us, and if the death of our friends draw fears from our eyes,
they do not so much hurt our body as our imagination; and we need but a common
dexterity, to persuade our selves, that these being things out of our power,
they cannot give us any incommodity. But pain is a thing within us, its
presence brings down our Body, it seizes our Members, and ascending from the
meanest to our more noble part, it causes us to feel all the torments
wherewith she exercises our Companion.

But what Arguments soever they frame, to justify the fear of torments, it
must be said, that she is the Daughter of Opinion, Inopia atque morbi silentio
subeunt, nec oculis nec auribus quidquam terroris incutiunt: ad tormenta magno
strepitu and apparatu veniunt. Sen. Ep. 14
that the tortures which appear the most terrible, are not always the most
cruel, and that corporal punishments do not seem less supportable than
banishment and poverty, but because they are accompanied with less solemnity.
Nothing does so much awe us, as that which may happen to us by the displeasure
of a potent King; and who having the disposition of our life in his hands, is
able to condemn us to tortures as terrible as infamous. Although that Diseases
destroy the Body as well as Torments, that the Pestilence be not less feared by
us than punishments, and that there be natural evils that exceed the cruelty of
the most ingenious Tyrants; yet is there not any thing which so much amazteh us
as the sight of torments, and nothing so much shakes our stability, as the
preparations made to deprive us of life, or to make proof of our Faith. Other
evils which arise from our constitution, seize us silently, and their coming is
so sudden, that there is often no distance of time between their first arrivel
and their violence. Sickness overtakes us without warning, it runs into our
veins without noise, and without show of that which might trouble us, it
congeals our blood, or burns up our entrails. Poverty has not so frightful an
aspect, she neither hurts our Eyes nor our Ears, when she enters upon the
ruins of Riches, and Fortune changes not her countenance, in making us poor,
or in placing us in the midst of abundance. But Tortures are terrible, we are
astonished at their preparations, the instruments of Death which they set out
before us, beat down our courage, and that tumultuous noise which attends the
ceremony, throws horror into the minds of all that behold it. There they set in
order all the cruelties which the malice of Tyrants has invented, here they
set up the Cross, raise the Rack, expose the boiling Cauldrons to view, lay
open the pitched Shirts, and rowze the cruelty of savage Beasts, to devour us;
all this attracting matter sends Terror into our Soul, and it ought not to be
thought strange, if we are so much afraid of Torments, since they are showed us
with so much addition, and that they appear to our eyes in such frightful
shapes, that the Executioner even redoubles our Fear, by gradually exposing the
instruments of Torture, and causes the most resolute to abate his Constancy,
by the preparation of things that are able to offend it. Nothing so much abates
our Spirit as the consideration of the evil that threatens us, and experience
lets us see, that pain is always less rigorous than the apprehension we had of
it. It is not always the thing that wounds us, but the opinion that we have
conceived of it; and we have found some persons that had endured Tortures with
constancy, had they not first been overcome by the ceremonies thereof. A man is
not miserable unless he think himself to be so, his thoughts are the Regulators
of his pains, and to become a glorious Conqueror, he need but persuade himself,
that the evil he suffers is light.

Although these Arguments be peculiar, they cease not to be true, and it is
sufficient to observe the effects of opinion, to make judgment of what she can
say for her self. For as she is the Child of the Body rather than of the Soul,
and borrows her activity from the Sense: she takes her part in all the
accidents that befall it, she shares in his Joy and Grief, and, by a subtle
craft, she raises the price of what ever pleases it, and augments the horror
of what ever is odious to it. From thence it comes that she represents Torments
with so much frightfulness, and enhauncing upon the evils which the Body
suffers, she gives them dreadful shapes, which astonish us, and which equally
send their horror into the Soul of the Patient, and of the Spectators. She is
so suspicious, that she never represents evil nakedly; and she is so little
faithful in her reports, that she is generally found a liar. If we float upon
the Sea, and the Winds swell her Waves, or never so little toss our Vessel, we
become faint-hearted; Reason and Light make their escape; and, as if we had
already suffered shipwreck, or were condemned to drink up the whole Sea, we
grow pale with Fear, and fall into a sweat with fright. If Earth tremble under
our feet, and if the houses that cover us do but shake, or make show of falling
upon us, what outcries do we not make, and what Deaths faces do we not show in
our countenances? Cold takes possession of all our Limbs, Fear summons the
Blood to the Heart, all objects astonish us; and, as if the whole house were to
fall on our heads, we are afraid of every part. Yet we are not ignorant, that a
small quantity of water will choke us, that a tyle from our house is sufficient
to knock out our Brains, and that we need but a Hole of three foot to do our
business.

It is the same in matters of Torture, of which we have so much apprehension,
the noise that attends it makes the greatest part of the pain, Opinion
enhaunceth its violence, and the sight of so many instruments set out for show,
fills us with more Grief than that Death we are to suffer: yet we know that all
those armed Soldiers, that that Troop of Officers, that the Executioner trimmed
up in a Wastcoat, can but remove us out of the World, let out our Soul at the
wound to be given us, and not to affright our selves with the name of Murder,
separate our Soul from our Body. In fine, they can do but what a Worm does
among Children in a Chamber, what the Gangreen causes in the Hospitals, and
what the Fever every day produces in the Courts of Princes and Shepherds
Huts. An ordinary resolution will serve to endure evils that pass in a moment,
and which often terminate with the same stroke by which they began.

It is indeed a difficult thing to gain this power upon our selves: we find at
this day but few Scaevolas and Regulus's, it appertains but to those great
Souls of Antiquity, to brave Tortures, and bear them without disturbance. We
find no more men, who dare burn their own hands, to abate the confidence of
their Persecutors, who dare run to meet Death in derision of their tyrannical
oppressors; and whose Joys, in professing their innocence, are not interrupted
under the hand of the Executioner. Modern Philosophy has made us too tender,
and the love of our Bodies is become too natural to us, not to be afraid of so
many evils as do conspire our destruction, not to fear a Wedg of Iron which
breaks our Bones, wild Beasts which rip up our Bowels, Engines by which Death
is conveyed to us with tedious repetitions, and moderate flames which reduce us
not to ashes, till after our patience is tired out.

But as general Principles terminate in examples, and that the living draw from
them their principal Lights, I think I may here propose the courage of a
Heathen-Dame to the cowardice of our Christian Men, and show them in the
History of her Life, that pain is insupportable only to them that are defective
in resolution.

Never was Empire more maligned than that of the first Caesar: his Usurpation
begat him the hatred of all the Nations of the Earth, the Romans often
attempted their Liberty; and did sufficiently testify by their enterprises,
that they could no longer endure the Government of a Man, who had robbed them of
their freedom. Brutus engaged covertly in the Conspiration, and though he
forced himself in hiding the matter from his Wife, he could not so well
dissemble it, but she perceived, and observed by the change of his Countenance
the disturbance of his Soul. Fearing then that her Husband mistrusted her
weakness, and that he durst not tell her a secret which might be the price of
his Life, if it took air, resolved to make trial upon her self, whether she
could keep it undisclosed; for retiring into her Chamber, and putting out her
Servants, she laid hold on a Razor, which she lets into her Thigh; her wound
bleeds in abundance, her members grow feeble by loss of Blood, a Fever slides
into her Veins, and seemed to lead her toward the Grave: when Brutus entering
the Room, and surprised by an accident so little expected, informed himself of
the cause and circumstances. Porcia constrained them that assisted her to
withdraw, prayed her Husband to sit down, and promised to tell him her self the
original of her indisposition. You know, said she, Brutus, that when I came
into your House, it was not in the quality of a Miss, or of a Concubine, and
that I preferred not your Alliance before that of so many Roman Gentlemen, to
be only the Companion of your Table and Bed, but to lie in your bosom, to be
the Confident of your Secrets, and to have my proportion as well of your
misfortunes as of your felicities. It is not that I accuse Heaven, or complain
that you are my Husband, but only that you look not upon me as your Wife: You
must not imagine that I am content with the duties of Marriage, and that I
expect from your person only those outward Caresses, that unite our Bodies
rather than our Wills and our Souls. I aspire to greater things Brutus; I
require to be admitted of your privy Council, and that you honor me as well
with your Friendship as your Love. This request is too just to be refused, and
if you judge it such, why are you so reserved? Why do you dissemble your
troubles of mind, and wherefore do you hide from me that glorious resolution
you have taken, to put a Tyrant to Death? If you cannot hope for help from me,
and if my Sex forbid me to assist you in your undertakings, you may, at least,
expect from me some comfort, or lessening of your griefs, or misfortunes: and
may be assured, that if I am not sufficiently strong to be your Second, I shall
have always courage enough to bear you company where ever ill luck or fate
shall call you; consider not the weakness of those of my condition, Cui verba
facio? rem vide, cepi ipse mei experimentum and ecce hoc vulnus, quod sponte
inutile ut discerem, ecquid dolori aut tormentis par essem Lips. monit. polit.
cap. 7.
but remember only that I am the Daughter of Cato and the Wife of Brutus, and
that if this Body which I received from my Father have not vigor enough to
suffer death, the love that I have vowed to thee, Brutus, shall make me
constant in dispising it. Then showing him her wound, see there, said she,
Brutus, see there the trial which I have made thereof; do thou now not scruple
to open thy Bosom to me, to reveal me thy designs: know that within this Body
is contained Cato's Heart, Possum far, possum contemnere, and mori, Brute,
cum marito, and pro marito possum. Id. 16.
and that if my Sex permit me not, to follow thee in that Execution thou have
determined, know, that my courage is great enough to die for thee and with thee.

If a punctilio of Honor, if a vehement desire of Fame, and if a short
obstinacy animated by vanity, have caused some to triumph over Death, conquer
Pain, and despise the rigor of Tortures, what cannot Virtue do, when she is
supported by Integrity? When she stands up for the preservation of Laws, when
she suffers for the defense of her Temples and her Altars? Since she is
composed in her Actions, and preserves the same measures in delights as in
torments.

Wherefore to acquire this insensibility of pain so familiar to the Stoics,
and so little known to other Philosophers, let us often have in mind the
Actions of those generous men, who by their Courage surmounted Tortures, let us
fortify our selves against the apprehensions of Death, let us not love our
Bodies more than necessity requires; let us separate from Torments that
solemnity which affrighteth us, and let us persuade our selves, that those
ceremonies contain no more than what is despised by a man in his Bed, sick of
the Gout, than what is endured by one at a Feast, who is sick at his Stomach,
and what is undergone by a tender Woman in Childbearing.

Discourse III.
That a Wise Man is not afraid of Death, and considers it as the end of his
miseries, and the entrance to felicity.
DEath is so terrible, and the horrors that attend it render it so dismal, that
the Lawyers have thought the Fear of it to be just, and that it might be
accounted among the number of those things which seized upon a man of
Resolution. Metus mortis est justus, and talis qui in constantem virum cadere
posset: unde and restitutio conceditur L. 3. ff. quod met. cause.
They say, that the acts then committed are rather forced than voluntary, that
our promises are not binding, that our agreements are invalid, and that as she
deprives us of Liberty, or hinders the use of Reason, she acquitted us of
performance, and annulled our Contracts. Divines, who consider Death as the
production of sin, rather than the effects of our constitution, conclude, that
she must needs be a great enemy to Nature, since she is so much redoubted,
since she gives dread to all sensible Creatures, and that those which we style
inanimate, testified some kind of aversness, to be separated from their
Principle. The Chicken hides at the approach of the Kite, the Hare flies before
the Dogs, and we find nothing in Nature, which uses not its force, or
industry, to make defense against Death. We cannot separate the Marble from the
Rocks but by violence, the Trees groan under the blow of the Ax, the Air shuns
the Fire that rarifies it, and all insensible as it is, it makes opposition for
self-preservation. If the Animals, says St. Austin, which were created purely
for slaughter, love life, and are so much afraid of Death, how should not man
be therewith affrighted, when it threatens him, since he was born to live for
ever, and that he should never have seen separation between his Body and his
Soul, if he had been careful of his own innocence? Philosophers support the
justice of their Fear by the necessity of Death, they think it reasonable to
redoubt an unavoidable evil, and which, though common to all men, has yet no
remedy in Nature. They accuse it of cruelty, they say, that it is she alone of
all the Gods, that will accept no Sacrifice, who refuses the offerings of men,
and that it is in vain to dedicate Temples to her, or build her any Altars,
since she is equally blind and inexorable.

But what Reasons soever these men invent, to excuse the apprehension of Death,
it is not hard to show them their error, Stultum est timere quod vitare non
possis. Sen. de remed. fortuit.
and to fight them with the Weapons wherewith they maintain their Principles.
For if Death be inevitable, if there be no Altars of protection against her
Arrests, if no man have been yet able to secure himself from her; and if that
by which we live, be the means of our Death, why are we so much afraid of it?
And why do we afflict our selves, for the suffering of a pain, for which Nature
has no remedy? We are born under this Law, we came into the world to go out of
it, our Ancestors have beaten the Road, and all those who shall come after us,
will find themselves bound to suffer the punishment of their first Fathers
offense.

Who is not moved with compassion to see Lewis XI. when affrighted with the
horror of Death, he courts the Physicians, he promises them mountains of Gold
to reform his temper, and by excessive presents engaged them to give him length
of years. For as if Divine Providence had forsaken him, and that his days had
been in the hands of Men, he summoned the Hermits from the Forests, and
conjured them to request the continuation of his Health by their Prayers: and
without taking care to amend his Life, he only charge them with the
preservation thereof. Sometimes being utterly void of all heavenly confidence,
he shuts himself up in his Closet, causes all avenues to be stopped, the doors
to be barracadoed, the windows to be close shut; and, as if Death had not been
able to pierce the place of his Retreat, he converted his Palace into a
Prison. O miser! assiduo times; semel faciendum est hoc. Quid times quod in tua
manu est ne timeas? Lips. mon. polit.
Unhappy man! what art thou afraid of, is it not what thou must one day
undergo? Why art thou affrighted at that which is in thy power not to be
troubled at? Chase from thy Soul this Panick fear, resign thy self to Gods
Will, forgo this vain superstition, that renders thee guilty before him, and
then shall thou see, that thy departure may become an offering to expiate thy
offenses, that Death is but the way of Life, and that thou may be eternally
happy, for having generously despised it.

Though Nature have brought forth nothing into the world, that is to endure to
eternity, though all her workmanship be condemned to dissolution, and though
all that we behold is but for a few days; nevertheless we may say, that nothing
is totally lost, that her labors are rather extinguished than annihilated, and
that Death does not so much determine, as interrupt them. If the Summer pass
away; if the Sun retire from our Horizon, if the Flowers forsake their Beds,
and if in our Fields we see no remains of the Vintage and Harvest, another year
restores them to us, and all those Beauties which we look upon as vanished
recover and renew the Face of the Earth, by the same means which seemed to have
caused their annihilation. If Winter steal away, if the Snow dissolve and leave
bare the tops of our Houses, if the Frost cease to harden our Rivers, and if
the North Wind forbear to shake our Buildings, it comes again after a little
time, and his Months, though departed for a while, fail not to return, to make
good his season. If darkness prevail upon the light, if night hide the Sun from
us, and if its obscurity keep Earths Beauties from our Eyes, the day following
causes the shaddows to flee away, and makes us restitution of the Lights which
the precedent darkness had deprived us of. The Stars which are never at rest,
which are in perpetual motion, and roll continually over our heads, hasten to
the point from whence they departed, and reassume their Course by the same
degrees by which they began their Motions: It is with Man as with other
Creatures, he dies to live again, the parts of which he is composed return to
their principle, as his Body descends to the Earth, his Soul mounts to Heaven,
and, escaping her Prison, she flies unclog'd to her original.

Neither do we see any but impious or criminal persons, that fear this
separation, and look upon it as their most rigorous punishment wherewith Divine
Justice can chastise them: they tremble when they are told of Death, they dread
the judgments of God, which they have despised, and are unwilling to leave the
Earth, Ad refrigerium justi vocantur, non est exitus, sed ad aeternitatem
transitus. Quis ad meliora non festinet? Cyprian. lib. de mort.
because they do not hope to reign in Heaven. But just men look on Death
without Fear, they submissively expect it, and wish for it as the ease of their
miseries, they calmly prepare for it, and knowing it to be the Sepulcher of
Vice, and the Cradle of Virtue, they cease not to supplicate the arrival of
their change. They know by Faith that the World is but a place of banishment,
that Heaven is their native Country, and that they shall one day be called
home, to receive the reward of their Labors. Descend into those solitudes of
the ancient Anchorites, and you shall there find the examples of this truth,
there you shall see men who are continually employed in the contemplation of
Death, who think only upon the day in which they shall be discharged from the
Earth, who expect it with joy, and convert the most dreadful of our punishments
into their ordinary employments. Break into their Cells, there you shall find
them, who are laden with Irons, who having their flesh torn with the Whip,
lean with fasting, weakened with watching, wish for the end of their Life, and,
like those generous Athletes, or Wrestlers of old, offer Combat to obtain
Death, the recompense of their Valor and Courage.

But, waving these Christian Sentiments, and to return to Philosophical
Arguments, I do not well apprehend, why we are so much afraid of Death, since
it brings us so much advantage, and that putting an end to our days, it makes
us infinitely happy, or renders us incapable of further offenses. For if we
have lived as virtuous persons, if we have not misspent the time given us for
the working out of our Salvation; and if we have well employed the moments of
our Life, why are we unwilling to be taken from it, and why desire we not
rather to lose it, since Death by which it is determined, is the passage to a
blessed Eternity? But if we have gone astray from our duty, and if we have been
Prodigals of our time, why seek we to prolong it, and to augment the number of
our sins, by the extension of our years? If we are innocent, let us not fear to
appear before the Judge: and if we are guilty, let us not take it in evil part,
that Heaven calls us from the Earth, and taking from us the means of farther
Crimes prevents the increase of our Creator's Anger.

It is to be ignorant of our own condition, to fancy that Death is a cruel
thing, and not to look upon it rather as a favor than a grief of Nature. Ignaro
malorum suorum, quibus non mors, ut optimum inventum naturae, lauditur. Sen.
Consol ad mort.
For be it, that she give date to the happiness of the just, be it, that she
finish the miseries of the afflicted, be it, that she give the aged a long day
of payment; be it, that she violently seize the Infant in the Cradle; she
becomes equally the end of all their Sorrows, and as she is the remedy of the
infirm, and of the guilty, she is generally the desire of the just, and of the
unfortunate. But of so many persons as call her to their assistance, she is not
so much a friend to any as to those to whom she comes without call, and whose
miseries and apprehensions she anticipates. The Earth has few men, that are
not beholding to Death, and who place her not rather amongst the number of
their acquisitions than their losses. For by her the slave is taken from under
the cruel hand of his Master, and breaking the twine that fastened his Soul to
his Body, she gives him a dispensation of his oath of fidelity: it is she that
sets the Prisoners at large, and who, knocking off their Irons, gives their
freedom in despite of their malicious Oppressors: it is she that shows the
banished persons the ready way to return to their own Country, that teaches
them, that they have no abiding place here upon Earth, and that it matters not
much to what part of the world they be confined, since she brings them back to
the place from whence they came. In fine, it is she who fortifies the faint
hearted against their misfortunes, who laughs at the cruelty of Princes, and
who constrains us to believe, that the Life we love is a punishment, since
that which gives it a period, puts an end to all our miseries.

Caius Caligula being Master of this Secret, and who had learnt by diverse
Murders, that Death past for a favor amongst the unfortunate, Mortem
misericors saepe pro vita dabis Sen. in Troade.
granted it only to his friends; he that obtained it must be reconciled to him;
and Seneca observed, that it was not so much an effect of his Rigor, as of his
Bounty, to be put to Death in the time of his Reign. He would have thought
himself ignorant of the Fundamentals of Tyranny, if he had chastised all men
with one and the same punishment, if he had not put a difference between
persons, if he had condemned the miserable to death, and if he had preserved
alive those who deemed themselves happy. There were some men during his time,
that wished for Death as a favor, and desired to be bereaved of Life, that they
might be no longer Witnesses of his horrible wickedness; Caninius Julius
received the Sentence of Death with Joy, he returned the Emperor thanks for it
in the midst of the Senate; and whether it were to reproach him of Cruelty, or
that he would blame the Cowardice of his Compatriots, he let him see, that
Death was not so terrible, since it was possible to despise it, to avoid the
sight of a barbarous Tyrant. He knew it was no extraordinary privilege for a
Man to live; that Vassals enjoy it as well as their Lords, that the condition
of Beasts in this point was equal to that of reasonable Creatures, and that we
must have had but small experience of the calamities of the World, to fear what
Children suffer without complaining, mad men expect without concernment, and
what the afflicted receive with satisfaction.

Death has nothing of Cruelty but opinion, Philosophers have augmented our
horror by the description of it; they have increased our apprehensions, in
designing to prepare us for it; and they have represented her frightful even by
reasons that might well serve to enable us to support it. Some have imagined,
that she was the greatest of all our evils* Omnium terribilium terribilissimum
est mors Arist.
because it was necessary: that it was the chastisement wherewith the most
famous Criminals were punished; and that it was not without cause, that man had
so much aversion for it, since Natures most useless animals used so much
endeavor to avoid or divert it. Yet we know that Death touches us not, but by
depriving us of Sense, it makes us incapble of suffering pain, and in
separating our Soul from our Body, it makes us insensible of all evils. The
Epicureans, who have vowed an inviolable fidelity to pleasure, confess this
Truth: the Living feel it as little as those that rest in the Grave; and as she
offends not in the latter, because they are deprived of Sense, she touches not
the former, because they yet breath.

If all these Reasons cannot persuade the Peripateticks not to fear Death, at
least, they will diminish their apprehensions of it, and will oblige them to
confess, that Death has nothing so terrible in it as they had represented her
to themselves, since an ordinary resolution will serve to endure or vanquish
it. Seneca, who knew that it was a part of his Essence, Ante Senectutem curavi
ut been moriar; been autem mori est libenter mori, and libens moritur qui non
repugnat: non qui jussus aliquid facit miser est, sed qui invitus facit. Sen.
Ep. 61.
and as quantity which has its extent and termination, it was composed of
Life, and of Death, he prepared to receive it at all times, he looked on each
day as the last of his life; and to use his own words, he wished for his Change,
to put an end to his miseries. He says in one Epistle, which he writes to
Lucillus, that he had been a long time prepared for it, that he enjoyed not
Life but because he was ready to surrender it; and that as he had prevented her
arrival by his Virtue, he could wait his dissolution without Fear, and suffer
it without Sorrow.

Discourse IV.
That Despair is mixed with Cowardice fury and Injustice.
THe Love which man bears to himself is so Just, and the cares he carries
about him for his own preservation are so reasonable, that he may not forgo
them without unhinging his frame, nor be exempted from the Rules thereof
without perverting the very Laws of Nature. It is the end of all his actions,
the foundation of human Society, and the principle of that strickt union
observed between Lovers and Friends.

If Aristotle may be credited in this matter, a man becomes sufficiently useful
to his Neighbor, from the time that he retains a Love for himself, Vix bonum
publicum curamus, nisi in quantum privatum bo^^ admixtum est. Cod.
and being governed by the Rules of virtue, stirs up others to practice them by
his example. From thence the Civilians assert, that our will cannot be pure
when it considers a benefit that is out of our power, that there is a self
love in all our actions, that interest is the life of our designs, and that we
care not to preserve, or defend, a public good, any further then it
concerns our own particular welfare, The Soldier fights not for his native
Country, but because he hopes to secure what himself therein possesses; and
as he is a member of that Body, he fears his own ruin in the destruction of the
Government. The Merchant mounts not the threatening Seas but under the hopes of
profit, the Husbandman does not cultivate the Earth, but because he expects a
happy Harvest of his Labors.

In fine, man imitateth his maker in his Love: he causes all Creatures to
serve his turn, he cherishes himself with delight, he looks upon himself with
respect, and subduing all things to his mind, he adoreth himself as a Diety.

Although this affection be as just as it is natural, and cannot be blamed in a
man but so far only as she passes into excess; yet does Despair design her
ruin, it opposes all her Principles, and engages the most tractable of all
Creatures, to become his own enemy. He breaks those Cords of Love which bind
him so strongly to himself, it causes hatred to succeed his Love, and by a
fury wherewith miserable souls and mad men only are possessed, it forces him to
be his own Executioner, to put a period to his misfortunes: Neque interest
multum, mors ad nos veniat an ad illam nos: illud imperitissimi cujusque verbum
falsum esse tibi persuade, Bella res est mori sua morte. Sen. Ep. 61.
I know that Seneca did allow his wise man this sentiment* that it was his
opinion that we might depart this World without offense, that there was always
Glory by letting in Death by our own hand, and that that man was able to live
at liberty, who could die without constraint: That a Wise Man was Master of his
Life, as well as his Actions, that he was to live as long as he ought, and not
so long as he could; and as he withdrew himself from a Feast when he was
satisfied, or quitted his sport when tired; he was to leave the World when he
became weary of it. In fine, he maintained that this Passion was an honor to
him: and that if it appertained to men of great courage sometimes to forsake
the Earth in their prosperity, it was a mark of folly in a man to desire to
live, being discontent and unhappy.

This sentiment is so often repeated in his Works, that we cannot deny but he
was of that opinion, and I must give the lie to my own judgment, if I would
defend or justify him in that escape. But he seems to me excusable enough,
being a Stoic, since his error proceeded from the Principles of the Sect he
was of, and for commending Despair in his Wise man, since it passed in his time
for the most glorious act of our courage: yet no sooner was he undeceived in
this Doctrine, no sooner had Christianity forbidden Homicides; and that no
attempt could be made upon a man's self, without breaking in upon the Rights of
his Lord, but he quitted his judgment; he retracts from his errors, and
confirmed, by the close of his Life, the truth of his Belief. For having
received the Sentence of Death, he would not execute it upon himself with his
own hands, he permitted his Veins to be opened by them about him, and suffered
them to let his Soul (with the Blood) out of his Body, without his own
assistance. In a Letter which he writes to Lucilius, he exhorts a wise man
not to deprive the Executioner of his Office, and (without fear) to wait for
the termination of his days, he says that there is fortitude in despising but
not in hating of Life, and that it is rather a sign of madness than of wisdom,
Aliquando etiam si mors istabit, and destinatum sibi supplicium sciet non
commodabit sapiens poenae suae munum, stultitia est timore mortis mori: veniet
qui occidet, expecta, quid occupas alienum negotium? Sen. Ep. 70.
to work our own dissolution by the fear of dying.

Indeed amongst all the Passions of the Soul, none are more sordid than
Despair: those that have made use of it, to recover their Liberty, or to
deliver themselves from the Tyranny of Princes, have not so much made proof of
their constancy as of their weakness; and they have passed among men rather for
impatient than courageous persons. Cato is not blamed in History, but for
having hearkened to the advice of Despair, his Death is the shame of the
Romans, his homicide blemisheth all his other actions; and what praises soever
Seneca gives him in his Book of Providence, he cannot be exempted from the
imputation of cowardice, in having recourse to Death, to shun the power of a
victorious enemy. It is a defect of Courage not to be able to undergo
Adversity, to wish for Death, because our Life is unpleasant, and to anticipate
the end of our Days, to free our selves from pain and infamy. Regulus, to whom
the like evil befell, showed himself much more generous to Posterity than this
Philosopher: for being fallen into the hands of the Carthaginians he would not
lend his own to Despair, that they might be deprived of the Glory of his
overthrow: and although he was become the Captive of them whom he had formerly
vanquished in pitched Battle, he chose rather to suffer, in being their Servant,
than violently to ease himself of their Tyranny by the commission of a
homicide. He received his disaster without murmuring against Heaven, he bore
the Domination of his insulting Lords with patience, he retained the same
greatness of Courage in his Captivity as in his Authority, and though far
removed from the Roman People, he ceased not to preserve his affection
inviolable for them. If his enemies loaded his body with Chains, they could not
tear from his Soul, the love he had for his Country, he was faithful to it in
the midst of his miseries, he made vows for its welfare, and as he knew that he
could not go out of the world without the leave of him that placed him in it,
he waited for Death from his Enemies, without daring to prevent it, by
attempting upon his own life. But Cato never surmounted Caesar, if he became his
Prince, he was also become his Conqueror by the Law of Arms, and if he deprived
him of Liberty, it was after he had subjected the Roman Commonwealth to his
Authority. Likewise his Despair is an evident sign of his imbecility: he did
not kill himself, but because he envyed Cesars fortunes, and set not the Dagger
to his breast, but because he could not bear the prosperity of a victorious
Antagonist.

If Despair be found guilty of infirmity, we shall find her no less full of
fury: violence gives not way to weakness, and as we deem a man a coward, whose
heart fails him in the day of Adversity, he is esteemed cruel, when he
contracts with Death for his deliverance. Those Tyrants that break in upon our
Lives, come short of the violence of Despair, they discharge their Rage only
upon our Bodies, they leave our minds at liberty; and, afflicting the meanest
part of us, they often see the more noble victorious over their Cruelty. But
Despair, that exercises its fury upon both, it depresseth the Soul with the
Body, it sets us wholly on fire against our selves, and more outrageous than the
evil that assaults us, it constrains us to make use of Steel or Poison, to
deprive our selves of Life. Then it is, that we become our own enemies, when we
turn our advantages to our destruction, when we employ our Reason to procure
our ruin, and to avoid Pain, which is but the trouble of effeminate men, we
summon the worst of evils to our assistance. Likewise an Orator has
excellently said, that Despair was but the Passion of furious persons, that it
took its Laws from Impatience, its Power from Indignation, its Weapons from
Fear and Pain; and that a man called not for Death, but because he hated
himself, or forgot his own Salvation.

Moreover Despair is accounted the most unjust of our Inclinations; and
whosoever should approve the use thereof amongst reasonable Creatures, would no
less offer violence to the Laws of Nature than those of Christianity. Life is a
gift of God, we enjoy it not but so long as it pleases him, we came not into
the World but by his favor, and that man would doubtless be insolently
audacious, who would dare to abuse a benefit which he received not, but upon
condition to preserve it. As none are permitted to choose the Country where
they will be born, nor the Parents that shall beget them, it is not allowable
for any to destroy themselves; and it is but just, that He only that placed us
in the number of the Living without our consent, should remove us from thence
at his pleasure. For although we are born for Command, and that we behold
nothing upon Earth, that is not subject to our Authority, nevertheless the
disposing of our selves, is not within our Commission, our Life is in the hands
of him that gave it us; and since the Son of God has redeemed us by his Blood,
it is no longer lawful for us to undervalue it, because of a few encumbrances
that attend it. Even as the Laws of Men forbid particular persons to rescue the
guilty from the hands of the Executioner, the heavenly Commandment permits not
that sinners should diminish or change their Chastisements; and they are
thereby obliged to suffer all sorts of calamitys rather than to abandon the
rights which God has over their Life, to the discretion of fortune. If we
desire Death let it be the Death of our Passions, let us avoid every thing
which makes us miserable, let us forsake all those false opinions which seduce
us, and let us die to our selves, if we will not feel the evil which we are so
much afraid of.

THE FOURTH TREATISE. OF GRIEF.
Discourse I.
Of the Nature of Grief.
AS Nature is an enemy to Ease, as she brings forth all things for action, as
the more noble of her works terminate in motion, and as she allows them no
divertisements but for the reparation of Strength decreased by Labor; as sloth
is hurtful to the Body, as it converts it into excremental humors, as it
increases Phlegm, as it changes the natural heat, and hindering the concoction
of Food renders it feeble and weak: The Stoics forbid their wise men to live
at ease; they make it the Seed-plot of Sin; and knowing it to be nearer allied
to darkness than to light, Nihil agendo male agere discimus.
they enjoin him to shun those retirements wherein he may learn to practice
evil for want of employment. The truth is, it falls out very often, that
nothing is more fatal to us than retirement and solitudes: our Vices become
less vigorous when they are seen; when the Disease is discovered, it is half
cured, and a dissolute life is never more dangerous than when, avoiding the
Eyes of men, we retire into private places. Yet such is the humor of Grief, she
delights in retirement, and seeks out solitary places to entertain her self
with her own miseries: and, as if she were possessed of an evil Spirit, she shuns
the company of them that are able to cure her. She resembles those idle
delicate persons, who know little or nothing of their own actions, who think
not of eating but when they are called to it, and who know not whether they be
sitting or standing, unless you ask them: they live without sense, they divert
themselves, and know it not, and they are employed, without knowing to what
purpose.

If the other motions of the Soul put us into agitation, they propose some end,
and the greatest part of them do aim at things that give us some sort of
content. Affection pursues the Object we love, and laying open its Beauties, or
Benefits, entertains us with the Joy of its possession, or advantage; Anger
meditates revenge, she considers the injury done her, and is never appeased
till she have had satisfaction: Covetousness applies her studies to Riches; the
comfort she expects from their enjoyment is her motive; and she cease to hunt
after them when she has once lost the hopes of finding them. But Grief is
always idle, she propounds to her self no ends* she is altogether taken up with
her own misfortunes; and without extending her thoughts beyond her self, her
food is only her own affliction. Nothing is so little at our command as this
Passion, she arises without our leave, she increases by her own motion; and
contrary to the other distempers of the Soul, she is made worse by the Remedies
which ought to be her Cure. The Journies or Voyages we undertake wherewith to
charm her; the cares we apply to correct her nature, and the divertisements of
which we make use, to allay her anguish, avail us nothing: she soon returns,
and all the witty inventions of Prudence serve not so much to destroy as to
deceive her. For Opinion coming in to her assistance, renews her Sorrows, shows
her the cause with aggravations; and, as if it drew strength from her respite,
it strives to make her yet more miserable. And it is from this reason, that
Seneca does infer, that Grief is not natural to man, since she is so fickle in
her humor, so variable in her wounds, and so inconstant in her affliction.

What ever comes from Nature is not sensibly apprehensive of alteration, it
preserves every where the same order, Ea quae a natura originem acceperunt
eandem in omnibus servant; apparet non esse natural quod varium est. Sen.
Consol. ad Helv. cap. 7.
and the diversity of matter it meets with changes not its course. Fire which
is a natural Agent, spares none, it equally devours the Prince and the
Peasant, it consumes the Wife and her Husband, and it must be Brass or
Diamonds, that is able to resist its fury. Steel enters into every part of the
Body, it divides all Metals, it separates the most solid things, it conveys
Death to the greatest number of Men, and we cannot reckon a Martyr in our
Annals, that was able to oppose its violence. But sorrow is partial, she wounds
one without touching another; that which afflicts us, reaches not our
Neighbors, and we often see, that one and the same disaster makes some
contented, and others unhappy.

The original of all this disorder is self-love, our Griefs proceed from our
affections, we grow not sad but because we are in love with our selves, and as
that Matron said in Quintilian, we regret not the loss of outward Goods, or of
our friends, but because we affected them too much. If the Enemy ravage our
Country, if the Pestilence depopulate the Provinces, if the Hailstones become
the Harvestors of the Husbandmans hopes, if the Thunderbolts batter down our
Steeple-tops, if the Famine decrease the number of our Compatriots; we do not
so much lament their misery as our own private calamity, we apprehend our own
ruin in their destruction, and their misfortunes and losses touch us no
farther, than that the same disasters may fall upon our heads. For by a
contrary reason, if news be brought us, that the Armies have quitted our
Borders, that they are gone into Ethiopia, or marched into Persia, and are
become Masters of their most considerable strong holds, if we receive advice,
that the Plague has tumbled twenty thousand Indians into the Grave, that the
Sea has swallowed up a whole Fleet of Infidels, that the Turks have gained
some Islands from the Christians, and violently carried away a great number of
innocent persons into miserable Captivity; all these evil tidings stir us not,
we hear them without disturbance; and though Nature oblige us to love all men
as our Brethren, we are not much concerned, whether they be miserable, provided
we are but out of danger; the misfortunes of our Neighbors terrify us not,
but in proportion to the love we bear them, and we fear not their unhappiness,
but in as much as it may chance to concern our selves. This was it that caused
St. Austin to define Grief, Tristitia est dissentio animi ab his rebus quae
nobis nolentibus accidunt. Aug. 14. de civ.
according to the Stoics, a Displeasure of the Soul caused by the opinion of
an evil, which befalls us contrary to our Will.

But as the humor of this Passion agrees not with that of its companions, she
brings forth effects, that are different from theirs: For if Love and Desire
treat us with oppression, Grief deals with us as a Tyrant, and if Hope and Fear
treat their guests as slaves, Sorrow makes them Martyrs. Her malignity extends
into all their faculties, she benumbs the Body with cold, she extinguisheth the
heat, by which they subsist, she dries up the radical moisture, by which they
live, she obstructs the digestion of what they eat, she embroils their memory,
she perverts their judgment, and she leaves not a member of their Bodies nor
any power of their Soul uncorrupted or not weakened. In fine, if the other
Passions be Diseases, Grief is a Torment; if Love be subject to discontents, if
Joy be ligh-theaded, if Fear be accompanied with imbecility, Sorrow is
attended at once with pining, anguish and pain: she beats down the Spirits with
the Body, and overthrowing the whole order of their Government, puts them into
a condition incapable of acting any thing, but what is fatal to their Rest.
Despair cease to torment us when separated from Grief, and our apprehensions
are supportable, when divided from that unquietness with which the
faint-hearted are afflicted.

Discourse II.
That Misfortunes make not a Wise Man sad, and that they are equally
advantageous to the innocent and the guilty.
ALbeit I have ever been persuaded, that there was a God in Heaven, that I know
well all Creatures obeyed him, and that that Religion, which I profess, obliged
me to pay him reverence, although I owned his Power to be infinite, that he was
equally just and merciful; and that the least of his Perfections was as well
beyond my expression as out of the reach of my thoughts: nevertheless have I
sometimes been unable to forbear lifting my head into Heaven, to bring his
Providence in question, and to ask, whether the Creator of the Universe were
the Governor of the minutes and adventures of our Life. It is true, that my
error lasted but a while, and I changed my opinion as soon as I considered the
Beauties of Nature, when I contemplated these azure Vaults, which hang over our
heads, when I admired the influences of the Stars, when I observed the regular
order of the Seasons, when I examined how the Day succeeded the Night, and how
the Sun, which caused both, conveyed his Light and his Heat into all the
quarters of the Earth. All these wonders easily undeceived me in my
misapprehension; and wholly ashamed of my infidelity, I confessed without
difficulty, that he who divided the Seas, who caused the Fruits to come forth
in their seasons, who upheld the Earth by its own weight, was the same who
regulated our Actions, Res humanas ordine nullo fortuna regit, spargitque manu
munera caeca pejora fovens. Sen. Hippo.
who took notice of our Sufferings, who assisted us in our warfare, and made
himself Arbitrator of our Defeat, or our Victory. But when afterward I saw
that all things were in disorder in the World, when I observed in it the guilty
happy, and the innocent miserable, when I considered there, the vicious
rewarded, and the just afflicted; I fell again into my first error, I appealed
from my last opinion; and swayed by an injustice, which to me seemed equitable,
I acknowledged no other Providence but that which the Ancients attributed to
Destiny and Fortune: my Faith lost her self by too great Curiosity, and I
became an Infidel, by desiring too much Knowledge.

But the Chastisement that waits upon sin, cured me of this Distemper, the
punishment of the wicked opened my Eyes; I complain now no more of the
afflictions of the just, nor of the felicity of the wicked, I know that these
are sufficiently miserable by being guilty; and that it is not necessary that
Divine Justice should abate their, Pride, since Vice contributeth to their
Torment. Indeed let a man be as vicious as he will he shall not avoid the
Chastisement due to his sin: Cognatum imo innatum omni sceleri sceleris
supplicium Lips. 2. de Constable.
his lewdness is his punishment, and how insensible soever he be of his Crimes,
he cannot shun their punishment, after he has committed them. There is no
safety here upon Earth, but that of innocence, and nothing can give rest to our
Souls, but the justice of our Actions. As it was the custom of the Romans to
bear the Cross upon which they were to be crucified, impious men carry their
punishment about them: the remorse of Conscience bears them company in all
places; and they feel themselves condemned before the Witnesses be called, ere
ever the Judge pass the Sentence, and before the Executioner lay hands upon
them. Those Torments that are visible, are not always the most sensible: our
Body is not at all times the theater of our pain, that which wounds this is
often offensive only to our imagination; and if its violence make it short, its
modertaion is not insupportable: but that which proceeds from our Crimes is
eternal, it is this only which is able to unite different qualities, which is
as lasting as cruel, which endures longer than that which caused it, which
increases by its silence, and gains strength by its moderation. It resembles
that famous Tyrant, who gave commandment to the Executioners, to give their
Patients a tedious Death, to make them suffer their Torments with longer
repetitions, to lay on gently, that their Death might be the more sensible to
them, and to send them into the other world by reiterated pains. For sin gives
us no respite, it continues our whole life, and by repeated torments conveys us
to eternal Death.

But without spending more time in summing up the Calamities of the wicked, it
will not be hard for me to satisfy those complaints, which most men make
against Heaven; if I show, that Fortune has nothing dismal in her, that her
disgraces cannot make us unhappy, that they are rather testimonials of Gods
Bounty than of his Anger; and that if they are the exercises of the innocent,
they serve also for remedies to the guilty. It is adversity, says an ancient
Orator, that reforms our Wills, that gives courage to the cowardly, that
constrains the obstinate, that teaches the proud modesty, which instructs
the impious in virtue, which crowns the just, and punishes the wicked.
Seneca esteemed himself happy in his Exile, Quod ad me attinet, intelligo me
non opes sed occupationes perdidisse. Corporis exigua desideria sunt. Sen.
Consol. ad Hell. cap. 11.
the penury that attended him, contributed to his quiet, he thought he had lost
his troublesome business, not his Goods, when they spoiled him of his Wealth,
and that by a happy mischief he had recovered his Liberty, in being deprived of
the care of preserving his Riches: The poor live securely; and, as Fortune is
not their Landlady, they fear not her displeasure. If a Tyrant invade the
neighboring Countries, if he send the Alarm into their Quarters, if he force
the Walls that surround them, they are not much concerned, they know the
Soldiers seek not for them, and that that want which makes them unhappy, is
their shelter from the pursuits of Usurpers. If they be banished from their
Country, and if, by a Power permitted by the Law of Arms to Conquerors, they be
forced to transplant, they leave their Cottages without complaint, they seek to
get out, and not to carry away; and knowing that the whole Earth is their
Country, they assure themselves of finding every where sufficient to satisfy
their needs.

Poverty is not insupportable, but to them that think it so, the imagination
makes the greatest part of their Torments, men must be abused by the noise of
the people, to be sensible of it, and be ignorant of necessitous contentments,
to be afraid of their condition. If we will take the pains to frequent the
habitations of the Poor, we shall see that there is nothing frightful in them,
but the name they bear; that Joy covers the faces of most of their Guests, that
they dispute tranquillity of mind with the Rich, and that without being laden
with the cares which disturb the wealthy, they taste Life's sweetness with
delight. But the rich are unhappy in the midst of Pleasures, Calamities beset
them on all sides, their Treasures are their troubles; and as they get them by
Labor, they possess them with Fear, and lose them with Sorrow.

But to make it appear, that Poverty has nothing vexatious, and that all its
evil consists purely in opinion; do we not see, that rich men often imitate
the poor, when they have a mind to divert themselves? That they appoint days,
to be entertained after their manner? That they lay aside their Plate-Services
for earthen Dishes? That they change their Goblets of Gold into wooden Bowls?
That they prefer the Work of the Potter before the Art of the Goldsmith? And
that they set aside the magnificence of their stately dwellings, to come and
divert themselves in a Shepherds Hut? Dementes! hoc aliquando concupiscunt quod
semper timent. Idem ibidem cap. 12.
Mean while these unhappy men fly from Want, they fear what they sometimes
seek; and, by a blindness which shows their infirmity, they abhor what in their
Delights they imitate. So much it is a truth, that indigence is but an
imaginary thing, that it has nothing more terrible in it than the common
opinion of men, and that the incommodities that attend it hurt not our Mind,
but in proportion to the wound they give to our imagination. Sometimes one and
the same cause produces different effects; and that which made poverty odious,
makes plenty a burden. As it is of small importance, whether a sick man's Bed
be of Ivory or of Wood, and as his being often removed, allays not his Grief; a
man is as little satisfied with Poverty as with Wealth, and because he carries
his evil about him, there is no help for his misery.

Therefore when any misfortune befalls us, let us be assured, that the evil we
resent, is only an effect of opinion, that it offends us because we think it
does, and that it afflicts our minds, only because we have suffered our
imagination to be seduced by it. If we are fallen into disgrace, if men have
violently robbed us of our credit, or good name, and if by the malice of our
Enemies, or the displeasure of the Prince, we are stripped of our Dignities, let
us remember that we have no power over human things, that there is a God above,
who has reserved to himself the Jurisdiction thereof, that we cannot be
renowned any longer than pleases him, and that as the Earth has no
pretensions upon the day, which by intervals enlightens it, we ought not to
promise our selves eternal advantages here, since men may spoil us of them
every moment. Fortune does not imitate Nature in her conduct: as this
perfecteth her Works by gradations, she brings them back by leisurely motions
to their Principles: the Planets withdraw from their Points at the same rate as
they hastened to them. But that sightless Dame does often make us poor at once;
we lose in one day that which cost our Ancestors diverse ages to acquire; and,
as if she knew that we are all born equal, that Riches fell unequally to our
shares, that we stripped our Neighbors for our own accommodation, that we have
increased them against the Laws of Nature, she casts us violently into a state
of poverty, and makes our condition equal to the meanest Creatures on Earth.
Though this method of proceeding be a surprizal, yet is it in some sort
advantageous to us: by wounding she cures us, she stifles all our evils at
once; and, as a skilful Surgeon, who nimbly draws an Arrow out of the Body,
she carries away with our Goods the care of their preservation and the
apprehension of their loss.

If the fire violently ravage our fields, if it burn our houses, and consume
all the substance we have in them; we are to consider, that this loss happens
to us by an universal cause, that this insatiable Element operates according to
the matter it meets with; and that it would be guilty of partiality, if it
should spare our habitations, since it pays neither respect to the Temples of
God, nor to the Palaces of Kings. Let us represent to our selves, that this
burning is a forerunner of that fire which is one day to devour the whole
world, that this Creature is enraged against us, that it is angry that we use
it as a slave, that we employ it in most of our Arts: and that it is but just,
we should be content to receive some damage from that which affords us so many
good services. Let us persuade our selves, that the evil befell us by the
secret Providence of Heaven, that God sends it to them that least think of it,
and that the flames would never destroy any houses, if they were to stay for
the consent of the owners. As the fire is burning up our dwellings, let us
implore Heaven to consume our Passions. By the light of the flames let us
behold the vanity of temporal Goods, let us therein adore the Hand that strikes
us, and which chastises us in this world, to spare us in the next.

If Death snatch away any of our friends; and, by an innocent cruelty, deprive
us of them we loved most in the world, let us bear this separation with
submission, let us be thankful to Providence, that we had them so long; let us
take her favors in the best sense, and not accuse her of having spoiled us,
since she could give as well as take; let us remember that all things in Nature
are subject to decay, that men have yet brought forth nothing immortal, and
that the proudest of their works lasted but a few years. Let us, by an
ingenious deceit, imagine, that our friends are absent, and not dead, that they
have changed their abode, and not their Country, that they are removed, but not
gone from us. Let us not be of the humor of those who love not their friends
till they have lost them; and who, doubting of their own affections, have
recourse to tears for their confirmation. If we judge of a man by the more noble
part of his composition, we are assured, that those we lament are not dead,
that their Souls live content; and that that virtue which caused them to excel
upon earth, has rendered them for ever blessed in Heaven. Quicquid est, cui
dominus inscriberis apud te est, tuum non est: nihil firmum infirmo, nihil
fragili aeternum and invictum est. Sen. Epist. 98.
Let us apply all these Arguments to our Adversities, let us thereof make
weapons of defense against their assaults when ever they attack us; and let us
hold for truth, that they serve always either to punish our Faults, or to make
our Virtues more perspicuous.

Discourse III.
That the Wise are happy even in Exile and Prison.
NOthing does so much oppose the general opinion of the vulgar, as to assert,
that afflictions are beneficial to a wise man, that his misfortunes contribute
to his felicity, that his disgraces turn to his glory, that he may be content
under oppression, and that that which makes other men unhappy should turn to
his profit. What, say they, can it be believed, that he should be beholding to
Fortune for reducing him to a state of beggary, to be lodged all his days upon
a dunghill, to be deprived of his Wife and Children, and to be ungratefully
forsaken of his nearest Relations? Is it possible, to think that Fabricius
could be happy in his Exile, when after his retirement from the Court, his
necessities constrained him to dig and delve, and to gather, with his own
hands, the Herbs and Roots for his Supper? Who will judge it a blessing to
Rutilius to be driven from his native Country, forced to forsake his Children,
make bankrupt of his friends, and to be confined to a barren corner of the
Earth? Who shall imagine that Regulus could be content in a Cask set with
Spikes, by which his wounds were renewed every moment, when he could not stir
himself without piercing his Body, when they constrained him to a continual
watching, and by a new sort of cruelty, they keep open his Eyes against the
Beams of the Sun?

Who shall think, that Socrates was used as a faithful Citizen, when they
present him the fatal Cup, when the Poison he swallows freezeth his Blood, and,
dispersing her malignity into all his Veins, bereaves his Eyes of Light, his
Limbs of Vigor, and his Reason of Stability? A man must be an enemy to himself,
to build his felicity upon his misfortunes, and be ignorant of the Nature of
Happiness; to think of arriving there, by the help of violent injuries which
oppose it.

Mean while we must own, according to Seneca's opinion, that Fabricius is happy
in his Poverty, that Rutilius is content in his Banishment, that Regulus meets
with nothing of evil in his Torments, and that Socrates is not miserable, in
letting in Death by tedious draughts. Magnum est exemplum, nisi mala fortunae
non invenit. Sen. de Provid.
Calamities astonish only men of ordinary Spirits, and he must be ignorant of
the condition of human life, who fears or flies the miseries that attend it.

Banishment, which is the midway beween Life and Death, which deprives the
living of conversing with their fellow Creatures, and causes them to bewail
the absence of them whom they have not lost; is in propriety of Speech, but a
changing of Habitation, and a removal from their Countries; the same Sun gives
them light where ever they go, and without being troubled for the place,
whither they are to retire, they are assured to find a Heaven to cover, and the
same Earth to sustain them.

A wise Man is too generous to be restrained to a portion of Earth, the whole
Globe is his Inheritance; he lives here below as a Pilgrim, and not as a
Citizen, and he thinks himself to be upon his Journey every time he is obliged
to forsake the place of his Nativity. Exiguum hoc, quod si montes coercent, si
fluvii cingunt, patriam esse censes? Universus orbis est, quacunque homines
sunt coelesti illo semine oriundi. Lip. 10. de constable.
Those Mountains which distinguish Kingdoms, and the Rivers which surround
their Provinces, do not comprehend their Territories: His comforts are spread
over all the Earth, he deemeth that he is arrived in his own Country so often
as he is brought into another; and as by his mind he possesses all things, he
persuades himself to be born in every place, into which Providence has cast
him. Who does not laugh at those fools, that are fastened with a straw by the
Leg to a Table, who being tied to a Post, by a small thread, seem as immovable
as if their Bodies were laden with Fetters and Shackles? And yet we see some
men agitated by the same Madness: They are so much in love with their own
Chimney-Corners, that they are not to be hauled thence. They confine themselves
to a piece of Earth, and like no Towns but those they were born in; and they
would think themselves thrown out of the World if they should be forced into
fresh Quarters.

But forsaking the error of the multitude, whose judgment, a false opinion has
disordered, it is not difficult to make appear, that Banishment is to be borne,
that it has nothing more terrible than the noise of the World, that the
Banished may live contented, and that they suffer nothing in Exile that is able
to make them unhappy. We see some men voluntarily quit their own to inhabit a
foreign Country. The People who fill the most stately City of Europe, are not
all born under one Hemisphere, the most remote parts contribute to her
composition, Strangers are not there less frequent than those of the Country:
and if there were a general muster of the Occupants, I know not whether the
number of the Banished would not exceed all that are Natives of Rome. Either
Delight or Profit is the motive of this exchange of Air: Some come thither for
Traffic, others to hide their enormities; Some are persuaded thither by the
desire of acquiring Arts, and others by a vain hope of heaping up Riches, or
gaining of Reputation: Ambitious men have sought it as a Theater whereon to
expose their Vanities to view; and we find no Nation of which some are not very
glad to change their Climate for that of this Worlds Paradise. But go out of
this City, which is the common Country of all those People, pass into the other
Towns, which have not her Fame nor Delights: Sum up the Inhabitants, and you
shall find, that the greater number are Strangers, that their Language is
different from that which they learnt in their Infancy, that interest tempted
them to remove; and that by a humor which seems strange, they often abandon
a pleasant Air to seek an Iron or a Brazen Sky.

Our Country is that place where we live contented, our felicity depends on us,
Patria est ubicunque been est^: illud autem per quod been est, in homine, non
in loco, est. Sen. Lib. de remed. fortuit.
and not on our habitation, and it is to little purpose to drive us from the
Land of our Nativity, since into what Coast soever we are carried, we bear
about us our Virtue, which ought to make all our Happiness.

A Prison seems to have something more vexations than Banishment: For besides
that this deprives us of the advantages of Nature, Tempus quo quis debet esse
in carcere, computatur in tempore quo quit debet esse in exilio. Lib. 23. Cod.
de poen.
that it is the general Residence of Darkness, that it shuts out the Sun Beams,
and that the light enters not but at the Grates and sighing holes; it debars us
of Liberty, it tumbleth us alive into the Grave, and makes us as Exiles in the
midst of our own Country. The Lawyers confound Imprisonment with Exile, and put
no difference between the time that we spend in the Dungeon, and that which is
wasted in Banishment. Mean while that which makes others unfortunate, is no
incommodity to a Wise man: His mind never suffers restraint; and as he lives
content in Solitude, he remains at liberty in Prison. The Walls which enclose
his Body, the Chains by which he is fastened to a corner of the Goal, cannot
limit his Soul: He is free whilst his Companion is a Slave, and without
clearing the Gates that enclose him, he takes his advantage to escape into all
parts of the World. As in his freedom he loathes Voluptuousness, he laughs at
Pain in Servitude; and he cares little into what place they put him, since he
demands not to have his Portion here upon Earth.

That which afflicts the weak, and makes a Prison so odious to persons of
honor, is because it is infamous, because it passes in the conceit of Men,
for Satan's habitation, the abode of evil Spirits, where his family recides, and
that letting the innocent go free, they fancy that none but the unfortunate and
miserable are there left behind. But all these words ought not to affright us:
for if we be true Christians, let us go in boldly, let us prepare our selves to
fight with a Tyrant even in his own house, and to trample under foot an
Usurper, who is not less an Enemy to the Just, than to the wicked. If the hole
into which we are thrust, be the Possession of Darkness, let our Virtue serve
us for a Light; let our Patience bruise the Fetters, let our inward sweet smell
expel the Stenches of the place, and let our innocence triumph over the rigor
of the Goalers. We trade well when we gain by our Commerce, when our profits
exceed our losses; and when adventuring some vain pleasures of this life, we
exchange them for solid and eternal Joys. It is really true, that the Guard
about us, those Fetters with which they load our Bodies, and the Dungeons in
which they bury us alive, are advantageous to us, they attract us from the
Earth, they are the Ladders by which our thoughts climb into Heaven, they give
us there the contemplation of Divine things, and insensibly pour into us
Charity, with knowledge. They do what Providence daily performs in the World;
and as she gives cessation to the labors of Mortals by the sweet refreshments
of night, they allay our miseries by the consideration of the rewards they work
for us. In fine, a Prison restores to the Soul that which by violence it takes
from the Body: The liberty of the one arises from the servitude of the other,
as it causes our sufferings, it begins our health: and stripping us of the
delights of the Earth, it leaves us only the desires of Heaven.

But if the Prisoners be not attended with all comforts, yet ought they not to
be much afflicted: A Prison has nothing but what may be born with; if it have
its Shame, it has also its Glory, and if it have incommodities that cause it
to be hated, it has advantages which have rendered it desirable. Some
Philosophers have made it the habitation of the Muses, they styled it a Wise
man's retirement; there they composed the most Excellent of their Works, and as
if it had been a School, they there taught their Disciples Virtue, unfortunate
men Constancy, and their Oppressors Mercy; it was there that Anaxagoras studied
the Square of the Circle, by which he put the greatest Artists to a Nonplus,
and proved by Reason what they could never demonstrate by Experience. It was
there that Boethius writ his Consolations, by which he shows, that it is God
that sends afflictions, that Philosophy is a proper Remedy, and that that which
came from so just a Hand, could not be offensive, but to such as were without
hope of reward. It was there that St. Paul preached the Gospel, that he writ
the greatest part of his Epistles, that he confuted both the Jews and the
Gentiles, and proved to all the World, that we cannot enter into Glory but
through the straight Gate of affliction. In fine, it is there that we may learn
to be sober, to be contented with what we have, to retrench our selves of
superfluous things, to contemn Earthly benefits, and by a generous violence, to
prepare for those Mansions, where the unfortunate shall be happy, the innocent
at rest, and the Captives free.

Discourse IV.
That Pity and Envy are Enemies to Wisdom.
AS we see nothing in the world purely simple, that all we find there has a
mixture, that the Pleasure we taste in it is mingled with pain, and that the
highest of human Felicity is always attended with troubles and disquiet: As
there is hardly any complete Virtue upon Earth, as the most excellent have
their defects, the most enlightened their mists, the most innocent their
faults, and the most courageous their weaknesses, it must not be wondered, that
Vice does so often deceive us in its appearance, and that, assuming a
proportion of its contrary qualities, it needs only a little outward show to
represent it self glorious; we magnify Ambition because she apeth Generosity,
because she despises Dangers, affronteth Death, and, to gain a piece of Earth,
makes little of all those laborious toyls which give exercise to Valor. We
esteem Prodigality, because it opposes Covetousness, because it claims
kindred of Liberality, and gives largely without hope of reward. We pay
reverence to the Dissimulation of Politicians, because it has an affinity with
Prudence, because it hides our Designs, covers our Anger, and waits for the day
of Vengeance. We honor Compassion, because it resembles Charity, because she
takes the Prisoners out of the Dungeon, comforts the distressed; and without
any consideration of their merits relieves equally the innocent and the guilty.
All the Orators have given her Elogies: they make her the Virtue of Princes,
they have lifted up her head above her Companions, and do assure us, that if
Valor and Justice made Kings great, it was Compassion that rendered them worthy
of our admiration. Nulla de Virtutibus tuis plurimis nec gratior nec
admirabilior misericordia tua. Nihil habet nec fortuna tua majus quam ut
possis, nec Natura tua melius quam ut velis conservare quam plurimes.
Nothing likens you so much unto the Gods, says Cicero, speaking to Caesar, as
your Compassion, your Clemency makes you his Image; and if your Fortune have
not any thing to present you more glorious than the Command of the Roman
Nation, Nature cannot endow you with a more excellent Gift, than a Will to
preserve the unfortunate.

Although this Virtue be so fair in her outside and that it seems as if we
could not blame her without a renunciation of humanity, nevertheless she
cease not to be found guilty of great defects, and to pass for a Vice in the
Stoic Morality. For as these generous Philosophers strip their wise man of all
the maladies of his Soul, they allow not that other men's misfortunes should be
his miseries: they will have him as little concerned for his Neighbors
afflictions as for his own disasters: They will have him to be fortune proof;
and that that which discomposeth others, should teach him Constancy, and an
even temper, What, say they, does Virtue consist in infirmity? Must we be
guilty of effeminacy, to perform Acts of Generosity? Can we not be charitable
without being afflicted? And can we not relieve those that are in misery,
unless we mingle our Sighs with their Sobs and Groans, Vere enim aegritudo, nec
long a miseriis est quisquis miseretur. Lips. 2. de constable.
and our Cries with their Tears? A wise may ought to consider the Poor for
their Relief, and not himself to share in their Calamities; he ought to protect
them from oppressions, and not to be inwardly disturbed for them; he ought to
endeavor their comfort, and not to be a Partner in their misfortunes.

But as this Notion seems somewhat strange to them that know not the Stoic
Sentiments, to apprehend it well, we must suppose with Seneca, That compassion
is a composition of two different parts, whereof one regards the Calamity to
relieve it, and the other to take a share of the suffering. The Stoics reject
the second to embrace the first; They say that Pity is unworthy of a man of
Courage, they call it the vice of effeminate persons, and do declare, that they
cannot become sad without derogating from the Excellency of the Mind: and that
they must resolve to be miserable, if other Men's misfortunes may as well pierce
their Heart as their Eyes. As we judge of the weakness of these, when they
water at the sight of others that have sore eyes: as it is not so much a
cheerfulness of Spirit as an infirmity of Body, to laugh with all that laugh,
and to gape every time that another opens his Mouth. Pity is a badg of
weakness, and we must be of the disposition of Women, not to be able to look
upon other men's troubles, without being assaulted by it our selves. Non
miserebitur sapiens, sed succurret, sed proderit: at illa facit tranquillam
mentem vultu suo. Sen. 2. de Clem.
Therefore when a Wise man gives Alms, when he saves a man from Shipwreck,
when he hospitably receives the banished into his House; he preserves still the
same tranquillity of Mind; he is seen to be as little disturbed when he helps
the distressed, as when he rebukes the impious, and chastises the guilty. He
accosts them without trouble, he comforts them with Arguments, he relieves them
by his Liberality; and knowing that his grieving can do them no good, he rather
draws money out of his Purse, than tears from his Eyes.

If Compassion be sordid when she renders other men's misfortunes her own, Envy
is infamous when she makes her own Torment of other men's Prosperity: and as we
may not excuse the first by reason of her weakness, we cannot but condemn the
second, because of her injustice. Vices do at sometimes tickle us, they often
steal into the seat of virtue, and some of them are so disguised, that hardly
we can know them from their Contraries. Profusion seems so becoming in
Monarchs, that we make no difficulty of confounding it with Liberality, Cruelty
is often covered with the Robe of Justice: Compassion is so tender hearted,
that she is hardly to be separated from Clemency, and as she bears all her
marks, she is not afraid to pretend to her praises; but Envy is always
opprobrious, Virtue is her torment, the most innocent feel her fury, she dares
not appear to the eyes of men, and as she cannot conceal her Malice, she is
forced to seek darkness to hide her deformities and discontents. Invidia est
odium alienae felicitatis: respectu inferiorum, ne sibi aequentur, respectu
parium, quia sibi aequantur. August. in Sermon.
As if she were animated against the whole Race of Mankind, she maks war
against all men; and without distinguishing their merits, she sets both upon
the perfect, and the less accomplished: She opposes the most eminent, because
she cannot arrive to their perfections; she persecuteth her equals, because
they reprove her Covetousness and Pride; and she prosecutes her inferiors, as
having an apprehension of their happy Successors. But though she be an Enemy to
all the Virtues, yet she exercises her fury particularly against the more
Noble, and resembling the Scorpions, who sting most fiercely when the Sun is
most hot and clear; she assaults those which have the greatest Luster and
Glory. From thence it comes that Tyrants hate the honesty of their Heirs, that
they fear the Valor of their Commanders, that they dread the prudence of their
Ministers, and apprehend the Puissance of their friends. They think themselves
contemned in the praises of their inferiors; they fancy that the Commendations
given to them is an abatement of their own Grandeur, and they are afraid of
Designs to supplant them, every time men speak in their favor.

But if Monarchs unwillingly suffer virtuous persons, the Subjects do not less
envy their Princes advantages: Conspiracy is not always an effect of their evil
Government, it more often proceeds from the Malice of the People, than from the
Tyranny of Kings; and their inaccessableness is often times the only cause of
their ruin. Socrates lost not his Life but for being too Virtuous: His
integrity made all his Crimes, and the Athenians would not at this day be
accused of having put the wisest man of their Commonwealth to death, if Envy
had not furnished them with Arms to take him out of the way. But as no Crime
goes unpunished, Envy finds her Chastisement in her self; she drinks the
greatest share of her own poison; and to make her miserable, we need but leave
her to her own fury. All other Vices propose to themselves some advantage, and
though it be never any thing but show, it cease not to give vigor to their
pursuits; but Envy looks upon good to afflict her self, she rejoices not but
in other men's harms, and by a blindness proper to Avarice, she measures her own
Riches by the Poverty of her Neighbors, and her own wants by their Treasures.
If a Passion be never so violent, it lasts not always, it cease after a
time, and often finds its suffocation in the cause that gave it birth. Anger
takes her ease after she has tormented us a while, Pleasure becomes our Pain,
when its Charms have tired us; Gluttony is wearied in much feasting; and our
Soul has not any faculty, which admits not a Truce after a Combat: But Envy
is always in motion, she lasts as long as her cause; and what efforts soever we
use to sweeten her, she is not to be cured but by the Death of the Author.

From all these Discourses it is easy to conclude, that Grief is not natural,
since she is so self conceited, since she does not equally affect all men;
since she is partial in Poverty, effeminate in Pity, infamous in Envy,
dejected, or insolent in misfortunes. He that embraces the motions of so dark
a Passion, may assure himself to be never happy, and as the most innocent are
attended by injustice, we are not to expect any moral good service from them.

FINIS.
A Table of the Contents of this Work.
PART I.
Treatise I.
Discourse. Page. 1. THe Stoics Defense against Passions 1 2. That it is man's
Happiness to live according to the Laws of Nature 11 3. A Continuation of the
same Subject, and of the advantages of Reason 20 4. That a Wise Man's Felicity
is not built on the Goods of the Body 28 5. That the Goods of Fortune cannot
make a man happy 41 6. That Virtue alone makes a Wise man happy 49 7. That the
Moral Virtues of the Heathen are not Criminal 57
Treatise II.
Discourse. Page. 1. What the Nature of Passions is, and in what Faculty of the
Soul they reside 66 2. Of the Number of Passions according to the Stoics 73 3.
That Passions are not natural to Man 80 4. That the Senses and opinion are the
two Principles of Passions 89 5. That Passions cannot be of use to Virtue 95 6.
That no man is more miserable than he that is subject to Passions 107 7. That a
Wise man may live without Passion 115
PART II.
Treatise I.
Discourse. Page. 1. OF the nature of Joy 127 2. That the love of Beauty is an
Enemy to Reason, and that it is not so much an effect of Nature as Opinion 135
3. That Learning is Vexatious, and the pleasures of knowledge are mixed with
Grief, Danger, and Vanity 145 4. That the Buildings, and Gardens of Grandees
are not so much the Inventions of Necessity as Vanity 155 5. That the Gaudiness
of Apparel discovers the impudicity, or Pride of them that use it 164
Treatise II.
Discourse. Page. 1. Of the nature of Desire 173 ^^ That the desire of
Greatness and Wealth plungeth men into misery and sin 181 3. That Audacity is
of no use to Wise men in assaulting or defending of Evils 193 4. That Hope is
ungrateful, fearful, and uncertain 199 5. That Anger is blind in taking of
Vengeance, rash in Quarrels, and insolent in Chastisement 207
Treatise III.
Discourse. Page. 1. Of the nature of Fear 220 2. That Tortures are not
terrible but in opinion, and that Fools and Cowards only are affrighted at them
228 3. That a Wise man is not afraid of Death, and considers it, as the End
of his misery, and the Entrance to felicity 237 4. That Despair is mixed with
Cowardice, Fury, and Injustice 247
Treatise IV.
Discourse. Page. 1. Of the nature of Grief 254 2. That misfortunes make not a
Wise man sad, and that they are equally advantageous to the Innocent and the
Guilty 259 3. That the Wise are happy even in Exile and Prison 268 4. That Pity
and Envy are Enemies to Wisdom 276
Errata.
Page 23 line 14. for Expert read Exparte. page 109. l. 14. for to Grandeur r.
to her Grandeur. page 130 l. 14. for Transmitted r. Transmuted. page 142. l.
10. for been r. seen. page 150. l. 25. for unskilful r. skilful. page 171. l.
31. for Christ's r. Christ. ag. 184. l 14. for dispose r. despise.


