Remarks upon the DREAM Of the late Abdicated Queen of England, And upon that
of Madam the D. of La Valiere, Late MISTRESS to the French King, etc.

REMARKS upon the DREAM Of the late Abdicated Queen of England, And upon that
of Madam the Duchess of La Valiere, Late Mistress to the French King, AND NOW
NUN of the Order of Bare-Footed-Carmelites at PARIS.

By the Author of the Harmony of PROPHESIES, etc. Being the Paper the Publisher
whereof was Condemned last Month to be Broken alive on the Wheel, by the
Parliament of Roan.

Done from the French Copy Printed at Amsterdam.

LONDON: Printed for Tho. Salusbury, at the Sign of the Temple near Temple Bar
in Fleet Street, and are to be sold by R. Baldwin in the Old Bailey, 1690.

Advertisement.
THis Paper is written by a Divine that has made himself famous by his Writings
against the Romish Church, and who has of late, written several Books about a
Revolution, he says, is to happen within a few Years in Europe, which he founds
upon the Apocalipse: may be read more safely in England than in France, to
which it relates in part; for there is no hazard of being broken alive upon the
Wheel for Reading or Publishing it here, as has been the fate of so doing in
France. And if the other Explication of these two Dreams, done by Monsieur
Agendar, at the French King's desire, come to my hands, the Reader shall have
it likewise, that he may be in a better condition to pass his judgment on both,
and give the Palm to which of them he thinks deserves best.

Remarks upon the Dream Of the late Abdicated Queen of England, And upon that
of Madam the Dutch. of La Valiere, Late Mistress to the French King, etc.
THE Occasion of Publishing the following Dreams, and Explication of it:

A Page of the late Queen of England came on Monday the 9th of January,
1689/90, to Monsieur Leonard, the French King's Bookseller in Paris, and told
him, his Mistress was desirous to speak with him immediately: Whereupon
Monsieur Leonard having gone incontinent to wait upon the Queen, she told him,
She heard he was printing an Explication of the King of France his Dream, which
had made so great a noise at Court, written by Monsieur Agendar: And she
desired he would, with the King's leave, add to that of the King's, a Dream she
had had herself, on Christmas-Night. Which the Bookseller promising to do, the
late Queen caused my Lady Salisbury, one of her Ladies, to deliver him a Paper
of the Tenor following:

The DREAM itself.
UPon Saturday night, the 24th of December, after having heard the
Midnight-Mass, I went to Bed very much troubled in mind: about four a Clock in
the Morning, there appeared to me in my sleep four Persons whom I knew not, and
who stood a long time before me, without speaking a word; at last the Eldest of
them, whose Face resembled a mixture, betwixt a Man's and Woman's, said to me,
Great Princess, Yet within three and a half, and the fourth part of a half, and
he shall be no more. Two Claps of Thunder having set my Chamber on Fire, those
four Persons thereupon disappeared: Immediately thereafter, I thought I saw a
Woman mounted on a Camel, who would needs have me to follow her with the little
Prince of Wales, saying, She would take me to a blessed Place; I followed her,
and she led me, I thought, through an Arbor full of Flowers, where all things
seemed Enchanted: here we met with a Prince who looked as one that had been
once very strong, but who now had his right Arm and his left Ear cut off, and
two Monks helped him to walk. But just when those Persons were beginning to
speak to us, a Whirlwind in a moment separated us from them; and we were
carried thence into a thick dark Wood, where there was no other light but a
little Moonshine; here there arose a thick and stinking Rynd of Mist, which
necessitated my Comerade and me to embark ourselves upon the Ocean, and
whereupon we arrived at last at the Elezian Shades: Just at our arrival there,
the terror which was upon me, forced me to awaken, and I found myself all over
in a sweat, and my Face and Pillows all be-dewed with Tears, so terrible a
Fright had the Dream put me in.

The Explication of the Dream.
BEfore I come to Explain this Exiled Queen's Dream, it is fit we should know,
she is by birth an Italian Princess, a Bigoted Papist, and much devoted to the
Pope, and to the Jesuits: Thence it was, she entertained a firm Design to Ruin
the English, and to Extirpate the Protestant Religion; to succeed in this
damnable Design, she pretended a Prince of Wales was born, and was the occasion
thereby of that Tragi-Comedy, so known to all Europe, and of her own and the
Flight of K. James her Husband out of England: And as she is the principal
Person concerned in this Tragedy, it has pleased GOD, by this Vision, to give
her the just Marks of his Anger and Displeasure against those of that Party.

This Queen, after having heard Midnight-Mass, went to Bed very much troubled
in mind: This Trouble of Mind was a Preludium to that terrible Vision that was
to follow. The Prophet says, There is no peace says my GOD, to the sinner: And
thence certainly it was, this Princess was disquieted at going to Bed: Why she
had this Dream on Christmas-night, I shall show afterward.

About four a Clock in the Morning, there appeared to me four Persons whom I
knew not, who stood a long time before me without speaking a word: This Vision
happened at four a Clock in the Morning, which is the ordinary hour of Dreams
coming from God; because at that time the Spirit is more free, and not
embaras'd with Vapors, or with the Fumes arising from the first Digestion. The
Queen did not know these four Persons, because God had left her to Blindness of
Mind; otherwise she might have easily known that it was the Great Whore and the
Signagogue of Satan she saw before her: These four Persons stood a long time
without speaking. It pleased God, this Vision should stay a long time before
this Unhappy Queen, to the end, she might be the more assured of the truth of
that Divine Revelation.

At last the Eldest of them, whose face resembled a mixture, betwixt a Man's and
a Woman's: This Hermophrodite is no other then the Pope, who feigns himself to
be GOD's Vicegerent upon Earth, when he is at the same time, the Great Whore
mentioned in the Apocalipse. In Dubritius his Revelations, the Pope appeared to
him in the shape of a Woman with a Beard; which is just as much as to say, in
the shape of a Hirmophrodite, as here.

This Hirmophrodite said, Great Princess, Yet within three and a half, and the
fourth part of a half, and he shall be no more: This Expression evinces
clearly, that the Speaker is the Great Whore, since she mentions exactly the
time of her own Duration, and the Year in which she shall be no more: It Is
certain by the Sequel of this Prophecy, that this infamous Hermophrodite speaks
of herself, and of her Sinagogue in the third Person. We have proved in another
Book, viz. The Harmony of the Apocalipse, That the three Days and a half, of
which St. John speaks, Revel. chap. 11. v. 11. are 1290 Years, and which will
end in the Year 1714: But here this Vision adds the fourth part of a half Day,
for the utter Destruction of the Pope; and as every Day of this Great Year, is
360, or 365 Years, it follows, that the total Ruin of the Pope, and of Popery,
must be in the Year 1759, for the eighth part of 360 is 45; these 45 Years
then, being added to 1714, makes up the Year 1759, in which the Pope will be
entirely Extirpated. The Prophet Daniel does explain this Affair after the same
manner, as in this Dream of the Queen's, Happy is he that shall see the forty
fifth day after the one thousand two hundred and ninety. We have in the Book I
formerly mentioned, cited this passage of Daniel's, to prove that the last Year
of the Pope's Reign, when the last Viol shall be poured out upon the Beast,
must be the Year 1759: And the wonderful agreement of all their Prophesies does
clearly manifest, that this Dream of the Queen's, was sent her of GOD.

Moreover, the ordinary way of counting Years at the Court of Rome, is by
Indictions, whereof every one consists of fifteen Years, and makes exactly up
the hour of three days and an half of St. John; whence we must conclude, that
it is the Great Whore herself, that speaks in the Queen's Dream, since she
follows her own way of reckoning.

This Hermophrodite does justly call the Queen Great Princess, because the Pope
has not a Princess within all his Empire, that has done more to establish it in
England, and elsewhere, than she. And it is for the same reason, that it has
pleased GOD to make her know, as it were by the mouth of the Pope himself, the
end of his Hellish Empire.

Two Thunder Claps that set the Queen's Chamber on fire, made these four
Persons to disappear: We have proved, that these four Persons that appeared to
the Queen, are the Pope and his Clergy; and the manner of those Wretches their
disappearing, does put it beyond dispute; for all the Prophesies expressly say,
That GOD shall extirpate Antichrist and his Synagogue by the most dreadful
judgments: These Judgments are very well represented by two Claps of Thunder,
which set the Queen's Chamber on fire. A great many other Visions and
Revelations, as that of Kotterus, of Erabritius, Christina Poinatovie, etc.
foretells the Destruction of Rome by Fire.

Then she saw a Woman mounted upon a Camel: We have proved elsewhere, That the
final Destruction of the Great Whore, shall not happen till the Year 1759, and
therefore it is no wonder she should appear a second time to this Queen, so much
her Friend. The Whore is mounted on a Camel, because she is to conduct the
Queen into a Desert; that is, the Desert of Popery, destitute of all Spiritual
Blessings, and where the Flowers and Pleasures of it seem to be, and are indeed
Enchanted. This is the same Wilderness of which St. John speaks in the 17th
Chap. of Apocalipse.

This Woman would needs have the Queen follow her, together with the little
Prince of Wales, telling her, She would bring her to a happy Place: But the end
of the Dream will evince how fallacious the Promises of the Devil and
Antichrist are.

I followed then this Woman, (says the Queen) and she took me through a
pleasant Garden full of Flowers, where all things seemed to be Enchanted: It Is
no wonder that this Princess should give ear to the words of the Great Whore,
since she has been bewitched with her Witchcrafts from her Infancy upwards, and
a Religious Observer of all the Maxims of Popery and Jesuitism.

The Whore conducts the Queen through an Arbor: These are the Court of France,
which is a very considerable part of the Desert of the Whore, as the event of
this Discourse will justify: These Arbours are full of Flowers, where all
things seem to be Enchanted: These Flowers and Delights which the Devil and
Antichrist give to Men, are not real ones, but only Delusions: In effect, The
figure of this world passes away, but the will of GOD remains for ever.

We here met with a Prince (adds the Queen) who looked as one that had been
once very strong, but who now had his right Arm and his left Ear cut off, and
whom two Monks helped in his walk: It Is not strange, that this Refug'd Queen
should meet Lowis the Fourteenth in her way, since the place where she now is,
is the Court of France. It is said of this Unhappy Prince, That he looked as
one that had been once very strong; but the Misfortunes which the Monks had
brought upon him, has now rendered him the Object of the Hate and Contempt of
the whole World. That we may understand the Misfortunes the Monks are to bring
upon Lowis the Fourteenth, we must consider, that a King has two Bodies, one a
Natural, the other Politic; Lowis the Fourteenth is not chiefly to suffer the
Ignominy mean'd here, in his Natural Body, but in his Mistick or Politic one,
which is the Kingdom of France, whereof he is the Head: The right Arm cut from
him, is the Massacre of the Protestants of France, which shall begin this
present Year 1690, in some parts of France, and shall continue the space of
three Years following, as we have proved in the Book formerly mentioned. The
Protestants of France were the right Arm of Lowis the Fourteenth for several
Reasons: 1. They were more faithful to him than the Papists, who would have
Dethroned him, if the Protestants had not stood by him. 2. Because by them the
Commerce and Trade of France flourished. 3. Because they brought with them a
Blessing from GOD upon the King and Kingdom, for their sakes. In effect, when
ever the King came to Revoke the Edict of Nants, immediately thereupon he was
struck in the Fundament, as the Philistines of old, upon alike occasion: But as
the Crime of Lowis the Fourteenth was far greater than that of the Philistines,
so much greater was his Punishment, for this Unhappy Prince shall never be
entirely cured of his Fistula; and because he shall never have the Grace given
him to Repent, his end shall be with Pains horrid and strange, as Nostredamus
has it Cent. 6. Quarunt. 6. It is also certain, that the outmost of all
Miseries, shall happen to France, and to their King, upon the Massacre of the
Protestants. This is it which was mentioned by Nostredamus, when speaking of
France, upon the back of this Massacre, After this (says he) there shall follow
the greatest of Woes.

All these Reasons prove evidently, That the Protestants were the right Arm of
Lowis the Fourteenth, and that by their Massacre the Monks will cut off the
King's right Arm. And in this Dream of the Queen's, there is a clear Alusion to
an ordinary Expression used by that KING, That to have all his Subjects become
Catholics, he would let them cut off his right Hand.

It is said in the Queen's Dream, that this Unhappy Monarch had likewise his
left Ear cut off: The cutting off the left Ear, signifies upon the matter the
same thing with the cutting off the right Hand; for the left Ear of Lowis the
Fourteenth ought to have been open to the Complaints of the Protestants, and
therefore by the left Ear is meant they. Every body knows that Magistrates
ought to have their right Ears open to the Accuser, and the left to the
Accused: In France the Papists were ever the Accusers, and the Protestants the
Accused; and therefore the left Ear of Lowis the 14th, signifies naturally the
Protestants of France, and the cutting off this Ear, their Extirpation and
Massacre: The Monks stand by, for they have brought the King to this
Punishment, and are the Authors of this dreadful Execution; which F. La Chaise
had put in practice before now, if not hindered by the late Prince of Conde.
This horrid Crime will be the Price of F. La Chaise's Absolution; and by this
Dreadful SACRIFICE, Lowis the Fourteenth pretends to Atone for His other
Crimes.

The Queen had this Vision on Christmas-Eve, because it relates much to what
was predicted of Lowis the Fourteenth, in terms like, and yet opposite to those
of the Prophet Isaias, A child is born, and a son to us is given: Whereas
Nostredamus has it, in Cent. 3. Quarant. 42. speaking of Lowis the 14th,
L'enfant naitra a deux dens en la gorge; A Child shall be born with two Teeth
in his Mouth: Which proved literally true of him. And indeed within a little,
this Unhappy Monarch shall cause Innocents to be murdered in the same manner,
and for the same reasons, that Herod did it long ago

A Whirlwind (says the Queen) separated us from this Wretched Prince, and his
two Monks, when they were just going to speak to us: The Whirlwind that shall
take this Queen from France, shall be the unhappy and fatal Crisis of Europe,
at the time when Lowis the 14th and his Monks shall be on the point of putting
in execution the Massacre of the Protestants of France.

And we found ourselves (continues she) in a Wood very dark, where there was
only a little Moonshine; and where there arose dark and stinking Mists: This
dark Wood, is the Condition of France, when the Romish Religion shall be
absolute Mistress. This Wood had no light of the Son of Righteousness, which is
Jesus Christ, but only that of the Moon, which is the Romish Church: In effect
this Antichristian Church is exactly opposite to that of Jesus Christ; which in
the 12th Chapter of the Apocalipse, is clothed with the Sun, and has the Moon
under her feet. The thick and stinking Mists are the abominable stinking and
tyrannical Doctrine of the Romish Religion, and the innumerable Murders which
their execrable Clergy shall cause to be committed in the black Desert or Wood,
spoken of in this Dream, and in all the other Dominions of Antichrist.

In the end (says she) we embarked upon the great Ocean: This Ocean where the
Queen embarks with the Great Whore, is that of this World, and is the
continuation of the Life and Actions of this Unhappy Princess.

Thereafter we arrived at the Elisian fields: The Great Whore had promised the
Queen to conduct her to a blessed Place, and in effect, she conducts her to the
Elisian Fields. As Popery is but a renewed Paganism, the Great Whore brings the
Queen to an Imaginary Paradise of the Pagans; which denotes the time and the
manner of the unhappy Death of this Princess, since none went, according to the
Pagan notion, to the Elisian Fields but after Death.

But then (continues she) the terror I was in awakned me, and I found myself
all over in a Sweat, and my Face and Pillow bedewed with Tears: This terrible
Fright the Queen was put in, upon her approaching the Elisian Fields, shows,
that the Great Whore kept not her word with the Unhappy Princess; and instead
of being conducted to a blessed Place, she shall die: And no wonder she was
covered over with Sweat and Tears, since she shall find how terrible a thing it
is to fall into the hands of a living GOD. GOD grant us Grace to profit by the
example of this Unhappy Queen, and thereby to shun the terrible Judgments of
GOD.

Madam La Valiere's Dream.
THis Lady having gone to Bed the first day of January 1690, after the Office
was over, she dreamed she was at Versailles in a Secular Habit, and that she
saw the King walking by the side of the Canal, in which she thought there were
two little Islands, very near one another: The King was attended by several
Hunters, and Spaniels, because he was going to kill several River-Fowls; Madam
La Valiere followed him: When they came over against the first Island, a great
Spaniel threw himself into the Water, and swim'd into the Island, environed
with a great many Ducks and Geese, whose Eggs and young Ones he eat up
greedily; after which he came back to Land, and was received by the rest of the
King's Spaniels; who thereupon commanded to fire upon the Ducks and others
Fowls, whereof some were killed dead. When they came over against the other
Island, they heard the noise of a great many Dogs as a Hunting, which the great
Spaniel hearing, threw himself into the Water after them, being followed by
some of the K.'s; as soon as he had joined them on this other Island, the noise
became louder and louder, and continued a good while, and thereafter another
flock of Ducks and other Fowls fled out of that Island into the first, whither
likewise the great Spaniel followed them: The King desirous to see the event,
came back upon his tract; the great Spaniel entering into the first Island
again, fought a long while with the Ducks and other Birds, who after a brisk
resistance and noise, took Wing and fled away beyond reach of sight. The King
caused fire upon them, and killed some of them in their flight. As the King was
returning to the Palace, he told those about him, that he must go and see his
Orange Trees; in saying which he stumbled against the root of a Tree, and fell
upon his Face, bleeding at the Nose; He was immediately taken up and carried
into his Bed. M. La Valiere seeing the Door of the Orange-Inclosure standing
open, she enters, and beheld the beautifulest Orange Trees she ever saw,
covered with Flowers and Fruits of all sorts: but that which surpised her
most, was that at the foot of every Orange-tree there was a Flower-de-luce
wreathed about it, and which mixed its Flowers with that of the Orange, and
which mixture yielded a most fragrant smell. In the mean time while M. La
Valiere was contemplating all this, she heard a great cry thrice re-doubled,
The King is a coming, the King is a coming; and the noise of the Cry
immediately awakened her.

Every body knows how earnest the French King was to have this Dream of M. La
Valiere, his Quondam Mistress, explained, and that he offered a thousand
Pistols to any that would do it: Which is thought is done already by the same
Author who ventured to Explain the K.'s own Dream, which he had about the same
time; but without any prospect of Reward, I give him the following and true
Interpretation of it:

The Explication of Madam La Valiere's Dream.
MAdam La Valiere having gone to Bed the first Night of this Year, after the
Office was over, dreamed she was at Versailles in a Secular Habit, and that she
saw the King walking upon the side of the Canal, in the midst of which appeared
two Islands near to one another.

La Valiere in a Secular Habit, represents very neatly that Seraglio, or House
of Pleasure he had at St. Cir, when this Lady was his Concubine: The Canal
denotes the Sea that environs Great Britain on all sides: The two Islands
amidst this Canal, are the two Islands of Great Britain and Ireland: and
Nostrodamus calls these Kingdoms Islands by way of excellence. In the Dream,
the three Kingdoms of England, Scotland, and Ireland is represented by two
little Islands, because she was to see them in the Canal of Versailles, which
being of its self but little, the Islands represented in them, behoov'd to be
little also; these Islands are near to one another, because there is but three
hours sailing from some parts of Scotland to some parts of Ireland. The King
was followed by Hunters and Spaniels, designing to kill some Fowls: His Hunters
are his Armies by Land, and his Spaniels his Fleets at Sea, because Spaniels
are fitter than other Hounds to hunt in the Water. Being designed to kill some
of the Fowls; That is, being designed to make War upon the Inhabitants of these
two Islands of Britain and Ireland, who are properly represented by the Fowls
of the River. M. La Valiere follows the King; to the end she may inform us of
the success of the War he was entered into against England.

When the King came over against the first Island, she saw a great Spaniel
throw himself into the Water, to swim into the Island, followed by a great many
Ducks and other Fowls, whose Eggs he eat up: This first Island is England and
Scotland; the great Spaniel that threw himself into the Water, is K. James; he
is followed by a great many Ducks and other Fowls; that is, the English; he
eats up their Eggs, that is when he began to destroy and ruin the People of
England and their Liberties.

The great Spaniel came ashore, and was received by the King's B. who caused
fire upon the Fowls, and killed some of them; That is, K. James fled over all
alone to France, and the King having assisted him with a Naval Force, has since
killed several of the English, in the present War he has declared against them.

When they came over against the other Island, they heard the noise of a great
many Dogs a hunting, and thereupon the great Spaniel threw himself into the
Water, with some of the King's Spaniels to join them in the Island: When they
were near the other Island, that is Ireland, they heard the noise of Dogs a
Hunting; that is, the Army of Tyrconnel, Viceroy of Ireland; the great Spaniel
upon the noise threw himself into the Water to join them; that is, K. James
seeing his Party subsist yet in Ireland, he goes thither, and joins his Army
there, accompanied by some of the French Officers.

As soon as the great Spaniel had joined the Dogs in the other Island; That is,
K. James had joined his Army in Ireland, the noise became greater, and
continued so for a while, that is, the War became sharper, and did not end so
very soon as was at first expected.

After which M. La Valiere, sees another flock of Birds fly out of this Island
into the first, and the great Spaniel follows them, where there is a fight
betwixt the Spaniel and the Ducks and other Birds, which last, after a brisk
resistance, are forced to fly, and the King causes fire upon them, and kills
some of them: The continuation of this Dream, continues to foretell some
Advantages to K. James; but what afterward follows, foretells unquestionably
the mavelous Success of K. William now of Great Britain, in such sort as that
great Prince shall at last Triumph gloriously over all his Enemies: In fine,
the great Miseries of Lowis the 14th, and the incomparable good Fortune of K.
William, are painted forth in this Dream of M. La Valiere's, with so much
brightness and clearness, as if written with a Sunbeam; which will appear by
what follows.

When the King is returning to the Palace, he told those about him, he would go
to see his Orange Trees: The Visit designed by the King to his
Orange-Inclosure, foretells the continuation of the War of Lowis 14th against K.
William, who is here represented as P. of Orange. This term to go to see,
signifying a Declaration of War, is taken from that place of Scripture, Where
Amisias King of Judah, sends to the King of Israel saying, Come let us see one
another, or let us look one another in the face: And it is afterward said, that
these two Kings saw one another in the face; that is, they fought together.

In saying this, the King stumbled upon Caillon, and fell on his face, bleeding
at the Nose: After this new Declaration of War, or rather renewing of the
former, the King stumbles against the root of a Tree; that is, he met with a
powerful Obstacle of his Design; and God is preparing a great and terrible
Vengeance for this Guilty Monarch. In fine, he falls on his Face, bleeding at
the Nose; That is, Lowis 14th shall fail in his Enterprise on William King of
Great Britain, and this last Monarch shall Triumph over the Armies of France.
Moreover, His bleeding shall weaken him, and render him timorous and cowardly.
And in the old Dialect of France, to say a Man bleeds at the Nose, was to say,
he is afraid. The end of the Dream proves, that this Fall of Lowis the 14th
will be mortal.

They presently took up the King, and carried him to his Bed: The fall of Lowis
upon his Nose, must be terrible, since he fell a bleeding thereupon, and was so
far unable to rise of himself, that they were necessitated to carry him to his
Bed: This denotes that Lowis the 14th shall die of this Fall, since the Bed is
an Image of Death: Thence this Dream is the fatal Forerunner and Prediction of
the miserable End of this King, and of his Kingdom. This is exactly what was
foretold by Nostredamus in his 5 Sireain: Celui qui la Principaute
Tiendra par grand Cruaute
A la fin verra grand phalange,
Par coup de feu tres dangereuze
Par accord pour roit fair meure
Auterment Coira suc d' Orange.


The present juncture of the Affairs of Europe, does teach us clearly, that M.
La Valiere and Nostredamus speak of one and the same Event; as also the Dream
of the late Queen, about the cutting off the right Arm and left Ear of Lowis
the 14th, denotes the great ensuing Misery of that Monarch.

M. La Valiere seeing the Orange-Inclosure open, enters, where she beholds the
beautifulest Orange Trees, she ever saw: As Lowis the 14th is the Capital Enemy
of God and of King William, it is not to be doubted, but after the Fall of this
Unfortunate Prince, King William will prove a Glorious and Prosperous King; and
which God has been pleased to reveal to M. La Valiere in this Vision. The
Beauty of the Orange Trees, denotes the incomparable Prosperity of that Servant
of God, William late P. of Orange; which we have likewise proved in our Harmony
of Prophesies, p. 117. in our Exposition of the 38 Sireain of Nostredamus, in
that of Cassarelli, and in our Exposition of the Dream of Lowis 14th.

The Orange Trees were all covered with Flowers, and with all kinds of Fruits:
These do denote to K. William all sorts of Blessings, both spiritual and
temporal.

But what surpised M. La Valiere most, was her seeing that at the root of
every Orange-tree, there was Flower-de-luces wreathed about them, and which
mixed their Flowers with that of the Oranges: This part of the Dream is very
consolatory for M. La Valiere; and it seems God shows her by it, that he is
pleased with the beginnings of her Reprentance, and that he will give her Grace
to turn to the living and true God, and to live to see the happy Day when all
France, and their King, shall make profession of the true Religion, in a manner
more perfect than is yet to be found among the Protestants, the best Reformed:
It Is for this reason, that M. La Valiere is so pleasantly surpised, and
ravished with Joy and Admiration, which would seem to foretell her Happiness in
seeing a great Reformation, and the happy Union of a King of France with K.
William.

This beautiful Flower-de-luce, which she sees wreathed about the Orange Trees,
and mix their Flowers with theirs, does clearly denote the Successor of Lewis
14th, who being animated with the Spirit of God, as K. William is at present,
shall Unite himself in a strict Alliance with him; so that the Interests of
them both, shall be one and the same, because they shall seek after the same
things, viz. The Glory of God, and the Good of his Church. There are a great
many Prophesies, particularly that of the Young Prophetess of Dauphine, who say
the same very thing.

This mixture of Flowers, rendered a pleasant smell; which denotes the
mavelous Blessings wherewith God shall follow the Alliance and Union betwixt
the King of France and K. William: And this sweet smell may be truly compared
to that which is called, The Savor of Life unto Life.

While M. La Valiere contemplates all these things, she hears a loud cry thrice
repeated, The King's a coming, the King's a coming; which cry awakens her:
This great redoubled cry, denotes that Lowis 14th begins just now to enter into
that Action foretold in the first part of M. La Valiere's Dream, in such sort
that it may be justly said to Lowis 14th, as was said to another of old, What
thou do, do it quickly.

FINIS.

