A REPLY TO Mr. Richard Bolton OF BRAZEN-NOSE-COLLEGE in OXFORD; Occasioned by
his presuming to Dedicate His Last Piece TO Dr. CHARLES GOODALL, One of the
Censors of the College of Physicians.

By CHARLES LEIGH, Doctor of Physic.

LONDON, Printed for John Sprint, at the Bell in Little-Britain, School.

A LETTER from the Learned and Reverend Dr. Charles Goodall, one of the Censors
of the College of Physicians, and Physician to the Charter House in London.
This to his Honored Friend, Dr. Leigh, at his House in Manchester,
Lancashire. London, December 6. School.
SIR,
YOUR Letter of the 3d of this Month I received the last Night, and do return
you my Thanks for it, and own your writing to me about Mr. Bolton's Book, as a
particular Favor; he having by no means obliged me by his rude and unmannerly
Reflections upon you; who, I am sensible, are not therein treated either as a
Graduate Physician, a Gentleman, or a Scholar. The Language and Reflections I
own to be such, as no Man of good Breeding, much less any Censor of the College
of Physicians, would pass with an Imprimatur. I do believe that Mr. Bolton had
merited the Favor of many Members of the College, by two little Books which he
published, and were licensed by the President and Censors, being looked upon as
Specimens of Industry and Ingenuity, and therefore to be encouraged: But
wherein he has exceeded the Bounds of Learning and Modesty, he must answer for
his Folly.

As to his writing against Mr. Colbatch, I must own that I did encourage him
thereto, he having so rudely treated the Universities, College of Physicians,
and the most learned Men of our Faculty, and likewise published and defended
such an erroneous Hypothesis, and raised such a dangerous Superstructure
thereon, which I fear will prove fatal to many, if made use of by weak and
unthinking Physicians. Yet notwithstanding Mr. Colbatch has deserved ill of
learned Men, and the Public, for the Reasons now given, yet I cannot commend
Mr. Bolton's treating him in the manner which he has done; which was so far
from my Approbation and Good-liking, that, at the same time I encouraged him to
answer Mr. Colbatch's Books, I earnestly requested him to read the learned and
ingenious Mr. Boyle's Book against Dr. Bentley (with Care and Observation) and
to imitate (as much as he could) that excellent Author, in his Reply to Mr.
Colbatch. But how he has herein followed my Advice, or the Original proposed,
I leave you and all learned Men to judge.

I am truly sorry, that in the Particulars you mention, he has not only
disobliged me, and many others, but highly injured his own Reputation, which I
do believe, a little time will make him sensible of. Sir, I have herein given
you a short and faithful Account of this Affair, which I hope will be
satisfactory to you: And if in any thing I can father serve you, (...) pleased
to command,

SIR, Your most humble Servant, Charles Goodall.

THat he may be satisfied he is not the Man he takes himself for, I have
printed Dr. Good^^^'s Letter to me, and given him a Reply to ^^s last Piece, so
far as relates to my self. In ^^at Reply I found such illiterate Arguments,
^uch mean and trifling Reflections, such a pro^ound Ignorance of the Latin
Tongue, I once concluded to have been silent, being assured ^^e Piece was a
better Answer to it self, than c^uld be given from another And. But since some
Persons were pleased to allege, that it was patronized by one of the Censors
of the C^llege of Physicians, I have therefore, to vindi^^te both him and my
self, made these pub^^^k.

When the most abstruse Points in Philosophy (...) reduced to dogmatical
Assertions, and the ^^st exalted and useful Topics in Physic (...) become the
sportive Rattles of unthink^^g Striplings; when Metaphorical Suppositions ^ust
pass for Anatomical Demonstrations, and ^^rogance and Noise are the Weapons of
in^^^cible Confutation; when Impudence and ^^^rrility are Arguments of Proof
against all ^^^ional Attacks, it is high time to tell the Youth, (...) has
erred, to reject the use of Lenitives, and (...) to more potent Applications.
With what Assurance does he make it evident, that the Animal Spirits move
slower than the Blood? He sure never entertained any Notion (...) Thought, had
no abstracted Speculations of i^^ Velocity. Their unaccountable Agility in
voluntary Motion, evidently demonstrates the contrary. In the first place he
asserts, but (...) where proves, the Animal Spirits to be a swee^ oily
Mucilage. Now, by the bye, Did (...) ever see or taste the Animal Spirits? were
they a sweet oily Mucilage he might do both. Others yet with the most accurate
Glasses could never discover them. What need I had of Sp^ctacles I know not as
yet, I thank God for i^^ But I am sure to make such Discoveries as a^^ there
asserted, bespeak him to be one of the greatest Virtuosi the World ever yet has
seen^ And I do again tell him, that did there such (...) Mucilage as he
mentions, circulate through the Nerves, the Nerve would either swell abov^ the
Ligature, or by the Section of a Nerv^ the Mucilage might be squeezed from it.
An^ what he offers to those Arguments is but a pitiful Evasion, and no Solution
at all: For if the Motion of the Mucilage be so slow as he a^serts, it is not
to be imagined, that upon the cutting of a Nerve, it should make so quick an^
instantaneous a return through its Branches, a^^ that it should not be possible
to discover i^^ For by this way of arguing, he might as we^^ tell me, a Snail
will make a swift Newmark^ Courser, or a Man of his poor pitied pitch o^
Learning a profound Philosopher. Dr. Lister^ I guess, will not thank him for
what he has sai^ in answer to the Controversy betwixt us two; for in my
instancing in the Kennel-pit-water at Haigh in Lancashire, it was not to prove
an Acid in Water, which, he says, no body ever denied, but to prove there was
perfect concocted Vitriol in Water; which was what the Dr. denied. His Remarks
and Quibbles about my Notions of hot Baths, are not worth answering: And I do
again affirm, That Hypothesis was never before laid down by any; and what some
had formerly alleged was, That the Heat in those Waters was caused either by
Fermentation of Sulphurous, and other Heterogeneous Particles, or by
Subterraneous Fires; both of which in the Exercitations I have fully confuted.
Wherefore I assigned a third Cause (viz.) a Collision of Sulphurous Particles.
But I find he has either not the Sense, or Sincerity, to distinguish betwixt
Fermentation and Collision: And indeed, I think, both the Instances he has
produced, do him no Service. The Parallel does not hold: unless he can
demonstrate, that, as the Fire heats the Water, the Water makes the Fire to
burn; and I think he has a Stock of Ignorance and Impudence to attempt it. With
what an accurate Ken, with what pungent Sophistry, with how admirable a turn of
a Faeculent Brain did he discover Ingenium Acerrimum to be a sour Wit? What
could produce such a singular Construction, but the Dawnings of immature
Conceptions? But now to expiate for so awkard a Construction, he proceeds to a
more conspicuous Dilemma, falls soul upon Case and Rule, and magisterially
affirms, Opinioni haud naturae se Credidit, to be false Latin: This he asserts
in a notorious Paraphrase, bids Defiance to Grammar and Authority. The
Unintelligible World, till now, mistook the President was delirous with
luxuriant Thought, and drew erroneous Charts of imagined Shores; not Cicero,
Seneca, nor Terence, with all their Train of Oratory; not the three Sons of
Parnassus, Horace, Virgil, and Ovid, the Delight and Glory of Augustus's Court,
when the Roman Tongue had acquired its (...), shall be Standards to this
renowned Trifler. But to set him straight in this, I shall lay before him the
following Authorities. In the first place, the Sentence he recites out of my
Exercitations, is an Expression in Seneca's Epistles; whose Authority alone had
been sufficient to vindicate me, had I had no other: But to show him Credo
frequently governs an Accusative with a Dative Case, let him take notice of the
following Quotations. Credere se Neptuno, is a Sentence in Plautus, Credere se
Coelo praepetibus pennis. Virgil; and these Words, I think, are applicable to
him; for I doubt not but he has a Head Chimerical enough to afford him Wings to
fly with, if the Lapwing would but have Patience to stay till the Shell dropped
off his Head. Credere suum animum alicui, Terence. Credere uni omnia, Cicero.
Libris Arcana Credere, Horace. Veritus se Credere nocti, Ovid. Wherefore for
shame, let him not set up for an Author, but quit the Press, Oxford and his
Addresses to the College, and return to the Grammar School at Chester; and by
that means he will leave us room to think he may in time be something; and
perhaps he may by frequent Lashing be qualified for the University. And since
in his usual Method of acting the Plagiary, he has stole a Receipt for me, let
him take this Advice: Before he writes, let him think; afterward consult his
Friends; and to prevent a Relapse of his Distemper, then burn his Papers: He
then, like a rash unthinking Adventurer, may expire in Fire and Smoke, and not
become the dishonorable Refuse of a Common-Shoar. His carping at the two Words
pro me, farther confirms his Ignorance in the Latin Tongue; for as I use them,
they are frequently used by Plautus and several modern Authors, particularly
Dr. Lister; so that if he blames me, he must likewise blame the Doctor, and not
shelter himself from a just Rebuke; because I had formerly opposed the Doctor:
And when ever I see an Answer to those Arguments alleged against the Doctor's
Hypothesis, I shall freely ask his Pardon, if I be found in an Error; if not, I
hope I have the Liberty of Thought. I do believe the Doctor will be ashamed to
be quoted by such a Trifler. But, upon my Word, it showed him to be a Man of
invincible Courage, to be so daring as to encounter those two Words Pro me; and
had he never exceeded the Pronouns and Prepositions, he had eased the World of
a great deal of Jargon, and kept himself in his due Limits; and so the Crane
and the Pigmies might have ^ought about the Knots in a Bull-rush. Another
Expression of mine he carps at is In proclivi est; where he says it ought to be
In promptu est: but I shall produce him a parallel Sentence from Terence, and
translate it for him, since I see he cannot do it; and it is this, Id faciam in
proclivi quod est, per me stetisse ut credat: Where by those Words In proclivi
quod est, is meant no more than what is easy or ready, which is in the Sense I
writ it.

He likewise quarrels with these Words, Sic Regero'; and in that I tell him as
I express it, it is constantly taken in Philosophy; that is, I reply thus. His
Instance from Dr. Willis can in no wise rescue him from the false Experiment he
imposed upon the World, since the Doctor never asserted such a Paradox, and
would have scorned to impose such a Falsity upon us. The Matter of Fact still
stands Evidence against him: The Doctor's Notions of Fevers are grounded upon
his Principles of Fermentation, which is quite contrary to what I have
asserted: For I have made it highly probable that Fevers and inflammatory
Distempers are not caused by Fermentations, but by Saline Particles coagulating
the Serum or Lympha of the Blood; but, Poor Man, to serve a turn, how miserably
can he mangle that Author? and when he finds himself at a Pinch; then, like a
most barbarous Tartar, defaces and ruins the spacious Plains he was foraging
in, and straight removes to a remoter Clime: Whence it is evident my Notions of
Fevers and Inflammatory Diseases could not, as he alleges, be borrowed from
Dr. Willis: Wherefore to satisfy his Curiosity, I will allow him, Dr. Willis
lived before I did; But do affirm, I have not in any one thing, which I have
laid down as an Hypothesis, borrowed from that Eminent Author. But I can assure
him this, barring his own fictious and false Foundation of all his Works, if
each Bird plucked its own Feathers from him he would be exposed as naked to the
World as he came there. In answer to that which he alleges, that my
Exercitations were printed at a private Press in Oxford; and that they were
denied an Imprimatur from the College, is notoriously false; for in the first
place they were printed at Litchfield's Press, which is a public one, and
allowed of by the University. In the second Place, the College was never
solicited by me for an Imprimatur; because in one of the Exercitations I had
opposed one of the Censors, and therefore concluded it might be esteemed ill
Manners to desire an Imprimatur from them.

His Objections against my Chapter of Dropsies, are of the same Stamp: For what
things I have assigned as the various Causes of those Distempers, he brings in
as the Effects: But since he never yet assigned a true Cause for any thing, I
can readily pardon his Mistake, and reasonably conclude he is not able to
distinguish the one from the other. And if so, I hope the Patient that is so
Foolhardy to commit himself to the Instructions of this most eminent Person,
will settle his Concerns before, and be thoroughly prepared for another World,
since he has two potent Enemies to encounter, a dangerous Distemper and a most
unmerciful Pretender. But what made him to amuse us with his Arabic Word
Acaid; since from what has been observed, it is demonstrably evident, he is as
much a Stranger to the Letters in that Language as he is to their Persons? But
I presume, upon some Surgeons Arms in London he had observed a Greek Word or
two; wherefore prevailed with some Friend to supply him with the like Stock of
the Eastern Dialect, that he might be thought Master of the Oriental Treasures.
And since he has reduced the Materia Medica to an Old Woman with two Receipts,
I hope he will be so kind to curtail our English Dispensatory. -- That he may be
brought to a rational Apprehension, that he may, if it is possible, escape that
Place with which he so foolishly, impudently, and frequently threatens me.

I hope he will reflect on his own Imperfections; for I assure him I do
vehemently suspect that his frivolous, inconnected, and roving way of Writing,
and one of the Statues in Moor-fields, are so lively Emblems of a Raving
Madness, that it threatens him with a Visit thither. I must confess the Remarks
upon his Piece concerning the Heat of the Blood, were in a Style too light for
the Gravity and Sobriety of Philosophy; but they were only designed as a
Ridicule upon his wild extravagant Notions, to show him the Vanity of that way
of Writing, a Method as I thought the most likely to reclaim him. Where the
greatest Men for their Knowledge in Philosophy the World ever yet has seen,
have been sunk in Contemplation in the unsearchable Works and Operations of
Nature, he dogmatically asserts, and pretends mechanically to demonstrate, the
Learned Charleton, Borellus, and Steno, have made large Discoveries in Muscular
Motion, having reduced the various Figures of the Muscles to Mathematical
Demonstrations: But alas, when we consider of the Power that gives Motion to
each Fiber in voluntary Motion, how defective and enervate are all their
elaborate Problems! But he, mighty Man, has out-stript all these Heroes in
Philosophy, he only the Champion, he the Dwarf upon the Giants Shoulders. The
Learned Willis, Crone, Mayow and Cooper, have supplied us with polite and
learned Hypotheses, yet faulter all in the main Business. They cannot see what
it is in voluntary Motion makes that Impulse upon the Animal Spirits, that they
can perform such Motions, contrary to all the Rules of Mechanism: Here they are
sunk in an Abyss of Thought. Could the Learned Bidloe? Could the Accurate
Cooper give us those lively Figures of the Muscles, and dissect their minutest
Fibers? Could they in the Scarf Skin, seemingly barren of Variety of Vessels,
discover that infinite Number of Capillary Veins and Arteries, by mercurial
Injections? Could they in the more abstruse Viscera discover the minutest
Glandules and Ly^^^^ ^ucts? and in the Cutis the Diversity of Pores, and
miliary Glands, and not be able to discover Mr. Bolton's Metaphorical Glands?
It Is strange coy Nature should thus obstinately deny us so inestimable a Jewel.
Nay, are we arrived to that Perfection in Microscopes, that we cannot only have
a lively Figure of the parts of a solid Body, but even the Figure of the
Particles in Liquids? Is it possible then there should be such Glands as Mr.
Bolton contends for, (viz.) Vessels impleted with a Juice from the Arteries and
Nerves? Can we by these Glasses discover the Globules of the Blood? the Forms
of Plants in their Seeds? Animalcules, and each Particle of a Liquid, and not
discern the Vessel that contains the Liquor? If so, sure now we are grown to
that pur-blind Generation, that we cannot see the Wood for the Trees, or can
discern each Grain in a Molehill, but cannot discover a Mountain. Thus he may
see his Metaphorical Glands upon which all his Works depend, are false and
fictitious: So that his Foundation being now removed, his Castles in the Air
must tumble down. I can with Laughter ridicule his Utopian Discoveries. He may
if he thinks convenient proceed in that Method, I can easily think him as empty
as the Welch-man that purchased the Pompion for the Mare's Egg, and doubt not
but the one will as soon produce a Colt as he solve the Phenomenon in Muscular
Motion. Thus he may see what he has alleged is upon a Sandy Bottom: From the
Premises we may draw quite different Corollaries. What he urges is highly
irrational, and only begging the Question, a Method he sure knows, the poorest
way of arguing. I do assure him (though he is pleased to challenge me) I do
not, nor ever did envy his Success.

And since he understands not the Classick Authors, as I have made it
undeniably evident from the best Authorities, he does not; he may be assured
till he qualifies himself better to write, I shall not give him or my self any
Trouble in this nature.

Poor Animal, his Gumms were swelled with Rancour, but he wanted Teeth to bite
with. I hope he will be so kind to himself to purchase a Whistle and a Coral to
break the envenomed Tumor, though no one needs to fear the Bite of so harmless a
Creature. But now, to convince the World what little Deference he has for
Learning, and how far he has transgressed all the Rules of common Modesty, let
him consult his own Letter, writ to a Friend of his at Chester, under whose
Tuition he ought yet to be. In that he tells him he was little altered with the
Air at Oxford; He expected indeed to have found it a Place of Learning, but, to
his great Disappointment, he found it, for the greatest put, a Seat of
Loggerheads; that the Exercise there was so mean and trilling, he could by
studying one Hour in twenty four qualify himself for the performance of it:
That when he disputed, he only talked to the Dean and Moderator, the rest not
being able to discourse him: That he had only the Sa^^^faction to see the
Respondent sit silent: and that with a Month's Study he could qualify himself
for any Degree there. He farther proceeds upon his being Candidate for a
Scholarship; That what Opposition he found, was only from a Blockhead of three
Years standing. What Pity it was to nip him in his early Bloom, to check him in
his Tour, to illegititimate this Eaglet, who presumes he can gaze on a Meridian
Sun, whilst his blear'd Eyes and dazzled Organs obviously bespeak his Original
spurious.

Here indeed is unparalled Arrogance, and unpardonable Reflections upon one
of the greatest Bodies of Learning in the Universe; so that his thoughtless
Raillery against me is the less to be regarded. Nor had I now taken notice of
his empty Abuses, had he not sheltered himself under the Patronage of so
eminent a Person: And let him be assured, shall not hereafter, without greater
Proofs of Modesty and Learning, trouble my self with such an Adversary. I could
enumerate more egregious Follies in the Piece of the same Stamp; but what have
been observed are sufficient. I shall not therefore trouble the World with any
more of his undigested Ribaldry.

FINIS.

