

AN ARMY FOR IRELAND, Conducted by the Lord Lithe, Son to the right
Honorable, the E^rle of Lice^ster, Lord Deputy of Ireland.

BEING A VOTE Of both ^o^ses in P^rliament for the sending of speedy Aid in^o
Ireland, consis^^ng both of the Scottish and English Army, fpeaking of the
great sear that the City o^ Dub^^n has been in, and in what danger ^o be
taken sundry times* but now ^ost valiantly defended by ^he Scottish Volunteers,
and English Army.

With ^n ^x^ellent Copy of a Letter sent from the Lord Moore to Sir Will^^m
Ba^ker ^n ^ngland, speaking of all the Greevances and M^^^^^es of the
ro^est^^^s what^oever, As also of all the b^on^y Designs that the Rebels
intended to take the Cast^e.

LONDON, Print^d f^r John Greensm^th, 1642

AN ARMY FOR IRELAND.
TAe House of Commons now assembled in Parliament having fully considered the
extreme distress, and calamity, that the protestants in Ireland are in, and
moreover in what great peril, and danger the City of Dublin is daily in fear
to be taken, have forthwith presented some Bills to the house of Peers
concerning the sending of some sudden and speedy aid, and assistance for the
same This Bill was twice voted by both houses, then they generally concluded to
send an Army, alotting 12. thousand Scots, and as many English to go with all
expedition. A post was incontinently sent to the Scottish Commissioners, who
seemed to receive this news joyfully without any murmur. Then Gen: Lesly
proffered himself to couduct them thither with great courage and alacrity, and
the Scots were no less propense to his motion, and voluntary magnanimity,
there was likewise warrants sent from the house immediately to the Lord Major of
London Sheriffs and Justices of peace in each County, for the raising of some
auxiliary opitulation, and munition of Arms into Ireland without any
in^ermission of time. There were diverse Letters sent from Ireland, which were
read in the Horse concerning the ^^b^llious pro^eedings of the p^pists there,
and with what ba^barous inhumanity they do oppr^sse and pers^cut^ the
pro^^^tan^s there, and how often they ^^ve besieged the city of Dublin^ and of
many Batt^ls that they have had with t^^ ^eb^ls, and in what e^tr^mity o^
dang^r ^hey are in: wherefo^e that u^lesse the Parliament did not s^pply them
wi^h some sudden ^orces, they had no^e or very small hopes of defending their
lives, and the City. For the daily bemo^^ings of the poor oppressed
Prot^stant^, would almost pierce any Christians hearts to hear them. Yet the
inex^rable tyranny, and the audacious attempts of the rebels are so
insufferable, that it transcends even patience it self to tolerate them any
longer. And hereup^n many within the walls of the City being in great fear of
the merciless rage and cruelty of their enemies, have re^olted to the Rebels.
At the reading of these Letters the Parliament was greatly moved to compassion,
promising a sudden commiseration of their deplorable calamities. Then was the
Vote o^ ^he Lower House immediately given, and sent up ^o the House of Peers,
where the said Bill passed, each giving both their Assent and Cons^nt thereunto.

After this news was sent into Scotland, they beg^n very cheerfully to gather
themselves together: a^f^rming that they could not undertake a jus^er war for
the defense o^ protest^nt religion, and the maintenance of the sincere purity
of the Gospel. God ^end that our Englishmen may be as forward to go as the
Scots were: and then conjoined bo^^ in one unanimo^^ concatenatio^ of w^lls a^^
cou^age, no ^oubt but they will return with a^ Olive ^r^^ch in ^h^ir hands,
crowned with a ^ictorious period in their s^ccesse.

But it is to be feared that as we have a Serpent abroad, so we have a Snake at
home: but God delivet us from the venemo^s poison, and pernicious stings of
both. For while we are en^ountring, and suppressing the Serpent; if this
domesticke Snake should begin to hiss, and assault us here, we shall be in
great dist^esse and danger too as it is to be feared: therefore Janus-like we
ought to look as well backward to the one, as forward to the other.

Therefore I ^oubt no^ but the Pa^liament will not omit a thing of so high a
nature, and great consequence, that there may be as well a strong Guard at
home, as an Army abroad: that while the sore of one wound is to be cured, it
breaks not out into another.

But alas! why do I speak of these things to the Parliament; for to admonish
them of these, and the like affairs, were to bid the Sun illuminate the earth
wit^ a resplendent irradiation of Noonday to bid the Moon retain her
monthly reparation, or the Celestial Orbs to keep their annual
circ^mference. Therefore our sole dependence relyes o^ them, and w^ doubt not
but in their due, and sea^onable time, all things will be brought to a happy
period.

Thus aid is ^oncluded to be sent into Ireland with great expedition, and a
sudden Army in preparation to be sent.

Copy of a Letter sent from the Lord Moore to Sir Robert Barker in England^
SIr, the daily thoughts of you have induced me to transcribe unto you the
present conditions of this Kingdom involved in misery at this ^ime; for that I
know men's hominum novitatis avida. The rebels proceed still in their former
Tyrannical i^humanitie, and they have much increased their forces: they lie in
ambush daily in expectation of this city of Dublin, and withal they have
assaulted it at sundry times: and had it not bin detected, and well forti^ied,
there had not bin a man of us alive at this day: but we have always answered
them as yet, and we thank God we have returned victorious. As for my own part I
value not my blood so much as my Countries good, and will to the uttermost of
my power, and freedom of life, stand in the defense and maintenance thereof.

Yo^ know, when as the Sun is set, many mists, and fogs will arise out of the
earth, that received their influence from the Sun: but when its luster and
splendent beams shall appear, how suddenly are they all dispersed. So when as
our King (that glorious Sun of our Nation) did rest himself in his Chair of
Majesty, and Tranquillity: these foggy Mists of Rebels have caused an
ambulation, but if ^is Majesty's Army, and auxiliary forces shall but ^nce
appear, we doubt not, but that there will be a sudden dissipation of them all.
These rebellio^s viperr like the Lernaean Hydra, do increase with budding
pullulations: but I hope there will come a second Hercules, that shall refecate
them all with a facile dilaceration.

We expect some sudden Aid from the Parliament now assembled, and we hope they
will not frustrate us of our just expectation; for if we consider the necessity
we are in, or the murders, rapes, incests which the Rebels daily commit: I
doubt not hut they would speedily commiserate our present miseries, from which
thing I hope they will not long desist. Thus to consummate all with my best
respects unto you, I commit you, and yours to the divine providence, and res^.

FINIS.

