(...)ry of the Divorce of HENRY VIII. (...) KATHARINE of ARRAGON.
(...)sense of Sanders. The Refutation of the Two first (...) ^^he History of
the Reformation of Dr. Burnett. By (...) ^^e Grand. With Dr. Burnett's Answer
and Vindi^ (...) himself.
WE have not as yet seen any more than the first Part of this Work, which was
published the Fifth of this Month. I know not whether a Man may judge of the
two other Parts by this, which seems at first but an Abridgement of the two
first Books of the History of the Reformation by Dr. Burnet, though the Author
promises to refute them in the two following Volumes.

First, It seems that M. le Grand foresaw that Men would have this Idea of his
Work, which is the Reason he has put before that History a preliminary
Discourse, where he endeavors, yet without telling his Design, to divert the
Reader from having any such Thoughts. He relates at first a Conference that he
had with Dr. Burnett, in the King's Library, in the Presence of M. Thevenot,
and M. Auzout. The Makers of Dialogues frequently introduce two Persons, one of
which puts the Question, and the other Answers: One is the Master, and the
other is the Scholar: Or at least, they make him more learned that teaches,
than he that propounds the Difficulties. But in the Relation of this Conference
we find quite the contrary. Mr. Burnett, who, according to the Authors
Character, is a Person of a quick peircing Wit, laborious, indefatigable, and
most capable to defend the Reformation; whose Expressions are always free, bold
and full of fire; and who speaks upon this Occasion with an Eloquence that
charms them that hear him: Yet this Mr. Burnett leaves the principal Points
undetermined, or else consents and submits every thing that is opposed against
him. But M. Le Grand, who propounds his Difficulties after a plain humble
Manner, and rather as Doubts than as real Objections, makes evident, quotes,
attacks, and at length leaves Mr. Burnett with hardly a Word to say for himself.

There is no Wonder to be made, that so soon, as M. Le Grand began to write, he
should so suddenly overturn a Man of that Learning and Reputation as Dr.
Burnett. For though never any Man wrote with more Cunning, or knew better how
to link and chain one Event to another; yet, as the Author says, he never
studied the History of England. He that romaged all the most considerable
Libraries of the Kingdom, to fetch out Registers and authentic Records and
Acts, and Copies of Dispatches, Memoirs and other Manuscripts of those times,
out of which to compose his History; who has printed a Volume in Folio of those
sort of Pieces, in justification of what he says; he to whom the whole Nation,
and the Parliament it self, gave public Testimonies of the Esteem which they
had for his Work. But the Reason that M. Le Grand, alleges for his Adversary's
Ignorance in the History, is because he does not refute the Errors which M.
Varillas has committed in several Things that concerned England, in his first
Book of the History of Heresy; having no other Design than to criticize upon
the Ninth, which only relates to the Reformation, as appears by the Title, A
Critic upon the Ninth Book of the History of M. Varillas, where he speaks of
the Revolutions, etc.

Mr. Burnett and M. Varillas being such defective Historians in M. Le Grand's
Opinion, there is no Wonder if he threaten them, to raise up a Third, that
shall make them lose a good Part of the Reputation which they have gotten. And
that which confirms his Hopes is this, because it is Plain, That those Authors
are very Negligent, and that their last Works are less valuable than their
first. As for M. Varillas, since it could never be believed that a Historian,
so partial, could write after a rational manner, I never gave my self the
Trouble to compare his Works together; and so I cannot say whether his Answer
to his Adversaries Critic, be better or worse than his Histories. But as for
Mr. Burnett's Travels into Italy, I must take the Liberty to inform the
Public, that M. Le Grand, who cites that Book to confirm what he writes, made
his Judgments upon the French Version, though Mr. Burnet has declared, That he
had but too frequently mistook his Meaning.

As to the Memoirs which the Author made use of, he says nothing but what he
has taken out of the Letters and Dispatches of Francis I. Henry VIII. the
Cardinals, Woolsey and Grandemont, the Bishops of Auxerres, Maion, Tarbes, etc.
Where we find that M. Le Grand makes two Persons of Cardinal Grandemont and the
Bishop of Tarbes, whereas they were but one and the same. As for the Letters
and Dispatches, etc. of Henry VIII. and Cardinal Wolsey, a great many of them
being in English, as may be seen in Mr. Burnett's Collection, perhaps they
might be of little Use to our Author; for we are apt to believe that he did not
understand the Language; as well for that by the Judgment which he makes of the
Travels into Italy, as by what Mr. Burnett shows in the Letter which follows
this Extract, it appears that M. Le Grand never cast his Eyes upon that
Collection of Pieces which is added to the English Edition of the History of
the Reformation of England.

Secondly, The Divorce of Henry VIII. is too well known to make an Extract of
it. We shall therefore make some Remarks, which will absolutely undeceive those
who may imagine that M. Le Grand's Book is an Abstract of one part of Mr.
Burnett's. In short, the Method and Design of those Two Books is extremely
different, as well as the Memoirs upon which they are grounded. 1. M. Burnet
has no other Aim in Writing the History of Henry VIII. than to represent how
the Proceedings of that Prince, whose irregular Conduct he does not undertake
to justify, levelled the Way to that Reformation which was made under his
Successors: M. Le Grand makes Henry to be always in the wrong, as if he had
never done good. 2. M. Le Grand bestows his Encomiums upon those that he thinks
deserve them, though never so great Enemies of the Reformation, as Fisher, More
and Cardinal Poole. He never dissembles the Faults of those that contributed
most to the Reformation, as Cromwell, Cranmer, the Duke of Somerset, etc.
because he has observed by an infinite Number of Examples out of sacred and
ecclesiastical History, That God never makes use of perfect Instruments for the
Execution of his Designs. M. Le Grand seems to have had very opposite Ends. All
those that contributed to advance the Reformation are very ill handled by him
in his History; where he gives them the honorable Title of False Prophets,
particularly to Ann Bolen, and Cranmer, whom he calls the False Prelate; and
Cromwell, whom he abuses, as Man as ignorant as ever was in the World. This
Minister, who is never permitted to justify himself, is condemned under
pretense of having exceeded his Master's Orders, in granting Passports for the
Exportation of Money and Corn. But heresy was the capital Accusation that was
laid to his Charge. Nevertheless the Author assures us, That the Impeachment
against him was grounded particularly, upon several Letters that were found
among his Papers, wherein he acknowledged that he held private Correspondences
with the Princes of Germany. unknown to the King.

Now in regard that History is but a Texture of Original Letters, and that
every Politician has his particular Remarks upon an Affair which he does not
well understand, no wonder that M. Le Grand represents so variously the Designs
and Inclinations of those who had the greatest Share in that Negotiation. He
says, That Francis I. was weary at last of the Capriccio's of Henry VIII. and
consented to the definitive Sentence, which condemned him to retake his Wise
under Pain of Excommunication. Nevertheless he observes, that after that
Sentence, Francis I. sided with Henry VIII. in all his Affairs with all the
Zeal imaginable. That Francis I. would not hear the Proposal of Clement VII.
That that Pope had promised before to do for the King of England all that lay
in his Power: That the Pope made some Scruple at it, but at length gave him his
Promise. But all these new Promises could not make the Holy Father forget those
that he had made at the beginning of the Process to the General of the
Cordeliers, the Emperor's Agent. Clement himself acknowledged that he had
promised that he would never pronounce Sentence upon the Divorce, and that he
would do nothing in that Affair without giving Charles I. Notice. If the Church
of Rome be so excessively tied to Decisions, the Court of Rome, on the other
side, is as little tied to Promises. And therefore we must confess that the
Complaisance of that Church goes sometimes a very great way. In those Ages,
says our Author, speaking of those that followed the Tenth, The Discipline
touching Marriages was not so severe as afterward. Kings put away their Wives
upon slight occasions, and never sought for any Pretense. Afterward they were
desirous to have one, and it was as easy to find one; because they could not
marry with a Kinswoman on this side the Seventh Degree: So that Princes that
could not allie themselves indifferently with all sorts of Persons finding
themselves all united in Blood, and coming to dislike their match, proved there
near affinity, (...) away their Wives and took others. (...) there were some
Princes who had Two or Three Wives living, and Princesses that had Two or Three
Husbands. This was practiced in the Tenth, Eleventh, Twelfth and Thirteenth
Ages; and in these times of Darkness and Ignorance it was, that these Sholes of
Canonists and Scholastic Divines became so numerous.

A Letter to Monsieur Thevenot, being a full Refutation of Mr. Le Grand's
History of HENRY VIII 's Divorcing KATHARINE of Arragon. With a plain
Vindication of the same by Dr. G. B.
PErmit me, Sir, before I pay you all those marks of Respect which are your
due, to assure you that I am so well persuaded of your Probity and Sincerity,
that maugre the difference of persuasion that is between us, nevertheless I
dare adventure to submit to your Judgment in the Contest, that seems to be
between me and M. Le Grand, in a matter that has no small relation to Religion.
Opinions, and the speculative Consequences which Men draw from matters of Fact,
appear very much different, according to the different Idea's which Men have of
the Things: But the matters of Fact themselves have but one Face, and present
themselves after the same manner to all that seek the Truth. Therefore in
regard that our dispute moves altogether upon matters of Fact, I am apt to
believe I can hazard nothing in taking you for my Arbitrator.

During our last Residence at Paris, having had the Honor to visit you several
times, I had time to observe with how much justice you made your self the
subject, and the esteem, and admiration of all the World. I was convinced of it
more particularly by the Civilities which you heaped upon me, and by the pains
you took to bring me into a Conference with M. Le Grand, in your own and the
Presence of M. Auzout. I was the less scrupulous when I found my self in a
place where I could expect nothing but fair dealing from a person that lived in
the House of a Man no less considerable for his extraordinary Virtues, than for
the great Employments with which he was entrusted, and who frequently conversed
with the Learned M. Bulteau, who as often visited the famous M. Baluze, whose
Sincerity equals his profound Learning, a thing rarely to be found in our Age:
And, which was more than all the rest, a Friend of M. Thevenot's. This made me
look upon M. Le Grand, as a person that had all those noble Qualities that were
to be expected from a fair Adversary.

I should give you too great a trouble to recall to your memories all those
little Things that were upheld in your Presences, and at which you your selves
were so much distated, that you confessed ingeniously how much you were ashamed
to hear them. You made this acknowledgment not only to me, after M. Le Grand's
departure, but to several others also; and you were so well satisfied in this,
that though what had been propounded, was not worth the talking of, yet that I
had fully answered the Discourse, as mean and frivolous as it was. M. Auzout
desired likewise at the same time, that I would make no noise of it, to which
request I was readily induced to condescend: For to say the very truth, I did
not find that my Adversary was a subject worthy my Triumph, or the pains of
boasting in public a Victory over him. And therefore as to what I have deemed
requisite to insert of our Discourse, among the Remarks which I have made upon
some passages of the History of M. Varillas, I have managed M. Le Grand with
all the Circumspection that he could expect from me. Though, if in the pursuit
of this Discourse, I happen to wound him more to the quick, he must thank
himself, and not lay the blame on any body else.

I can easily brook all those Reflections which he has made upon my Ignorance,
and shallowness of Capacity, more particularly upon what he says, That I never
studied the History or the Laws of England. For thus he expresses himself after
he had bestowed great Praises upon me, and such as I never deserved.
Nevertheless, by the sudden change of his Pen, he seems to look upon me as a
Person of little worth. But that same Thick skull'd, and common Artifice of
some People to praise those whose Reputation they have a design to destroy will
never surprise men of Understanding; nor will heinous and dirty reproaches pass
among them under the Covert of a few generous Encomium's. I must be contented
with that small measure of Knowledge and Capacity, which come to my just share,
especially now that I have to do with a person of so mean a Talent, as M. Le
Grand appears to be by this same Treatise of his.

I could only wish that they, who would be better informed of the truth of that
celebrated Passage of the History, which is the Subject of our Dispute, would
give themselves the trouble to read what Sanders and my self have written, and
then peruse the History of M. Le Grand. I am assured they will conclude, That
there must be some fault in the Title Page, where he promises the Defense of
Sanders, and the Refutation of the Two first Books of my History. The whole
substance of his Work agrees altogether with mine, unless it be in some parts,
where he shows that great Art of his, wh^rein I yield him willingly to outdo
me. In all things else he so perfectly concurrs with me, that I am tempted to
believe, He only took his Pen in hand, to fulfill those Offers which he made me
in your Presence, to furnish me with Memoirs sufficient for the Confirmation of
what I have wrote upon this Subject. True it is, I have not read any more as
yet than the First Part of his Book; nor can I imagine how he can justify
Sanders, whom he has abandoned during the whole course of his History. He
forsakes him in the whole History of Ann of Boloigne, and in all the progresses
of the Story that depends upon it, though it be the chief Head of Sanders's
Accusation, and which he presses most vigorously, as being a Nullity in the
Title of Queen Elizabeth, and consequently an Original pretense for Rebellion.
He acknowledges also the Decretal Bull, nor does he insist upon the Carriage of
Sr. Thomas Moore. In a word, if you examine the Fourscore Faults of which I
have accused Sanders in my Additions, you will find that M. Le Grand has
confessed above Seventy, and confirms what I have maintained in opposition to
him. Which will most evidently appear, if his work shall ever be thought worthy
a larger Examination.

I say nothing of his Style, for that his Readers without much consideration or
study will easily find it to be the Style rather of an Advocate that pleads a
Cause, than of a person disinterested, that cordially and barely relates matter
of Fact. For to argue with heat and passion, and reproach his Adversaries, are
unpardonable faults in an Historian. Besides that, there is something so sacred
in the very Ashes of Kings, that they are never to be spok'n of but with great
Caution; and if at any time there be an unavoidable occasion to blame some of
their Actions, softer Terms are to be made use of, than those of Lie and
Imposture. Add to this, that the principal Point, and upon which the whole
Question moves, being, Whether the King's own Cause ought not rather to be
judged in England, and by his Clergy, than at Rome, and in the Consistory; that
man can never be thought to act conformably to the Gallican Church, who takes
part with the Pope upon this occasion. It is rather to be wondered at, that at
a time when there is so little respect given at Versailles to the Vatican
Thunder, and where the ancient Custom is renewed of appealing from the Pope to
the General Council; I say, it is a wonder, at such a time as this, a Subject
of this nature, should not be handled with more freedom and sincerity. Perhaps
this is one of the little Tricks of those sort of People, which M. Talon has
more frankly described, than I have a design to do, who make hideous
portraictures of the Actions of Henry VIII. to observe the glory of those of
Lewis the Great. And perhaps our Author is neither so great a Politician, nor
so well knowing in Affairs, as to have such distant prospects in his Eyes, or
else this work being his first Essay, he did not study the Point with that
Application which was requisite, believing that trouble to no purpose while he
has to do with a person, that gives no better proofs of his Understanding than
my self. I shall therefore insist only upon six of his principal Errors, which
are nothing to the great number of mistakes which he has committed, and which I
could easily make appear, had I the Liberty to enlarge my self in a writing
that must be inserted into the Universal Library.

I. He calls in question the Contents of the Decretal Bull, which Cardinal
Campeggio brought, upon this Ground, That having been only shown to the King
and Cardinal Woolsey, no Body can tell what it was; and if it had been a
definitive Sentence in that matter, the Legates Commission had been at an end,
and the King would have contracted his Second Marriage, as formerly Lewis the
XII. did, without expecting any other proceedings.

Had Monsieur Le Grand given himself the trouble to read that Bull which I have
published, he might have spared himself so many useless Remarks. The Bull was
contrived in England and sent to Rome, where, though some few Alterations were
made, it appeared nevertheless by all the Letters, that were written
reciprocally from Rome and England; that the Bull which was given to Compeggio
was in substance the same. Certain it is, that Bull declared the King's
Pretenses to be just, gave power to the Legates, to examine the Truth of them,
and to pronounce Sentence upon the proofs that should be made before them. For
though this Bull implied a definitive Sentence of the Pope, upon a supposition
of the Validity of the King's Pretensions; nevertheless it left many things for
the Legates to do. They were to inform themselves, 1. Whether the King had not
desired this Marriage himself. 2. Whether it would not occasion a War between
Spain and England, should a Dispensation be granted. 3. Whether this
Dispensation had been annulled by the Protestation which the King made against
the Marriage, when he came to be of Age. 4. Whether any of the Princes, in
favor of whom the Dispensation was allowed, were Dead before the Marriage was
consummated.


It is apparent that that same Bull for the dissolution of the Marriage between
Henry and Catharine, being only granted upon supposition, that all the matters
in Question were as the King maintained them to be, had been void in case he
could not have proved his suggestions; which is the thing that confounds all
the Author's Arguments.

But I must confess that M. Le Grand has something of Reason on his side in
what he says concerning Rodulphus, whom I believed to have been Campeggio's
Bastard. He proves out of Sigonius, who writes the Life of that Cardinal, that
Rodulphus was his Legitimate Son. Sigonius is a very good Author, and I
acquiesce in his Authority. But had M. Le Grand cast but his Eyes upon the
English Edition, he would have seen that it was not without sufficient Ground,
and not out of any design to blacken the Reputation of C. Campeggio, that I
called Rodulphus Bastard; since I quote the very Discourse wherein he is so
called, which was Composed by Sr. William Thomas, Secretary to the Privy
Council, under the Title of the English Pilgrim. I had the misfortune not to
have seen the Life that was written by Sigonius, so that it is only a fault of
Omission, which the Author would aggravate into a malicious Invention. And I
make this acknowledgment of my Error so much the more frankly, because it is
the only mistake among all the rest of which the Author accuses me, that is
well grounded.

II. M. Le Grand labors to destroy the Authority of the Decision of the Sorbom
in favor of Henry. But in regard this Decision was printed the Year following,
and acknowledged for true and real, since no person in those times taxes it of
being counterfeited, we have no reason now to suspect it; for neither does
Cardinal Poole, who was then at Paris, when it was made, nor any other writer
of the Roman Communion, tax the King of Imposture upon that occasion. Add to
this that the Bishop of Tarbes being continued to solicit in Henry's behalf at
the Court of Rome, after he was made Cardinal, and that the King had publicly
acknowledged before the Legates, how privy that Prelate had been to his
Scruples conceived upon his Marriage, has given an undeniable Confirmation of
this matter, whatever our Author says to the contrary. The same thing is to be
said of the Sorbonn; for that never having been charged with falsehood in the
particular of this Decision, there is no question but that they made it. So
that all M. Le Grana's Arguments can never prove any thing more, than only that
it has occasioned great Disputes, and that Beda was a real promoter of
Sedition. By the way, we may observe that the Ecclesiastics of France were
very ill satisfied with the Conduct of Francis the First, who had sold their
Liberties by the Concordate, of which the University of Paris was so sensible,
and for that reason full of Malcontents. And therefore it might be perhaps
that so many of the French Clergy were so ill affected to Henry's Cause,
because they knew that Francis the first so passionately supported his
Interests. After all, the Author confesses, That he sound in the scrutiny Fifty
three voices for the Divorce, and Forty two against it; and Five, that were of
Opinion that the matter should be referred to the Pope. And this is sufficient
to justify the printed Decision, which only says, That the greatest number of
Doctors were for the Divorce, and declared the Marriage illegal, which may
serve for an Explanation of the words of the Letter of the first President,
That that same Declaration would do the King more hurt than it would advance
his Affairs; In regard all the other Universities had judged in his Favor,
whereas the Opinion of the Sorbonn favored him only by the plurality of voices.

III. The Author, who pretends to publish an Extract of the Reasons which the
Favorers of Henry alleged against his Marriage, has forgot the Principal, and
that which supported all the decisions of the Romish Church; that is to say,
That the Scripture, explained by Tradition, is the Rule according to which all
Controversies are to be determined: They alleged a perpetual succession of
Provincial and general Councils, of Popes, and the Chief of the Greek and Latin
Fathers; particularly, the Four most famous Fathers of the Western Church,
whereas the Imperialists had neither Father nor Doctor on their side.
Nevertheless the Author says no more, but that the English quoted the Canons of
some Provincial Councils concerning Incontinency; with certain passages out of
Tertullian, St. Basil and St. Jerome about Virginity, and against second
Nuptials. I am sure the Reader must here take notice, That there is something
wanting in this Relation which is more essential to an honest Man, than a great
stock of Capacity. For the Canons of Councils and the Passages out of the
Fathers which they quoted, speak expressly of the Degrees of Marriage, forbidden
in Leviticus. He names Three Popes whose Letters they produced; but he passes
over in silence the Chief, in reference to England, who was Gregory the Great.
For the Saxons being converted at what time he held the Sea, this Pope gave
express Order to Austin the Monk to disannul all Marriages that had been
contracted with Brothers Wives. Now England having submitted to this Law, upon
its first embracing Christianity, they who defended the Kings scruples looked
upon this as the Principal Foundation of his Cause. So that if M. Le Grand
would have acquired the Reputation of a sincere Historian, he ought to have
mentioned this Particular. Moreover he should not have passed over in silence
as he does, all that was alleged against the Power which the Popes assume to
themselves of dispensing with all Ecclesiastical, and every the Divine Laws
themselves. Nor ought he to have forgot that other great Reason urged by the
King, that according to the Canons of the Council of Nice, the determination of
that matter belonged of right to the English Church, and not to the Pope. If
the Author be a True Member of the Gallican Church, he ought to grant these
Maxims; and if he would be thought a Faithful Historian, he ought not to pass
them over in silence. But though he do not set down all the Kings Reasons, he
adds several New Reasons to the Queens pleading, which her Advocates never
dreamed of, and we do not meet with in any Story or Relation of that time. They
all tend to prove that the Rules touching the degrees of Consanguinity have not
been always observed in Marriages with the same Exactness. But the Church is
governed by Rules and not by Examples.

As for the Law of Deuteronomy which permitts a Man to Marry his Sister-in-Law,
if her Husband died without Children, it has been always considered in the
Christian Church, as an Exception to the General Rule; so that in regard it was
only made in favor of the Jews, and with reference to their Right of
Succession, it was abolished together with their Republic; whereas the Laws of
Leviticus concerning this Matter, are to be looked upon as Laws that are Moral
and Universally received. In a word if you will take the pains to compare the
Books that have been written upon this Subject, with the Extracts which M. Le
Grand and my self have given of them, you will presently find that he writes
with no Sincerity at all, who descends to a Nicety. For my part I shall not
Envy him the High Opinion he has of his, so long as Men will but acknowledge me
to have writ sincerely and without the Bias of Interest.

IV. Our Author says that the Parliament abolished the Oath which the Bishops
swore to the Pope at the time of their Consecration; and formed another which
they were to swear to the King. But this is not that which he calls
understanding to the Bottom, the Laws and History of England. For the Truth was
this. They read in that Assembly the two oaths which the Bishops took, the one
to the Pope, the other to the King; and in regard they found them to be
Contradictory, as being two oaths of Homage and Fidelity, which could only be
sworn to one Sovereign; they abolished that which was made to the Pope, and let
that stand in it is full vigor which was sworn to the King. I have given an
undeniable Example of their oaths sworn to the King by the Bishops in former
Ages, which is to be seen in an Act at the head of the Collection of the Pieces
that justify my History. If M. Le Grand had only the French Translation, where
those Pieces are not, he might have consulted the English Edition at Mr.
Bulteau's, where they are all to be seen. He might have there seen in the Act
which I cite, Cardinal Adrian renounce not only all the Clauses of the Bulls
which were contrary to the Kings Prerogative, or the Laws of England; but also
swear an Oath of Fealty to the King, in the same Terms which our Kings have
since continued to receive them from the Bishops. The Oath to the Pope, which
is an Innovation not known till before the XII. Age, contains besides, so many
large and unlimited Clauses, which neither accord with the Doctrine of the
Gallican Church, nor with that submission and duty which Prelates owe their
lawful Prince, since it is apparently an Oath of Homage and Fidelity to a
Foreign Power.

V. Mr. Le Grand labors might and main, to make Cranmer to be looked upon as
one of the most wicked men in the world. He accuses me for making him a
Gentleman, but I have said nothing of it, though I well knew him to be so; not
believing that Quality considerable enough to be mentioned in the Eulogies due
to the memory of so great a Personage. He cannot believe, That Cranmer was in
Germany when Warham died, nor that he was named in his Absence to be Bishop of
Canterbury; nor that he stayed Seven weeks after he received the News of his
Nomination, because he assisted at the Marriage of the King with Anne Bolen. He
cannot allow what I say, That this Affair went on slowly, since it was but
three Months between December and January before this Prelate was known to be
exalted at Rome. Nor will he be persuaded, That the Provincial Synod of
Canterbury pronounced any positive sentence upon the Marriage of the King. See
here more mistakes than Varillas himself could have been guilty of. For in the
Criminal Process against Cranmer which is Printed, we find that he calls his
Judges to witness, with what reluctance he accepted the Primacy of England; and
that he did not return out of Germany till Seven Weeks after the King had
signified to him his Intentions. Nor did the Bishops who knew his Judges, and
who had been Eyewitnesses of his behavior at that time, say any thing to it,
as not being able to contradict what he said. Twelve Weeks passed from the
Twenty third of August, that Warham died, to the Fourteenth of November, that
the King was married; so that although the Courrier had staid Fifteen days by
the way, Cranmer might have delayed his departure for Seven Weeks, and yet have
come time enough to be at the Nuptials of the King. But our Author to change
Five Months into three excludes September and January out of his Account, for
this only Reason, That he found it requisite to retrench them. As for the
Judgment of the Synod of Canterbury, the Sentence of Divorce has it in express
Terms, That the two provincial Synods of England had decided the King's Cause.

But M. Le Grand, above all things makes it a Crime in Cranmer, that he took an
Oath of Obedience to the Pope when he was consecrated; and for that he made a
Protestation, by which he gave diverse Restrictions to the said Oath. But he
reports all that he says concerning this Matter, upon the Authority of certain
passionate Scriblers, and quite contrary to the Faith of the public Acts. The
Protestation of the Archbishop was read twice before the Altar, while he was
consecrating, and it is clear that he had no design to make use of Equivocals,
since what he did, he did in public, and for that the Bishops usually made
Protestations, by which they renounced all Clauses of their Bulls which were
contrary to the Kings Prerogative. It seems the Canonists, accustomed to this
doubling Equivocation, had so much Power over Cranmer as to incline him to take
the Oath, and restrain it by a public Protestation, made at the same time; so
that if he did any thing amiss in so doing; it was rather a Defect of Judgment
in that Prelate, than any want of Sincerity.

VI. The Author says that the King pardoned Moore and Fisher, the Business of
the Maid of Kent; and though he confess that the first ridicules her for an
idle silly Nun in one of his Letters, yet he seems not to have seen a long
Letter of Moore's, which I published in my justifying Pieces belonging to the
Second Volume, where he speaks of the pretended Revelations of that religious
Wench, as one of the most horrid Impostures that ever were. As for Fisher,
whatever the Author says, he was condemned for favoring that Imposture. To
this M. Le Grand adds, That the Chancellor having demanded of Fisher and
Moore, what they thought of the Statues made in the last Parliament, they would
make no Answer, only they said, That being cut off from civil Society, they
minded nothing but their Meditation upon their Savior's Passion, which Answer
cost them their Lives. Here is a Corruption of History, which I shall not call
so bad as it deserves; which is so much the more odious, for that writing
things as they were transacted, and according to public Acts, he could
represent them after a manner so favorable to his own Cause. These two great
Men were condemned at first by virtue of a Praemunire, which is loss of Goods
and perpetual Imprisonment, for having refused to take the Oath concerning the
Succession, by reason of the Kings Marriage according to an Act of Parliament.
After that they were farther prosecuted, because they opposed the King's
Supremacy, or his Title of the supreme Head of the English Church. There is one
thing too in Moore's Process which might be sufficient to make a Man Guilty of
High Treason, where he says, That a Parliament can both make a King and depose
a King.

Now In regard I have consigned myself within these Six Heads, I shall go no
farther; but the abundance of Matter makes me that I have much ado to hold
here, I cannot but wonder the Author has forgot so many important Things in his
History, and that he could find in the Collection of Letters printed by
Camuzat, which I never saw, until he did me the Honor to give them unto me. He
says nothing of what the Pope promised Cardinal Tournon, That for Forms Sake he
should be obliged to observe some Formalities of Action, to the End he might
not show himself too partial to the King of England, in favor of whom he was
resolved to do what lay in his Power, for the Love of you, said the Prelate,
writing to the King of France. And a little after, I think I am well assured
that our Holy Father will comply with you, touching the Request which you have
made him in Behalf of your said Brother, Henry VIII. In a Letter of the
Seventeenth of August 1533. The same Cardinal writes to Francis I. That the
greatest Party of the Cardinals, that were of the Imperial Faction, would have
been mad with the Pope, had he not done what he did, in regard there was but
little likelihood that the King would submit his Cause, and that the Pope
might have some honorable Pretense to act for him, he would do it with as good
a Will as was possible. And it may be, adds this Minister, when you meet
together (he speaks of the Interview that was to be at Marseilles) there will
be found out Expedients. It appears also by another Letter, that Francis I.
told the English Ambassador, That the Pope himself had confessed that King
Henry 's Cause was just, and that he wanted nothing but a Procuration.
Therefore it was that when the King was cited to appear at Rome in Person, or
by a Proctor, he took little Notice of it. That if Carne were sent beyond the
Mountains in the Quality of an Excuser, it was seen by those Mixtures that it
was not in the Name of the King, but in the Nation's Behalf that he went to
make those kind of Excuses.

This Refusal of Henry being looked upon at Rome as an effect of Contempt,
which he had of the Holy See, the Pope promised him the Divorce if he would but
appear in that City either in Person or by his Proctor, in pursuance of the
Assignation which he had caused to be given him, and acknowledge his Authority.
Francis the First applauded the King's Conduct in that Affair, and was so far
from endeavoring to oppose his Marriage, that he ordered his Ambassador to be
Godfather in his Name to the Child that should be born in case it were a Son.
The French Ambassador at Rome about that time wrote also several Letters to his
Master's Court, where he observes, That the Pope was very ready to do what was
desired in the King of England 's behalf, and more if he durst or could, but
that the Emperors People pressed the Affair with so much Importunity, that the
half of the time, His Holiness, against God and against Reason, nay, contrary
to the Opinion of a good part of the Imperial Cardinals, was constrained above
half the time, to act at the pleasure of M. Dosme -- We wanted you there to
have put a spoak in his Wheel, pursues he, writing to the Cardinal of
Grandemont, There is no Man that dares tell him the Truth. And it is as true
that this Ambassador who was Bishop of Auxerres, said also speaking to the
Pope, That he saw him so pressed by the Emperor, his People, and the greatest
part of the Cardinals, that he thought he could do no good but only by
Dissimulation. But indeed these cunning Politicians understand so well how to
change their Style, according to Occurrences, that there is hardly any trust to
be given to their Letters. The same Day that he wrote what we have cited to the
Pope's Legate, in another Letter to the Grand Master he observes, that the Pope
had told him, that for Four Years the Business of Henry VIII. had been in his
Hands, that there was nothing effected as yet; that if he might do what he
would, he would do what we would; and says the Minister, This he told me in
such a manner, that if I am not deceived he thought what he spoke. All those
Letters were dated the 17. of Feb. 1532. But in another of the 13. of Jan.
following, he assures that the Pope had told him, That he was resolved to
referr the whole Business to a good Time; and that he clearly understood, what
the Pope meant by a good Time. To which he adds, that if the Matter had been
judged according to the Wishes of the Cardinals, and the eager Instances of the
Emperor's People, the most ancient and learned had judged for the King of
England. But that there were but few of that Company, and the number of the
other was so great, that by plurality of voices the English would have utterly
lost it.

M. Le Grand is very nice and tender, when he comes to that Circumstance, that
there arrived a Courrier from England to Rome a day or two after Sentence was
given; and he omits the have in which it was pronounced, as if he knew nothing
of it. Nevertheless we find in these Miscellanies, a Letter from Pomponio
Trivulci, dated from Lions the 16. of April, where he observes, that M. de
Paris passing that way upon his return from Rome, told him that the definitive
Sentence which the Pope had given against the King of England, had been
precipitated. That it was not the Pope's fault that they did not temporize
longer; that if they had staid but Six Days more before they had pronounced it,
the King would have submitted to the Holy See. But that the Importunity of the
Imperalists and the Consistory was so great, that they would not stay. That the
next Day after the Resolution of England came too late, but that then the
Consistory and the Imperalists were mad, that they staid no longer. All these
passages plainly show, that the Court of Rome was governed in this Affair, only
by the prospects and maxims of Policy. And therefore it is, that according to
the Principles of the Gallican Church, M. Talon has maintained with so much
Zeal, upon an occasion of much less importance, that the King of England had no
reason to have any regard to the Sentences and Thundrings of that Court.

If I am extremely obliged to M. Le Grand for having made me a present of so
good a Book, in which he furnished me with so many proofs of the most important
Points of my History, I am no less troubled that he had so little value for
himself, as to suppress them, and for his having forced me, as I may so say, to
make use of the kindness he has done me to his own disadvantage. But upon such
occasions as these, they saying is, Magis amica veritas. And though M. Le Grand
imagines that I am jealous of my Productions, were not the Interests of
Religion intermixed therewith, I could easily abandon mine. But I will not now
push this censure any farther; neither do I know whether I shall write any more
upon this Subject, not being able to determine any thing in that matter, till I
have seen the Three other parts of this work, and the effects it will produce
in the World. I shall conclude with humble request to pardon the Liberty which
I take of addressing this Letter to you, and that in so public a manner, not
believing a man could otherwise so properly give a censure upon a printed Book.

I am, Sir, etc. Hague, 20. of June.
FINIS.

