THE DIVINE EPICURUS, OR, The Empire of PLEASURE OVER THE VIRTUES.

COMPOSED By that Most Renowned PHILOSOPHER,

Mr. A. Le GRAND;

AND Rendered into English by Edward Cook Esquire

(...). Isocrates in Nicocle. LONDON, Printed by H. Bruges for M. Widows at
the Green-Dragon in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1676.

Licensed

November the 29th. 1675. ROGER L'ESTRANGE.

TO ROBERT COKE OF NORFOLK, Esquire A Member ^o the Honorable House of COMMONS.
SIR,
BEing sensible how prevalent the Censures of Envy and ill Nature are almost
over every thing that once becomes public, I thought it my prudent'st Course
before hand to provide my self such a shelter, as might, if not wholly keep off
the effects of their Malice, at least render them little prejudicial to me.

Immediately therefore I was carried away by a force of Nature impossible to be
resisted, to beg leave that I might have your Protection for my Sanctuary,
being very well assured your Name is Amulet enough against all the despiteful
outrages of perverse dispositions.

And indeed to whom could I with more reason Dedicate a Book composed by that
Famous Philosopher Mr. Anthony Le Grand, and consequently of a most Elevated
dignity, then to your self, who not only most delights in the virtues of it,
but at large possesses them.

Persons of your Quality, Sir, can very seldom fix their virtue, and make it
regular; the impetuous tumults of a giddy world are so violent upon their
senses, that they are quickly Hurrican'd out of course by them: but the
Debauches of an Impious and degenerate Age have no in^luence upon your steady
mind; You enjoy an undisturbed composure, notwithstanding all the Attacques of
others to divert the Channel, and are not like those bodies, whose Complexions
follow the nature of their Climates; for you live in the continual exercise of
virtuous Actions, amidst those who make it the chiefest of their practice to
stifle and oppress them.

As Heaven has been very prodigal of its bounties to You, it has likewise
instructed You how to enjoy them; and You do it in so noble, generous, and
exalted a manner, that all Mankind who have heard of Your fame, are forced to
acknowledge You best deserve them: and instead of envying your affluence, they
have more reason to wish that You may daily meet with new Accessions.

Your Greatness has not the power to make You superciliously haughty; you
receive all addresses with such a familiarity and easiness of Nature, that
plainly shows it is Virtue only magnifies you: and the qualities you have made
natural to you are so excelling, that as evil men can find nothing in them to
malign, so good men cannot see any thing but what they admire and doat upon.

Let me then in all humility implore your Patronage of what is so much your
own: there is none will doubt the value of any thing which shall have the
happiness of pleasing You: and in it I shall not only have my greatest
security, but shall find also my extremest Obligations to be all my life,

SIR, Your most Devoted, most Humble, and most Obedient Servant, EDWARD COOK.

THE DIVINE EPICURUS, Or the Empire of PLEASURE Over the VIRTUES.
The first Treatise: of Pleasure.
The first discourse. Sapientes pacis causa bellum gerunt, and laborem spe otij
tolerant.

The Opinion of Epicurus concerning PLEASURE.
PEace, Clemens Alex and strom. 2d.
when considered as the Reward of War, which returns with U^ury the pains and
toil of Conquerors, is the desire of all Soverains: even the most Barbarous as
well as Civilized people give honor to her, and none will refuse her
Entertainment in their Kingdoms, but who are reputed Salvage, yea the very
Antipodes and opposites of Nature.

No Nation whatsoever will proclaim a War, but they propose her to themselves
before any Engagement with their Enemies, whose promising results are so large
and considerable, that they never scruple the hazarding whole States and
Kingdoms for her acquest. It Is true, there is no affinity betwixt a quiet
Repose, and a troublesome and bloody Battle, nor is it imaginable, that a Man
should have thoughts of Peace at the very time he is Sacking of Towns,
dispeopling Provinces, committing Murders, and laying all places in Ruin and
Desolation through which he passes. Yet is this the language of all Soverains,
who say they never begin a War, but upon the presumption and hopes of Peace,
nor do they ever labor the subduction of their Enemies, but that their first
amity and alliance may be more strongly renewed.

What Peace is in the Politic, Voluptas in omnibus nobis in^levit, and circa
volupt^^es and d^lores totum n^gotium (...) and civilis versabitur. A^ist. Mor.
Nicom. Lib. 2. cap 3.
that is Voluptie or Pleasure in the moral; she is the end of all humane
actions, and when Philosophers do engage against Vice, making use of Virtue to
combat with it, they propose not to themselves any other happiness then its
Enjoyment: they account the difficulties of Virtue delightful, because of the
pleasure she promises to them, the hopes of which cause all their resolutions
and fidelity, and questionl^ss they would be disengaged from the cares and
troubles of being possessed with her, were they not transported with her charms
and delicacies. Epicurus, who has openly declared himself as well the defender
as lover of Pleasure, never had a thought to be injurious unto Virtue, when he
presented her with it for a companion or a Mrs. For as he observed all our
Actions inclined to Pleasure, that we had a natural aversion to grief and
vexation, that the former concluded our desires, the latter opposed them; he
was persuaded that Pleasure was our chief felicity, that we might enjoy it in
Nature, and that it was an Innocent aspiring to the condition of the gods, to
share with them in a quality which made them happy

His Enemies, who either have not had a right conception of his thoughts, or
have dissembled and put a false gloss upon his designs, on purpose to serve for
an occasion to oppose them, have imagined that he has sided with the Body
against the Mind, that he has established his felicity in the sense, and as if
he had rejected the Immortality of the Soul, he had jumbled together in a mixed
confusion the pleasures of mankind with those of the most infamous beasts. From
which surmise have proceeded so many bitter invectives against Voluptie, that
even all their writings are stuffed with his disorders, and that calling of it
sometimes the pest of Mankind, anon the destroyer and Enemy of Reason, they
have caused the greatest part of the Philosophers to have a nauseating and
horror for it. I acknowledge, that that which only respects the body, and
concludes all its dominion in the sense, is dangerous unto Man, often
debauching his Reason, abating his Courage, darkning his Judgment, and making
Virtue to be of no value in his breast, when that before hand is possessed of the
chair. If some Philosophers may be credited, it is the cause of all disorders
in the world, and is no less the destruction of whole Estates, then it is the
Ruin of particular Families. It Is she has so often mingled the poison with the
drink, made Subjects Rebels, caused Soldiers to keep secret correspondencies
with their Enemies, and obliged children to give death to those from whom they
themselves have received life. In short, Voluptie belyes its name, since it
never affords us true and real Pleasures, but hurts us in its flateries, makes
Martyrs of its slaves, and indeed bestows nothing less upon its votaries, then
what it makes them hope for.

I should be ashamed to defend the Opinion of Epicurus, did I seriously think
it was the protector of so infamous a felicity, and that the Original of all
its good things had their source from all our evil ones. But his Philosophy to
me seems too rational to approve of such extravagancies, and he has sentiments
too Noble to authorize in public that which the most impudent and shameless
themselves condemn in secret. Those, who will take the pains accurately to
consider and weigh his Writings and narrowly search into his thoughts, may
observe that he had no other intention, when he spoke so to the advantage of
Pleasure, then to make his wise man happy, to loose his body from griefs and
troubles, to fill up his mind with delight, and to render them both equally
satisfied. Those who have thought otherwise, have scandalized his innocence,
and can find no other ways to please his disciples, then in the publication of
their malice or their ignorance. For what Stoic is there that does not desire
to be exempted from cares and troubles? and what Philosopher thinks himself
unhappy, because he enjoyes a perfect health, sees his mind free from sorrows,
and distempers at a good remove from all the parts of his body? what favorable
opinion soever we receive of the merits of Virtue, yet would she be but little
grateful to us, if always she appeared perverse and froward, only giving us an
entertainment of her miseries, without ever rendering the enjoyment of her,
pleasant and agreeable. She ought to make a discovery of her Charms, as well as
Beauty, to oblige us to be in love with her, and to promise us full contentment
and satisfaction, to engage our affections to an earnest pursuance of her.

Though Good be the Object we are naturally most inclined to, Bonum nisi etiam
delecter, non suscipitur. August. li de Spir. and litt^ra. cap. 3.
yet it never at^racts our affections, but when it discovers unto us something
particular of Beauty in it; and we look upon it as an indifferent thing all the
while that it does not appear to us pleasant and agreeable, as well as
Profitable, and of Advantage. This is the common Sentiment of all Men, and it
is sufficient only to consult our own Inclinations to be persuaded of this
truth.

Now if this desire be Just, and it be permitted us to follow it, Since it is
natural, why should Epicurus be condemned because he has advanced the glory of
Pleasure, by the fastening it unto Virtue, and by rendering this Noble Habitude
agreeable to procure her Admirers? If there be such ill persons in the world
that make an ill use of her, and who leave the Mistress to pay their Courtships
to the Waiting-Gentlewoman; this Mischief ought to be attributed to their
disorderly temper, and should be no more wondered at, then to see Impious Men
profane Sacred things, and Mercenary ones quit their adored Divinity, wholly
to be taken up in her favors.

There can be nothing more rational, Inclinavi cor meum ad faciendas
justificationes tuas in aeternum propter retributionem. Psalm. 118.
then the Passion and Love of Saints, who love the Almighty from the bottom of
their hearts, who seek Him in their actions, who suffer all things for his
love, and never do esteem themselves happier, then when they may testify to him
their affections by their suffering. Yet it is permitted for these Jealous ones
of their Master's glory, to consider the happiness that they wait for, to love
under the hopes of Recompense, and regard the Laurels that must one day crown
their Labors. This Mighty King, in whose Person both Valor and Piety are
united, and who has as much Signalized himself by his Devotion, as his
Victories; Professes loudly that he looks for the Reward of his Justice, that
his hope begins and ends all his Actions, De torrente voluptatis ^otabis eos.
Psalm. 36.
and that he is never more animated to the Practice of Virtues, then when he
sets before him that pleasure which must render him for ever glorious in
Immortality.

After this allowance, we cannot blame the Followers of Epicurus, but we must
do an outrage to the innocence of the Saints, and make these unjust, as we
would condemn the former as guilty. Both of them aspire after Pleasure, and
look upon Virtue as the mean to arrive to it, and to have a different Faith,
makes them not contented with the same aims and designs. If the Stoics have
cried them down, and condemned their Doctrine in all their Works; we must
attribute this Judgment to the severity of their Sect, who acknowledging no
other felicities then those of Virtue, reject all things that may make it in
the least suspicious. Though the Philosophy is more pompous, it is not therefore
the more Plausible, and it would be easy for me to reject their Maxims, had I
not been on their side in my Book Entitled The Man without Passions; and if I
had not discovered according to their Sentiments, that the advantages of the
Soul make all its grandeurs, that others are strangers to it, and that to
render a wise Man perfect, it is but necessary to render him virtuous.

But to make an Accommodation betwixt these Enemies, and cause them to enter
into a good understanding and intelligence, we must acknowledge that their aims
are at one and the same end, and both are Rivals to the same Mistress, though
indeed it is under different Pretexts. The Stoics regard Virtue as an honest
good, and the Epicureans as a Delectable; Those content themselves with
possession of Beauty, these latter are taken up in the pleasures she creates in
the hearts of those that are her Captives.

The Second Discourse;
That Voluptie or Pleasure is Natural to Man.
NAture is so prudent in her Conduct, and so regular in all her Works, that we
cannot be beside the cushion in our pursuit after her; She is the guide of the
Universe, the Sovereign of Creatures, and the invisible Light that superintends
all our Actions. All Philosophers approve her Inclinations, and as they are
assured that she derives her Origin from Heaven it self, without any
difficulty in the case, they make choice of her for their Mistress. All who
observe her Laws are accounted happy by them, her hatred and her love excite
all their passions, and they do not shun Evil, and embrace Good, but because
She has inspired them with an Aversion for the one, and a ready Complacence for
the other. Epicurus, who is rendered Famous in his School, by making a narrow
Scrutiny into all her Secrets in his Remarks upon her Movements; has obliged us
to revere Volupty, because she is Natur^'s.
her Glory, and that this Interessed Mother makes a general communication of it
to all her Children. In short, all Animals are capacitated for it, they seek it
as soon as they do come into the world, and by their Industry after it, they
make a public indication how much they are inclined to her. The little Infants
that are hanging at their Mothers Breasts, and whose reason as yet lies buried
in the Flesh, are fearful of Grief, and in love with Pleasure, bemoan
themselves when the former touches them, and are in an Expansion of Joy, when
the other gives a flattery to their Senses. When a more ripened age has refined
their faculties, and the objects they entertain themselves with, have
discovered to them their Beauties, their thoughts are wholly busied after their
Prosecution, their reason contrives ways how to acquire them, and following the
instinct of Nature, they do what they can to satisfy their desires and give
their minds contentment.

The Poets, imitating the Oracles by their frequent hitting upon truths in
their Verses, have fained that Orpheus drew Beasts to him through the sweetness
of his voice, that those who shunned the sight of men were easily brought over
by his elevations and cadences, that their wild and savage dispositions was
forgotten by his melody, and that by this kind of mirth and pleasure he made
those creatures become familiar which he could no ways reclaim by his address.
The Politi^ians, acknowledging this secret, and Learning by experience the
efficacy and power of Pleasure, have made use of it in all their designs; by it
they have kept the people in Obedience, put a stop to Rebellion in States and
Kingdom, and have kept off those dangers that have threatened Ruin. The
Republique of Athens owes its conservation to the divertisments of her Poets,
and their plays have won them over more subjects, then the happiness and
success of their Arms. For combating with the peoples passions, they have
pre^tily stolen into their minds duty with Pleasure, the same scenes which
have diverted them, have taught them virtue, and they have carried away that
from the Theater, which they could never get from Philosophy.

The Lawyers, Qui jura^vit cum muliere contrahere, potest eam r^pellere propter
sup^^v^nientem de^ormitatem cap. quemadmodum de jurejur.
who are so expert in their decisions, and ought to know the properties of
every thing to determine our differences, accord with the sentiments of nature,
in saying that Man is always inclined to Pleasure, that the privation of it is
sufficient to cause him to break his promises, and that he may permissively
fail in his word to a young Lady, when sickness has spoilt the body, and left a
visible deformity upon the face. It seems a shock to the inclinations of this
common Parent, that a man should be obliged to marry her who ceases to be
delightful to him, and that she should unjustly exact the continuation of his
love, when she has lost that attraction which begat it in him.

Almighty God, who prescribes an end in all his Actions, and who often makes
known his designs by those circumstances that are attended upon them, has given
us this assurance, that Pleasure to a Man is natural, since he created him in a
place of Delicacies, and afforded him a Paradise for his first Habitation. If
we may credit the ancient Fathers in their Descriptions of it, the Earth did
never bring forth any thing more beautiful, since all things that was there
placed conspired to his felicity. 'Twas the very Mansion House of all
imaginable Charms, the retrait in which all Happyness was circumscribed, and
the enchanted Castle of the Poets. The Fountains that gently fell from the
small declining Hills, the Streams which made their intricate but pretty
meanders over the flourishing Meadows charmed his ears with the delightful and
purling noise of their Waters, the Trees did charge themselves with Fruits for
the pleasing of his taste, all things he could look upon ravished his sight,
the Beasts were no less his Domestiques then his Slaves; and as the former was
the agreeable supporters of his life, so these respected his orders, and showed
their Obedience to his commands. All the Seasons were in a delicate confusion
with the Spring, the Cold did never freez up his members, the Sun warmed, but
had no power to burn him, and the Stars were to surround him with their most
Benign influences. Delectatio est mensura bonitatis actionis, quia illi^s sinis
est, i^ quo quiescit. S. Tho. 2. 2. q 30.
The Earth, from whose bosom He received his being, gave him a share of all her
Treasures, She covered her self with Flowers to be a delight to him, and in her
Verdant and Forest Tapistry, invited him to his repose, and if at any time she
took away any of her Beauties, it was only to present him with a greater
variety far more agreeble. In a word, Pleasure and Man are born together, it is
the end of all his Operations, and he may be said to have obtained it, when
once he comes to enjoy it.

It would be needless for me to make use of other Arguments to enforce this
truth, and as it would be to no purpose to prove the fire heats, the Earth is
heavy, and all the Stars are incircled with light; so it shall suffice me to
say that Pleasure is common to all creatures, that Man seeks it as his
happiness, that Nature diffused it in all her parts, and that God himself did
give him his creation in an Earthly Paradise, for his assurance that it was
natural to him.

But as no Maxim is so sollid as not to meet with its adversaries, and that
even those themselves who love the truth, yet do sometimes persecute it; they
give out that this Sentiment is an enemy to Virtue, that it shocks Modesty, and
is not to be defended without bringing Confusion into the World. For if Volupty
be natural to us, and if we are permitted to follow its motions, who will not
presently cry out, and think that we may lawfully commit Whoredoms, without any
punishment carry away our Neighbors Wives, and make Marriages the occasion of
our Libertinage and Sensuality. This Objection, he, that speaks much to, will
be Impertinent to very little purpose; Nature does not oppose her self to the
Laws of God, she abhorrs whatever he forbids, and as all her Light springs from
him, she adores his Will, and observes his Ordinances. All that displeases him,
is an offense to her; and He has never yet forbid any thing, which she has not
inspired into us an horror for, and aversion to do it. Does He detest the
Adulterer, She looks upon him as a Monster, and gives all the Nations in the
world an abhorrence of him. If he makes Pleasures unlawful, She condemns them
likewise; She persuades all her Children to fly from them, and as she is
Obedient, she observes all the commands of her Sovereign.

The third Discourse.
That Good, Honest, and Profitable, is inseparable from Pleasure.
AS Qualities have their Oppositions, so have they likewise their Resemblances;
Logic, which seperates their properties, can never divide their Essence, and
they agree in Unity, although they are composed of different Species. The
Mystery of the Trinity which Astonishes all Theology, and has made all Ages
sweat about the discovery of it, concludes in one and the same nature a
Plurality of Persons; the Father is not the Son, and the Holy Spirit is
different from them both. As they make diverse species, their proprieties do no
whit agree together, the Passive Generation cannot be attributed to the Father,
nor the procession to the Son, without confounding the power of the Father, the
wisdom of the Word, and the love of the Holy Spirit. Yet notwithstanding, they
are all Three reconciled in one and the same Divinity, and the diversity of
their Persons is no hindrance at all to the unity of their Nature.

What appears so difficult to the conception in Theology, seems evident in the
Moral. The Good that is the object of it, and which makes the Glory of all its
instructions, is expanded in all its branches, its Division stands not in
opposition to its Unity, and if it makes use of different Names, it neither
changes Quality or Condition. Henestum cum utili convenit, atque jucundo in
rebus, quae post earum absolutam acquisitionem jam possidetur. Leo Heb. de
Amore. dial. 2.
It is every way agreeable, the Pleasure makes its principal difference, and it
never does attract the Mind, before it has stirred it up by its surprising
Charms. Vtility which is as the soul of Politicians, appears always under its
habits, and Philosophers are not such courtiers of Honesty, but that they hope
from it to receive Satisfaction. But the better to mix this confusion, we must
observe that the Desire is continually under disquietudes, that its violence
keeps us in suspense, and its Languishing does often equal the vigor of the
most rigorous Distempers. For it is as Shame-fac'd, as it is Cruel, and we
ought to confess our Miseries, as oft-times as we make any Wishes. Nothing, but
their accomplishment, can afford us satisfaction, and put us into a Sedate and
quiet temper. Indeed we swim in Pleasure, when our desires change into Effects,
when we possess whatsoever we did propose for our Content, and when we see our
Fears vanished, and our Hopes established. But this Joy is of no longer a
continuance, then whilst we are engaged in the search of a Good; It lessens it
self by its possession, and we cease to be satisfied and contented, as soon as
we see our greedy desires in repose, and our ambitions have their satisfaction.
He, who to secure himself from Poverty, passes the Seas, despises dangers,
finds out Lands Incognito with the hazard both of his Safety and his Life, and
all to get him Riches, is no longer affected with the pleasure of them, then
whilst he is heaping them up, and as the profitable Gain does charm his
Travels, so is his delight of them lost and gone, as soon as they are lo^k'd up
in his Coffers. He languishes after the Treasures he has not, and disregards
what are in his own possession, and only those good things which he hopes for
can give his Thoughts contentment. The Ambitious Man is as much unhappy as him
that is Covetous; for when he is sweating with the pains he takes to get
himself Honors, employing the credit of his Friends hat so he may come to be
above them, and often taking on him an undecent humility, that at last he may
arrive at some Eminency in the World, the Glory only then appears delightful to
him, when he beholds it as the recompense of all his Labors and Humiliations.
But no sooner are his desires accomplished, and he has made his Inferiors of
his Equals, but he languishes in the midst of his Honors, he only regards those
that are yet wanting to him, and being pushed on by the inquietude of his
desires, he does acknowledge no other happiness, then that which promises him
the Dignity and Preferment he earnestly thirsts for. What is the joy of a
Philosopher, when he is become conqueror of his Passions, and master of those
slaves that would oppress his Liberty? he does no violence to himself but such
as gives him Pleasure, all his pains are agreeable to him, and he reckons all
his Combats happy ones, since they lead him unto Victory. But has he excluded
Vice from his breast, is the object of his affection become that of his hate,
and has he subjected that which before did Tyrannize over him? His virtue is
forsaking him, his pleasures dwindle, and he must combat with new Difficulties,
if he would procure to himself Delights.

This Principle granted, it is no hard task to prove that honesty and Profit
are in affinity with Pleasure, and it is only she that ingages us in their
pursuit. For the profitable good is not disireable only for its self sake,
since that the possession of it is Sterile, and gives no satisfaction to those
who are once made masters of it. It must be Pleasure that moves them to it,
representing it under a form that is agreeable, and appearing beautiful as well
as profitable, to make one be in love with it. Eating, which is so necessary to
Man, is ever followed with pleasure, and I doubt whether we should be at the
trouble of self-preservation if we were not invited to it by the contentment,
as well as by the necessity. Riches, which are made the Divinities of the
world, and which most Men idolize, would be in little esteem amongst us, if
they did not discover the pleasures they give to those that have them, aye^ and
flatter them with an assured Felicity. For they display all that possibly can
make them divertive; they show them stately Structures, rich Habits, Tables
spread with all the varieties capable to please their Taste, advan^agious
Marriages, and a vast retinue of Servants, who attend their Persons, and
observe their Commands. All this Pompous Gayety ravishes their Affections, and
makes them without any Difficulty, consecrate their cares and diligence in the
Acquest of those goods which promises them so many advantages.

It Is true, the seeking of that good, we call Honest, is more pure, it is not
beholding to strange ^avors to satisfy its Lovers, and it is to do an injury
to its Merit, to desire any thing above its self. But yet it ceases not to have
its Charms, as well as Profit, it is the Glory as well as the Ornament of those
who possess it, all Mankind has a Reverence for it, and as it has the Wicked
for its admires, so all good Men too load it with their Panegyricks. Honor is
its Appanage and portion, all persons that regard it, give it their praises,
and those spectators must become enemies to it, that can refuse it this
recompense. Knowledge, which is one part of it, does it not create a bundance of
delight and pleasure in the Learned? And can they mount up into the Heavens,
make a discovery of the Stars, sound Nature, and penetrate into the Abysms of
the Earth, without a transport? As she is the light of our Understanding, she
with it infuses joy into our Souls, exalts us above our self, and without ever
changing our condition, the seems to make us pass out of darkness into light,
from a Prison unto Freedom, and from Death to Life. None, but those who are
ignorant, can question this truth, and who having never been exempted from the
phlegmy conceits of their dull and gross bodies, are not sensible of its
Sweetness and Delight.

The Fourth Discourse.
That Pleasure is the soul of Morral Virtues.
NOthing is so great a Scandal to the Stoics, as the low and petty Rate that
is put upon Virtue, they look upon all those little less then Sacrilegious,
that do dishonor her, and never think any punishment too rigorous to chastise
their Insolence. As they are inamoured with her Love, they call her the
Divinity of the Earth, they make her the Standard of all their Noble Actions,
and they wish Monarchs would as well rely upon her conduct, as the meanest of
their Subjects. Epicurus, who is just of an opposite Sentiment, and who has
given Pleasure the preference to Virtue, is reckoned among them no better then
a Monster; they have thought a Man must quit his reason to side against her,
and prostrate a Sovereign unto Her whom she disdained to accept of for a Slave.
But without doubt those Philosophers are too severe in their condemnation,
which makes me think they have not sufficiently conceived the meaning of their
Adversary, in that they have charged him with so many Reproaches. For did they
take the pains to examine Sovereign Good in its nature, they would find
themselves in no disagreement at all with him, they seek that in effect which
they blame in Appearance, and are no otherwise enemies to him, but in their way
of expression. For if they affirm that Virtue is contented with her own
perfections, that she despises all advantages that are foreign to her, and only
to be possessed of her, is sufficient to make one live happy in the world. The
Epicureans likewise will yield this G^ory to her, and make their protestations,
that they look upon her as the most profitable of al good things. Vi tus (...).
Ci^.
But they will never acknowledge, her to be Man's felicity, since she only
conducts him to it, and never makes her self desirable, but for the love of
that pleasure which she promises. For that happy life which they would have
begin from an enjoyment of her, is nothing but the pleasure which they
establish, and which, seperating the means from the end that leads to it, they
are obliged to prefen^ to Virtue.

Indeed Pleasure seems Natural to the Virtues, the most severe of them do seek
her, as well as the most diver^ive, and though their contentment is more
reserved and hid, it is no whit the less true and real. As she is the chief and
peculiar good of Man, clearing up his reason, and fortifying his will, she very
agreeably slides into his soul, and if she sometimes amazes her Spectators* she
still affords her admirers most plentiful Delights and Satisfaction. Those
Heroes, who make Fortune their diversion, and laugh at it, contemning her
power, and with an equal unconcern beholding her favors and affronts, have done
well to acknowledge that there is a certain pleasure in the Virtue that charms
them, since they prefer its injoynments to Riches and Honors: accounting
themselves happy in their poverty, and extracting Glory from that which makes
others Miserable. That Philosopher, who has made himself Tamous in History in
his choice of a Tubb for his Mansion house, and so as it were to bury himself
alive in the midst of Athens, speaks but the satisfactions that he there
received, Ipsum Diag^a^m quid iliud quam voluptas coniecit nam licet (...) and
(...) Tyr. Max.
and though he was deprived of all things, he did not forbear disputing his
Felicity with the most pompous and lofty Sovereigns. His abode was more
pleasant to him, then their Palace, he considered it as a Temple from whence
he deliv^red his Oracles. and depising the Ornaments of rooms of Entertainment,
he looked upon his own as very well accommodated, since it had virtue for its
Hostess, the Water that quenched his thirst, and the dry parched Bread that
satisfied his hunger, he thought, need give no place to to their Delicacies,
and as they did purely satisfy Nature, they left no disgusts which are the
usual punishments of their extravagant seeding. He got the conquest of all the
passions that insulted o'r Kings; Fear and Grief were banished from his soul,
and while these lament the loss of Battles, and afflict themselves with the
revolt of their subjects, and groan under the weight of their Diadems, he
enjoyed a sweet Repose, and lived in a profound and undisturbed Tranquillity. If
he shunned the Courts of Princes, it was because he knew the troublesome cumber
and distraction of them; if he refused public Dignities, it was because he
counted them as specious Servitudes; and if he preferred the caelibate life to
Marriage, it was because the name of Zantippe was odious to him, and that he
looked upon the society of Women as such, who would always be commanding,
though they were born to obey. In short, this Philosopher enjoyed a perfect
freedom: his miseries were only in appearance, and contemning the grandeurs of
the World, he could boast in this of being the most happy Man amongst all the
Philosophers, and the most puisant of all Kings.

If Pleasure has triumphed over Poverty in the person of Diogenes, if its
sweetness has overcome its cruelty, and has put an agreeableness into the most
incompliant and unwelcome of all virtues; it has no less Empire over the rest
of her companions. Those that seem to be the most dis-interessed, do propound
her to themselves i^ all their enterprises, and though they would be tho^ght to
shun her, yet they take their measures by her movements. Friendship, which
derives all her Glory from the sincerity of her Affections, has yet a
passionate earnestness for her, it loves it in the object it reveres, its
presence contributes to her happiness, and she never makes her approaches to
it, but to receive from thence satisfaction.

There is nothing more pure then the virtue of the Ancients, who have exposed
themselves to dangers, not valuing their lives, but choosing an inevitable
death to preserve their Countries from those mischiefs which have threatened
them. It seems those generous Spirits had no other Sentiments then those of
Honor, they had only a regard to Virtue, when they made themselves Victims to
her. Notwithstanding we may say that Pleasure was the life and soul of all
their actions, they stirred not but as she did move them, and though they
sought out miseries, they were not less the Slaves of Pleasure. They imagined
that Posterity would give them Elogies, that their Children would become the
peoples love, Histories would publish their Valor, their Statues would be
Ornaments and Decorations of public places, and all Mouths expanded in the
celebration of their Names, and all Pens employed in relating their Merits.
Death, which is so terrible to the Cowardly did appear to them but a petty Evil
in comparison of the honors they promised to themselves; and as they were
animated by the desire of Glory, they only considered the Immortality that
would crown their actions.

Justice, which pleases it self with Rigor, and most of her time is taken up
in the chastisements of Criminals, has not any Sentiments more pure and
re^in'd. When a Father is enraged against his Son, and favors his Accusers, and
becomes his persecuter as well as his Judge, making his natural affection give
place to that of his country, and condemns him to a shameful death; one may
well say he is enraged with himself, he punishes himself in the person of this
Mallefactor, and he feels by Anticipation, those torments that should put an
end to his life. For who can imagine that a separation so sensible, and
touching, should be accompanied with contentment, and that any Man who has a
Love for his Children, can become their Parricide with satisfaction. Yet we may
be assured that he receives joy from it, that by taking away his Son's life, he
renders himself famous in the World, that by this Rigor he acquires to himself
the title of Just, that he has ridd himself of a person that would have
blemished his Reputation, and whose crime would have been an eternal Blurr upon
his Family, had he not washed it away in his blood. As his Interests are
fastened to those of the public, and none can attacque his Country, without
intrenching upon his liberty; he studies its conservation in that of his
Nations, he is satisfied that the one cannot be destroyed, but the other must
lie grovelling under its Ruins, and that all those are his Enemies, who have a
design at her overthrow.

What has been said of Poverty, Force, and Justice, might with much more ease
be attributed to the other Virtues, since they do more agreeably insinuate
themselves into our breasts, without opposing the inclinations of Nature, to
make themselves Masters of it.

There is but therefore one difficulty behind to be removed upon this Subject,
to clear up Epicurus, and to justify him against the reproaches of his
Adversaries. If that Pleasure be so linked to Virtue, that she and it are
inseparable, why does she oppose it, and declare her self its Enemy wherever
she meets it? Temperance keeps her in awe and subjection, and will not suffer
her to make any Sallies, and as if she was the shame of Nature, she condemns
all her escapes and extravagances. Prudence blames the use of her, and
discovering what disorders she causes in her Slaves, obliges us to shun all her
approaches. This Objection stands in need but of a slight Answer; in saying,
that Virtue does not reject all manner of Pleasures, but if she condemns those
that are Infamous and Criminal, she permits on the other hand, all those that
are Natural and innocent. She allows the temperate Man to take delight in his
Sobriety, the Judge, to be pleased in the equity of his Decrees, the
Philosopher, to extract his joy from the conquest he gets over his Passions,
and the politic Statesman to hugg himself in the happiness that favors his
Designs, when he sees his desires accomplished. Evil is not always the object
of our Hatred, and if it afflicts us when we feel its first assault, we are
well pleased when we behold it flying away from us, and Discomfitted.

The Second TREATISE Of Moral VIRTUES.
The First Discourse.
Of the nature of PRUDENCE.
NO part in Man's body is acknowledged so useful, as that of the Sight, it is
the Noblest of all the Senses, the Theater of the Soul, the Inspiration of
Passions, and the Instrument to instruct and help us in the discovery of all
Arts and Sciences. Astrology, which despises the beauteous glories of the
Earth, to take her full Contemplation of those higher ones of the Stars, and
which inferrs so often from their Motions, the Symptoms of our Distempers,
would have been unknown in the World, if the Sight had not given it its Birth
and Origin, and if she had not discovered to her, all those Pompous principles
from whence she draws her conclusions. The Eye which is the Organ of it, is a
contraction of Miracles, and if we will give any Credit to the Anatomists,
Nature never made any thing so full of Delicacy and Magnificence. It Is placed
in the Head as in a Throne, its Palace is environed with Glass and Crystal,
and the Water there, is so curiously mingled with the Fire, that its light is
conserved in it without losing any thing of its substance. Nature, which knows
the value and worth of all her works, has ordered all the members that are
neighbors to it, to serve as Guards and bars, the Dust falls downwards to
secure it from danger, the Eyebrows stand up for its defense, and the Tunicks
are hardened that they might withstand the often changes of the Air, as well as
the violence of Heat. But admit, the Sight should not have all these
advantages, it would be sufficiently considerable in its discoveries of the
wonders of the Universe, measuring the distance of the Stars, observing their
motions, and Reading therein, as in a Book, all the Characters which become the
Destiny of Mankind.

If the Eye be the light of the Body, Prudentia recta regula actionum
humanarum, and vitae anima. Arist. mag. moral. l^b. 1. cap. ult.
Prudence is that of the Mind; it is a Luster that dissipates its Darkness, a
flame that clears it up in all its designs, and which seperating the Good from
the Bad, creates in it, a Love for the one, and Honor for the other. As she is
active, and interessed in her good success, she regulates all its motions, and
will not permit it to take resolutions to its disadvantage. She prescribes such
a comely Moderation to its Sallies, that it sets about nothing but by the order
of Reason, her judgment is dependant upon its advice, and discovering to it the
nature of every thing, puts it out of danger of choosing doubtful good things,
for certain ones, and those which are only appearing for True and Real.

The virtues, that are the Daughters of the Will, fetch all their light from
this Sun, she is their perfection as well as guide, and as they are animated by
her light, they are observant to all her commands. Those, who forsake her
conduct, do easily change from being natural, and degenerate into Vicious, they
become the shame or the punishment of their Slaves. Temperance ceases her
Empire over the Passions, when she leaves off being ruled by Prudence, her
moderation is turned to excess, and following the vain Fancies of imagination,
she lets her self be carried out to extremities that are very hurtful and
prejudicial. Justice loses its name, and takes that of its contrary, when it is
abandoned by Prudence; all its sentences are either too remiss through Fear, or
cruel; and not well weighing the greatness of the Crime and its merit, it often
punishes the Innocent, and absolves the Guilty. Valor is converted into
Weakness or ^emerity, when it has once left off to depend upon her succor, all
that it attacques, does either injure or provoke it, it is always faint-hearted
or insolent, and does nothing that is not a reproach to its Cowardice or its
Presumption.

This glory cannot be disputed with Prudence, without being ignorant of ^^s
Puissance; for as she is the soul of the Active, civil, and politic Life, she
is extended over all the actions of Mankind, she gives the lively and
perfecting touches to what Science and Knowledge have but rough-drawn, Prudentia
informat, actuat, and applicat quae Scientia and sapientia cognoscendo
invencrum Cassian. coll. 1.
and making their general principles become particular, she discusses all the
circumstances that may be either a ^^op or an advance to her Designs. That she
may happily succeed in this purpose, she lets nothing escape her sight, she
considers upon all the differences of time, and comparing the future with what
is past, she judges of the event of affairs which she has been meditating on.
Making use of the memory to learn the conduct of our Ancestors, correcting her
Faults by their Errors, and taking advantage from their loss and damage. Things
present, little touch her, for as they are easy to discern, and there needs but
a mean Capacity to judge of them, she troubles not her self but with futurities,
she thinks upon what may happen, though the events may sometimes betray her
designs, we cannot condemn either her Consultations or Fore ^ight. She is
even-pois'd in all her Enterprises, the evil t^rns of Fortune do make not her
alter her Advices, but she dares undertake to defend them though all the world
condemn her of blindness. She is assured that her knowledge of things cannot
prove deceitful, since they are grounded upon so many Precautions, and she
never undertakes any thing without having the judgment for her Arbitrator,
Reason for her Mistress, and the Memory for her Warrant. The first discovers to
her the nature of things, separating the false from what are true, and serving
her as a light, and guide, will not permit her to be mistaken in her Choice.
Reason instructs her in what she ought to choose, and pasting from discourse to
actions, she applies the general Maxims to particular Accidents. The Memory
makes her reflect on what is past, she presents to her view all that has any
likeness to her enterprises, and consulting the actions of Predecessors, she
draws from thence her examples and copies.

But though all these particulars go to the making up of Prudence, she seems to
have her most absolute dependence on the last, and is more redeveable for her
clear perspection into things to the faithfulness of the Memory, then to the
discernings of Judgment, and the persuasions of Reason. For as the affairs of
the world are as it were chained and linked one to another, and the last
ordinarily depending on those precedent to them, she regards the things that
are past and gone, and comparing them with these present, from thence gathers
considerable advantages. Past Events are to her instead of premises, and she
grounds her conclusions on their Evidence; as our understandings never make a
judgment before they be cleared up and enlightened, so she never makes any
Resolutions, but what she draws from those of former times. She consults the
Annals, and remarques the accidents that fall out in them, she examines the
Counsels of Princes, and Sovereigns, and according to the designs projected by
her, approves or condemns them. In short, She runs through all the differences
of time, and appearing as an Hieroglyphick of Eternity upon Earth, she regards
past Ages, instructs her self of the present, and fore-sees what will be the
future.

Now, Epicurus having well known the merit of this Virtue, has made of it the
principal instrument of Man's felicity, and would have her, as she is the Queen
of Virtues, always to begin and end her happiness. We do not approve of the
Medicine but for the Health's sake it procures to us: That Art which has
instructed us to sail upon the Seas, is not commendable, but for its usefulness
to us, and by giving an equal satisfaction to the greedy desires of covetous
persons, and to the Ambition of Conquerors. So we esteem Prudence, adoring it
as a Divinity, because it bestows upon us abundance of Delight and Pleasure,
and bannishing from our breasts the ugly forms of Fear and Sadness, she is in a
continual engagement about our happiness.

The Second Discourse;
That Prudence advises the wise Man to a Retreat.
THough our own Interests commonly make us blind, and the love we bear our
selves is oft-times pernicious to us; yet it ceases not to be Legitimate, and
we are suff'red to love our selves without transgressing the ordinances of our
Creator. This affection is born with us, it grows up with our age, and never
leaves us till we come to our Graves. For as our perfections do dazzle us with
their luster, we are apt to look upon our selves as the little Demy-gods of the
Earth, we make every thing serviceable to our conservation, whatever is out of
us does not at all affect us, and good or evil must make an impression upon our
body or mind, if it would testify the Complaisance or the Aversion we have for
either. The friendship we bear to our Neighbor, is grounded upon this natural
Inclination, we love him in reflecting on our selves, and as the ^ear^ does not
emit any heat into the other parts of the body till after that it is well
warmed with it it self, so we have but little kindness for our Friends, before
we have discovered that they have some for us.

Prudence, which accounts it her glory to regulate our life, acts always
according to this apprehension, she consults our inclinations when she would
conduct us to some kind of living, and examining our ability and our desires,
she invites us to undertake nothing that may oppose or jussle with them. She
would have us follow our Genius in all our Enterprises, and that Nature should
be as well our guide as Reason. From thence it happens that she persuades the
Sturdy and Courageous to Warlike exercises, and causes those Men of blood to
find abundance of pleasure in Carnages and Murders. And thus Husbandmen are in
love with the toils and labors of the Cart and Plow, these happy slaves
prefer their Thatched Cottages to the splendor of the richest Palaces, and
their Plowtail is before the Battoons of Marshalls, and the Scepter of Princes.
From thence it comes to pass, that she stirrs up the Ingenious to Learning and
Sciences, and that according to their Inclinations she animates them to the
study of the secrets of Nature, or to the clearing up to us the mysteries of
our Faith.

As she well knows that the Court is an enemy to Virtue, (...)
and that none can live there long, but they must either become Criminal or
Unfortunate, she persuades the Wise Man to a Retreat, and courts him to get out
of a place that may tempt his Innocence, alter his Purposes, and debauch his
Purity. She makes him see that it is as inconvenient to represent the person of
a Favorite, as that of a King and that he ought to avoid as well the Ambition
of the one, as the Pride of the other. As he understands not the art of
^lattering, but his Tongue is always the interpreter of his Heart, (...)
and as little knows how to commend a Crime, as to blame a virtuous Action, she
will not suffer him to expose himself to Danger, ver^ari a^las Regum, quia ibi
nec veritas nec trq^^uillitas sed simulatio. Marsil. fi^i^us.
and run the risque of wronging his Conscience in playing the Courtier. She
instructs him that Fortune is blind, and as unjust in her favors as in her
outrages. That he must act below himself to submit to her Empire and
Governance, and make a Divinity of an imaginary Idol. ^na word, He ought not to
regard the Court but as the Enemy of Wisdom, and as a Theater, whereon he
cannot appear but he must lose his Liberty, hazard his Conscience, and
abundantly derogate from his Honor.

But his Labor will be still Imperfect, if after he has estranged himself from
Court, he does not retire from the noise of the World, and if having disengaged
himself from one Peril, he is abandoned to another. For the Populace is not
more just then those of a Prince^s ^rain, their Sentiments though more
generally received, are never the more Reasonable, and if we love our own
Repose, we should most fear how we please many persons. The multitude is always
dangerous, what ever Virtue we bring to them, (...) aut imprimit.
we hardly ever carry away again Pu^e and Entire; our Manners alter by the
company of Men, and either the ^vil insects those that come near them, or an
i^^^nious Complaisance gives it is Entrance, we still go from them less
Innocent or more disordered. Vice, there appears commendable, because it has
always there some to approve it, Sen. Epist. 7.
the pomp wherewith it discovers it self, begets in us a high esteem of it, and
judging its worth by the number or quality of its Authors, we receive it with
satisfaction. It often steals into us without ever staying for our consent, all
its approaches corrupt our heart, and only to present before it an Object that
is agreeable and pleasant, is enough to engage it to an earnest search and
diligence. On the other hand, there is little trouble in a shady Solitude, as
one sees there, no rich Gayeties, so the Desires are kept regular and orderly.
Impurity is banished where one can meet with nothing to entertain it, and
Ambition ceases to be our torment, when Honors have left off dazeling our Eyes,
and our actions are no more to have Spectators and Witnesses. As one cannot be
near the ^ire, but the heat must be felt, so likewise cannot we be conversant
with Mankind, but we must blurr our Innocence, and share in their Defilements.

If they find they have Courage enough tooppose their charms or their Efforts,
they scarcely will be able to shun their Derision, they think them Bruits when
ever they divide from their sentiments, and we must resolve to become their
Enemies, if we would not be their Picture to resemble them in imitation. The
Wise Man, knowing his virtue cannot be in Safety amidst so many Dangers, Nihil
sore, nihil^ impo nihil (...) (...) de popul^, im^^ unicum negotium mihi est,
nihil aliud n^^c ^aqu^m ^e^ar^m.
and that it is hard to converse with the Impious and Profane without
contracting their Vices; flies their company, and mistrusting his own Strength
to resist, thinks it better to make an honorable Retreat, than to hazard his
Innocence. He seeks his ^elicity in his solitude, he retires from the World to
enjoy himself, and his virtue being all his Treasure, he believes himself
sufficiently happy in his having it for a Companion. He regards it as a Good
that will never forsake him, Ter^u^^. (...). de pal li^.
but be his Shadow when ever he is pleased to be the Substance, and which is
never more faithful to him then when he is a Recluse to the world, to become
her most humble and passionate Servant. The Volupty he receives from it, is an
effect of Prudence, he is indebted to the sincerity of his Counsels for the
tranquillity of his Soul, and it may be said that she is the cause of all his
Happiness, since she discovers to him the miseries of the Court, and the
injustice of the People to engage him to a Retreat.

The Third Discourse.
That Prudence instructs Men to rule their Families.
IF Oeconomie be not the most Noble, she is the most Ancient of Empires,
Fathers of Families were seen before Kings, and the first who have set
themselves over the liberty of the People, were but as Prentices to them. Their
Rules have served them for Instructions, they have got from these Sources
wherewithal to govern their States, and have learnt the Politiques in observing
the Maxims of particulars. If the conduct of Families has not so much of Pomp
in it as that of a Kingdom, it has not less of Difficulty, and I question which
is the easiest, to command Subjects, or to keep a Wife in her duty, and
Children in their obedience? The ill humor of the one, and extravagence of the
others, put a whole House into disorder, Correction and Chastisement are
oftentimes little profitable to them, and the fear that assures their Estates,
almost continually puts their Persons into danger.

Therefore does Prudence boast of her assisting us in our Necessities, because
she counsels us not rashly to engage our selves in Marriage, but to consider
well beforehand the dispositions of that person one designs for a Wife, and
rather to be affected with the perfections of her Soul, then the charms of her
Face. It tells us that Beauty is but seldom innocent, that Pride is inseparable
to it, that the Fair are always scornful, and commonly despises the company of
their Husbands to entertain themselves with that of their Adorers. That the
Rich are imperious, that they love to command, but will never obey, that they
must not be contradicted in their will without making them angry, and that we
must resolve to bear with their Insolence, if we would be quiet in our house.
To make our Marriage happy, she would have our conditions equal, our humors of
a pretty near resemblance, our Love mutual, and she does not aim so much to
unite our Bodies, as our Minds and Affections. When Heaven smiles upon our
Choice, and we find all these qualifications in the Person of her we Court, she
obliges us to consider her as our Spouse, and not as our Friend only, to
receive her into our counsel, to make her share in our Secrets, and to conceal
nothing from her that may give her a suspicion of our mistrust. It Is to
Solicit her to abate her Kindness, to doubt of her Discretion, and to reveal
all that is not committed to her Fidelity. Love suffers no partage, all that
divides it is its bane and ruin, and it changes its nature and languishes when
it ceases to be communicable. The way to engage a Wi^e to silence, is, to think
her faithful, to assure her of the good opinion we have conceived of her
Virtue, and to testify to her that we believe our Secrets as secure in her
breast as in our own.

If there be some opportunities that dispense with this Obligation, Nemo sibi
bla^diatur, de legibus hominum, omne stuprum adulterium est, nec virolicet,
quo^^ mulicrinon t^cet, eadem avi roqu^^e ab uxore deb^tu^, ca^^^monia. D.
Ambrose, lib. 1. cap 4. de A^raha.
and suffers us not to declare our Secrets, there are none that disengage us
from our Promises; the faith that knits the Marriage is sacred, and not to be
violated without committing a Sacriledg. The Law that favors Men, cannot
absolve them from injustice, when they difile the Nuptial Bed, and leave their
Wives company, to throw themselves into the arms of an Adulteress. Nature,
knows no difference of Sex, what is forbid the one, is not permitted to the
other, and he unjustly exacts ^idelit in his Spouse, who prophanes that he has
promised her by Illegitimate and blamable Conversations. Yea, he does as it
were make himself the Bawd to his Wife, by his ill example, and sollicites her
to the Sin by the corruption of his own loose carriage, and authorizes her
flyings out and reproachful liberties, when he approves of them in his own
person. He ought to be Chaste, if he would have his Wife Continent, and to have
his life exempt from Scandal if he would with justice oblige her to an honest
innocence.

When Heaven blesses their Marriage, and bestows upon them Children to continue
their Family, Nature charges them to take care of their Nurture, and to keep
them after they have brought them into the World. Facile l^nera conciliantur
ingenia, ad honesti amorem.
When Age has loosned their Tongue, and Reason begins to discover its Vivacity,
and renders them capable of Instruction, they ought to labor their Education,
and imprint upon those young plants, Sen Epist 50.
Piety and Virtue. Those that are failing in this Duty, may very well pass for
their Enemies, and it may be doubted if they think them Legitimate, since they
so shamefully abandon them in their necessity. An Infant receives nothing from
his Father, but his Body, his Soul is God's production, the Estate he ought to
inherit, is often fixed to his Cradle, and that person does but imperfectly
deserve the name of Father, that does not improve his Mind, and implant
commendable Sentiments into his Understanding and Judgment. If Nature, has been
niggardly in her favors to him, and denied him this address, which is so
necessary to the Education of Children, he ought to have recourse to the
Pruden^e of others, to make choice of Masters of whose conduct he appro^es, and
whose life is as void of unworthy Imputations as are his Manners. Quo semel est
imbuta recens serva bit odorem -- testa diu. Hor.
Nothing, makes a deeper impression on our Soul, then that which is poured into
it in our youth, whatsoever is then sowed takes root, and as the young Twiggs
of Trees bend according to the motions of the hand which turns them either up
or down, so without any Difficulty do we pursue the instructions of Masters who
govern us. Their words we make our Oracles, we reverence all that comes from
their mouths, and considering them as representing the persons of our Fathers,
we imitate their Actions, and often become their Copies and Images.

Though Servants are strangers in houses, and they may rid themselves of them
when ever they become unprofitable, yet they make themselves a member thereof,
as well as the Children, and though they are their inferiors, they may in some
measure boast of being their equals. The Patres Familias are obliged to feed
them, they are as well their Procurators, as their Masters, and they must
provide for them necessaries, if they would get any service from them. Also
those that consider well their conditions, look upon them as Men, and not as
Slaves, they converse with them as with friends of an humble and contracted
Fortune, and considering that their servitude is equal, and their dependence
mutual, they do not so much make use of Fear, as Love, to keep them to their
duty. They know that their birth, though more obscure, is not more vile then
their own, and that those Parents who brought them into the world, might be as
free and unrestrained, as rational. That they liv^d under the same
Constellations, that Heaven is their Country, that Air and (...) arth are
equally common with them, and that Death, which puts no differences between
Princes and Porters, crumbles into Dust, the Masters and the Servants.
Familiarity, makes them faithful, those who speak at their Tables are silent in
their Troubles, and do not fear to expose their lives in concealing their
Masters secrets. Too much Rigor abates their courage, and they will not be
concerned in the interests of those who are too insulting and imperious over
them, or who mistrust them of their Fidelity. But if they are found such as
Domineer over their Masters, and abuse their Goodness to whom they owe Respect,
they must repress their Insolence with address and cunning, and make them know
they do not so much dislike their persons as their ill carriage. To rule and
govern this sort of People by harsh and rugged means, except one has a recourse
to Prudence, and takes its measures, one may easily fall into dangerous
Extremities.

The Fourth Discourse.
That the Art of Governing States and Kingdoms has its dependence upon Prudence.
WE can never see any thing more Illustrious in the world, then Kings; they
are the Suns of the Earth, the Arbitrators of Mankind, the Rulers of their
People, and the visible Divinities whom they Adore. Fortune, seems to betyed to
their Wills, and according to the passions that animate them, they make their
Kingdoms miserable or fortunate. Their Anger is constantly the forerunner of
Death, and if they are offended, it is the sacrifice of some Life that must
appease them. But their goodness makes the Subjects felicity, they esteem
themselves happy under a Prince's conduct that is mild and courteous, they
receive his Commands with respect, and his Words are no less sacred to them
then his Laws and Injunctions. Nothing can be seen in their Persons, but what
begets Veneration, and represents this Puissance primitive from whence they
borrow their Authority.

But to administer so absolute a charge, Qui regit, majestatem suam tuetur non
tam severitate vultus, quam morum rectitudine. August. lib. 5. de civit. Dei.
as to render ones self worthy the name of a Sovereign, it is requisite that
there be qualities more then ordinarily eminent in him, that he exceed the rest
of Men in his Perfections as well as in Grandeur. The Examples of Princes is a
light that shines into all their Subjects, a burning Mirroir that reflects upon
their hearts, filling it with Virtue or Vice, as they themselves are, just or
debauched. For what people is there that count it not their glory to imitate
their Sovereigns? and reckon Lawful and Authoritative whatsoever they remark in
His Person? As they believe he is the Soul of the Republic over which he
rules, they admit of all his Movements, and count it an honor that it is
permitted them to imitate his Actions. Do we not see the imperfections of
Princes become the faults of their Subjects, what offends the one, wounds the
other, the evil that gives the former a diversion, is agreeable to the latter,
and not distinguishing between good and bad Actions, they think they may close
with any thing that they authorize by their Example. It concerns Kings to be
Virtuous, if they would not bring down upon their heads the curses of Heaven,
and render themselves responsible for all the disorders of their People.

But Piety would be little benificial to them, if they were not Just and
Upright, and did not observe the Faith given to their Nieghbor, Non decent
Stultum verba composita, nec principem labium m^ntiens. Proverb. 7.
after they had paid their duties to their Creator. Perfidiousness, is the
crime of base Spirits, never entering but into the hearts of infamous persons,
and for any to be unfaithful to their promises, they must first absolutely
renounce their Honor. Every time a Prince goes aside from His word, or finds
out any circuitous Tricks and Evasions to null His Contracts, He shows a
vanity that lesse^s His Grandeur, and discovers His Fear, or want of Power. Who
will give any heed to Their Promises, that have once found them false and
deceitful? And how can They assure Their People that They will support them for
the future, if They are accounted faulty in Their Opinions? Truth is the
Appanage of Crowned Heads, Kings ought to be the Lovers as well as the
Defenders of It, and they no less hazard their Reputation when they are
Unfaithful to their Enemies, then to their Allies. If They write Patents with
Their own Hands, who will credit them? Or, who will receive them, if they send
Ambassadors? It Is hard to deal with persons that have no Faith, and that esteem
nothing honorable, but what is for their advantage. Fraud, is unworthy the
Majesty of Kings, and they cannot make use of it, but they must betray their
Fear, or else acquire to themselves the Ignominious title of a Liar. They must
be of the Nature of Scorpions that hide their Venom in their Tail, and have
their after Thoughts and mental Reserves when concerned to treat with Honor.

If Princes ought to be true in their Words, they ought not to be less just in
their Actions; their Authority does not exempt them from the Laws, and though
they be the Authors of them, they cannot violate them publicly without
incurring the Indignation of their People. The excess of their Power is a Mark
of their Dependence, and if they may execute whatever they have a mind to, it
is forbidden them to will any thing but what they ought. Justice, Qui regit,
Majestatem suam tuctur non tam severitat^ vult^^s quam morum rectitudine.
August. lib. 5. de civit, Dei.
has an Excellence above that of Diadems, it judges of Kings as well as of
their Subjects, and appeals always from their Tribunals to Themselves, when
they have offended it. It behooves them to follow the Orders they have made, if
they will command with Equity; to submit to the Laws that they have prescribed
to others, and to establish them in their Hearts rather by their Example then
by their Words and Writings.

They would easily execute this Design, would they but reduce their Ordinances
to a Reasonable Number, and not multiply them without an evident Necessity.
Laws, are the Medicaments of States, and as the quantity of Remedies disorder
the natural Bodies, so multitude of Laws bring Confusion to the bodies
Politic. It Is their excessive Number that begets all our Quarrels, which
ingages us in tedious Suits, and often causes our ^euds to be perpetual. It Is
their Number that feeds the Avarice of Lawyers, and that furnishes these
Blood-suckers with Tricks and Devises to filch our Purses. It Is their Number
authorizes Injustice in Magistrates, that stagger Judges, and makes them find
in their Codes and Pandects matter enough to favor the most feeble and guilty
Causes. It Is their Number depopulates Countries, wastes Armies, decays and ruins
Traffic to fill up the Courts of Justice, imploys so many loose Fellows in
Jarrs and Bramblements, and renders Tribunals, the Retreats of Pirates and
Robbers. The excess of good things is not always wholesome, and I question
whether Vice is more pernicious to a Commonwealth, then multitude of Laws.
Both do debauch Consciences, corrupt Manners, trouble Society, and raise up
Disorders and Enmities in States in the midst of Peace.

It were well then that a Monarch suffered but few Laws in His Kingdom, if He
would avoid all these disorders, and content Himself with those He has received
from His Ancestors, if He would keep His Subjects in good Intelligence. But as
Justice is the happiness of States, and Laws the more sacred, the less
profitable to it, if not executed with Rigor and Severity, Princes ought to
watch over their Majestrates, and see if those Subalterne Powers do act with
Equity. They ought to bethink themselves that they are God's Ministers, that
they hold His judgments in their hands, and are not exalted above the quality
of other Men, but to chastize Offenses and exercise Justice. This is an
employment annexed to their Puissance, and they cannot discharge themselves
thereof without renouncing their Dignity. They ought to fillet down their Eyes
to have no respect to Persons, but whosoever should dare to sin against them,
ought to be esteemed their Enemies, and they profane their Majesty's in their
partiality, by making one and the same Action in two different Persons, become
both Innocent and Criminal.

The Third TREA-TISE. OF TEMPERANCE.
The First Discourse.
Of the Nature of Temperance.
THe inferior sort of People could never yet conceive that Wise Men got any
Advantage by Afflictions, that they received any satisfaction at its approach,
and that those which grieved the Body, could transmit Delight and Pleasure into
the Soul. What^ say they, have Contraries allied themselves in His Person, and
do Torments cease being sensible, because they are supported and upheld by
Virtue? Effects have still relation to their principles, and it is to mistake
the nature of things, to make 'em depend on causes to which they are opposite.
Some Philosophers have had the same Sentiments of Temperance, they can scarce
comprehend that it produces Pleasure; since it is still opposing of it, and
labors as much as can be to o'rthrow and ruin it.

But yet these two Paradoxes are true, and it will be sufficient to give a
Cursory Explanation of them, that their Evidence might be the more clear and
manifest. The wise Man is sensible of Joy in the midst of Torments, because he
is wholly retired in his Soul, does not at all communicate with his Body, and
places all his Glory and Felicity in his Virtue. Temperance, gives birth to his
contentment, in her resisting of Pleasure, retrenching of Disorders, and
submitting her self to the Laws of Reason. For, Temperance is nothing else but
a Controuling Power that She as Sovereign has over the concupiscible Appetite,
which governs those passions that are most agreeable, and which gives us
satisfaction from their Moderation or their Overthrow. She represses the
Desires, and suffers not those Rovers to take their flights out of our Selves.
She restrains Hope, and does not permit the ambitious seeking of Goods, which
are prejudicial or unprofitable to us. She retains Love, prescribes Laws to
that Tyrant, and qualifying its fury, she keeps it from raising up Tempests
that might be a trouble to our Repose. But her chief work is to oppose
Pleasure, to suppress its unjust Violence, and to hold the most dangerous of
our Passions to its Duty. She is a Persecuter of infamous Pleasures, and
knowing they are Scandalous, and dare not produce themselves, she chastizes
them in the persons of their Slaves, she moderates the lawful Ones, and forbids
the too frequent use of them, and prevents those things that are permitted us
from engaging us in Sin.

The Husband is not always in safety in the embraces of his Wife, the excess of
his love may render him criminal, and it matters little that Marriage
authorizes his Liberty, since that Intemperence may make him impudent, he ought
to love her, but not to be her Idolater; it is fit his approaches be as
respectful as they are free, and that he pursues in his entertainments, the
Rules of Moderation, and not the motions of Lust and Concupiscence. He runs the
risque of wounding his Conscience, when he is immoderate in his Pleasures, and
of losing the name of a Husband, and taking up that of an Adulterer. Shame is
ne^ver seperable from Moderation; it is her Defense as well as her Friend, and
she is easily turned into Stupidity or Impudence, when she is deprived of her
Succor. A Civil Behavior makes up a great part of her Glory, it inspires in
her, an Aversion to every thing that offends it, and does not suffer her Lovers
such pleasures as may oblige them to Repentance. So that we must be afraid of
Infamy if we would be Temperate, and have an horror to do any thing in secret,
which would shock our Modesty and orderly Deportment.

As Temperance imitates Prudence in her conduct, showing us the good things we
ought to choose, and the evil things it would become us to avoid; She would
have our Resolutions firm, and not to make any Proposals to our selves, but
such as we fully purpose to accomplish. Many have engaged themselves in
shameful Pleasures, because they flatter their Designs, and have made them
Unchaste by being desirous to combat with Volupty. They have submitted to that
they thought to conquer, and not foreseeing the Mischiefs that might befall
them, they have made of their pretended Slaves, their true Lords and Masters.
Distempers are for the most part the fruits of this Imprudence; it is that which
fills Hospitals, and discovers there so many repr^achful Martyrs, and which
obliges all Men to detest their vi^es, and have a horror for their Persons.

Reason, is the Directress of Pleasure, we must follow her rules to enjoy it
without Regret, and look upon as unlawful for us, whatever she condemns or
disapproves. The privation of Pleasure is often advantageous to us, and as
there are but few reasonable ones, we dai^y find great satisfaction in
conquering and subduing them.

From all this Discourse it is easy to conclude, that we love Temperance, not
because she is Austere, and in perpetual war with Pleasure, but because she is
the Tutress of Prudence, that cuts off those pleasures that are either
Superfluous or Criminal, and instructing us how to stand out against them, she
makes our joyful satisfaction arise from our victory,

The Second Discourse;
That Sobriety maintains the health of the Body with Pleasure.
IF Eating to Excess be not the greatest of Vices, Hos ventr^ obedientes,
animalium loco numeremus, non Hominum. Senec. Epist. 60.
it is the most Infamous and Shameful; it brings Man to become Bestial, it
takes away Liberty after it has robbed him of his Reason, and some have justly
questioned, if that person still deserved to bear the name of a Man, who has
taken upon himself the qualities of Irrational Animals. For as he is always
bowing down toward the Earth, he has no other thoughts but for things below,
his Belly is the Divinity he ^everes, and he counts nothing deserves his
diligent search but what will glut and satisfy his sordid desires. But that
which contents him, dishonors him also, the excess of his Eating and Drinking,
renders him Stupid, and blinding his Reason, equals his condition to that of
loathsome Beasts.

Though these Reproaches are Shameful, he nevertheless would have them True,
and that Man should be more irregular in his Inclinations, then the bruit
Beasts in their Appetites. Those eat not but when they are oppressed by Hunger,
nor do they drink, but when Heat has caused a Drowth in their bodies; and all
Objects become indifferent to them, when they cease to provoke their desires.
But Man is an unsatiable Monster, he is never wearied but perpetually Cramming,
he is still calling for his Viands though he is but just before sated with
them, and the Wine he is continually swilling himself with, does not so much
serve to content his Passion, as to sharpen it. An Acre of Land is sufficient
to nourish many Oxen, and those Beasts that are eating most part of the day,
can find enough in one Field of a small compass to sustain their lives. One
Wood keeps many Elephants, and those heavy lumps of Flesh, that have so vast a
paunch, meet there with Food enough to fill them up. But nothing is capable to
satisfy Man's Hungry appetite; after he has depopulated the Earth, forced its
entrails to afford him Viands and turned its Excrements into Nurture, he is
presently for the Sea, penetrates into the Abysms of it, and spares nothing of
all that Nature has there hid, to satisfy and appease his insatiable Gluttony.

Temperance, which Glories in attacquing this Monster, instructs us to reform
these disorders, and not to extend our desires beyond things necessary. She
would have Nature be our Mistress in the management of our lives, not to set
about any thing that she disapproves, but let her Conduct be our Instruction,
and as she rejects those services of Meats that are superfluous, we should be
contented with her Provision for us. She condemns Debauches, for they destroy
the Health, change the Temper and Constitution of the Body, and cause disorders
in all its parts. Impudicity, is, a thing annexed to this immoderate Feeding,
those two Vices are never separated, and it is almost a Prodigy, to see a Man
chaste that is a lover of Good-Cheer. Diseases proceed from the inordinacy of
Feeding, the crudities of the Stomach, the pains of the Head, and the dizziness
of the Brain, would be unknown in the world, if Feasts and Banquets were not
the unhappy causes of them. On the contrary, Sobriety smothers these Vices in
the Cradle, it prevents their disorders, and is equally the defense of
Chastity, and the companion of an honest and virtuous Life. It keeps the Body
in health, maintains a good Intelligence between its Members, and according to
its humors, it makes its Passions become obedient and orderly. Maladies have
only respect to those that live not according to its Rules; Grief and Pain is
the partage of those that are Intemperate, and when Infirmities weaken Man's
Body, the Gout torturing his Nerves, the Fever filling his Veins with burning
fire, the Chollick tormenting his Bowels, we may justly say, that he himself is
the cause of all these Evils, or that he does derive them from his Ancestors.

Wine is a gift from Heaven, as well as a present from Earth; the Poets make it
the Parent of Pleasure, the enemy of Sadness, and an innocent Magician, that
enlightening their minds, serves them as a Guide to discover the Wonders of
Nature. Its Heat contributes to the conserving of our Health, its Spirits
animate and enliven our Bodies, and moderating the qualities of those Elements
of which it is made, keeps its strength with Delight and Pleasure. But the
immoderate use of it o'rthrows all this Beautiful and Comely Order, it destroys
the Memory, and causes this Guardianess of Sciences to lose the Deposita which
it was entrusted with. It darkens the Judgment, perverts the Understanding, and
those messengers which are so acquired to us then, give us but unfaithful
accounts, when they are Obfuscated by those Vapors. The Blood that nourishes
our Bodies, becomes then a Contagion, it corrupts all the members that it gives
heat and warmth to, and leaves in it nothing that it does not weaken, if not
consume. Monstrum habetur libido sine gula. Tertullian, lib. de jejunio.
Someties it begets in us such Flames as prove our Destruction, by engaging us
into infamous Enormities that are not to be mentioned but with Horror. A
Drunkard is the most unhappy of all Men, if sometimes he is exempt from Crimes,
he is not free from the torments that accompany them. He is Agitated by Furies
even when he sleeps, his Repose is interrupted by Phantasms and Apparitions,
all that appears to him, affrights and terrifies him, and one needs not trouble
themselves with Chastising his Intemperance, since that he bears his
Executioner in his own breast.

If the excess of Eating and Drinking alter the disposition of his Body, if
Debauches do disorder his Temper, and produce all these Maladies to carry him
to his Grave; the Delicacy of his Viands is not more Pernicious to him, and
though it is the more to be excused, it is not the less dangerous. Those Dishes
dressed with so much Cost and Sumptuousness, decay the natural heat, and
spreading a malignant fiery influence into all the Veins, consume that Radical
Moisture which is the principle of Life. Who is ignorant that the weakness of
the Body, paleness of the Face, and stinking Breath are not the effects of
Delicacies, which depraving the Stomach, leaves therein such Superfluities as
do infect it? Health is the daughter of Abstinence, one ought to be Sober, to
be full of Strength and Vigor, and he very unprofitably hopes to see the Heat
agree with the moisture and coldness of his Body, who is never but filling it
with curious and studied Rarities. How happy was the Age that knew no Cooks,
but looked upon them as the Adulterers of Nature, as the enemies of Health, and
the Sorcerers that inchant Men to destroy them. How pleasantly would he live
that contented himself with the Provisions of the Earth, that made his Meals of
common Viands, and that fed himself on what he found without Search and
Difficulty, and what he might purchase without Artifice.

As his body is disposed, that the functions of his Soul should be sedate, he
wants no Potions to purge him, Sobriety is to him instead of Physic, and
without any succor then that of Nature, it conserves his Health, and cures him
of all sorts of Maladies.

That which advances a sober Man's Happyness, and puts him above the Powers of
the Earth, is, that he is unapprehensive of the Disgraces of Fortune, and that
he is as steady and assured in Poverty as when he does abound in Riches. For
what has he to fear, that studies, but to satisfy the necessities of Nature,
and in all places finds enough wherewithal to quench his Thirst, and appease
his Hunger that is pressing upon him? None but the Effeminate are afraid of
Misfortunes, and who never think themselves happy unless they swim in Delights
and Pleasures.

The Third Discourse.
That the Coelibate or Single Life is accompanied with Pleasure.
THe World owes its Conservation to Marriage; it is that which began humane
Society, which has populated Countries, filled Cities, formed States, and given
Inhabitants of the most remote parts of the Earth. Our first Parent was engaged
to it a little after His Creation, his alliance preceded his consent, and no
sooner was he established in his Earthly Paradise, but he saw himself obliged
to have one part of him the Object of his Affection.

Almighty God, who wrought this Miracle, fetched the Woman from his side during
his Ecstasy, that so those two Persons should make but one and the same All,
that their Bodies should be but one and the same Flesh, and that their Minds
should aspire but to one and the same felicity. Marriage is an image of the
Divinity, the Unity does not Derogate from the plurality of their Persons, they
are but one though they be two, and though they are of a different Sex, they
still have the same Nature. This advantage heightens the glory of Marriage, and
there is no person but would boast that he resembled his Creator, if he was not
pursued with so vast a retinue of Miseries, and if there was not an absolute
necessity to be Miserable, because he was of the Number of those that were
Married.

The Wife is as it were, Mulieri quoque dixit, multiplicabo aerumnas tuas, and
conc^ptus tuos; Sub potestate vi^i eris, and ipse dominabitur tui. Genesis 3.
the bought Servant of her Husband, she loses her Liberty in becoming his
Spouse, and she obliges her self to serve and obey him, from the time that she
promises her self to be faithful to him. As she makes but one and the same
substance with him, she ought to observe all his Motions, be pleased in his
Joys, grieved in his Afflictions, and be a faithful Mirroir to represent in her
Person all the passions that influence him. The Portion she brings exempts her
not from this Servitude. She is poor as soon as she renounces her Liberty, and
unjustly usurps the name of Mistress, since she has nothing in her dispose.
That which still increases her unhappiness, and renders her poverty more
evident, is, that she is forbid to receive any Presents but in the presence of
her Husband, and must not accept of any private Sacrifices without making her
self suspected, and hazarding her Repution. But though this Restraint should
not be fixed to her condit^on, and this Alliance she contracts with her Husband
should not prejudice her Liberty; yet she cannot secure her self against
Troubles, Bini sunt cum uxore jucundissimi di^s, alter quo ducitu^, alter quo
mortua essertur. Hipponactes, apud Stobaeum Se^. 69.
her being great with Child, is Incompatible with her Health, she is exposed to
a thousand dangers during the time she carries her Fruit, she runs the ^isque
of losing her own life as often as she gives it to her Child. The vows she
makes for her deliverance, and the horror the name of Mother gives her, are the
irreproachable evidences of her apprehensions, which make her often repent her
wishes, and prefer Sterility to a fruitfulness that carries along with it so
much both of Pain and Danger.

But consider her in some estates, and she is never freed from the suspicions
of her Husband; He narrowly pries into her actions, he examines the Sense of
her words, he watches the motions of her Eyes, and often makes innocent
Divertisements to pass for Criminal and blameable Entertainments; Oh! what
slavery is it to be obliged to live constantly with a Man who is possessed with
the spirit of Jelousy, that mistru^^s her Fidelity, fears her being unconstant,
and often teaches her to be unfaithful to him by his diffidence? That person
must needs be an enemy to liberty that is in love with Servitude, and must hate
her self, to be willing to be put into the Puissance and governance of another.

Though the Husband take on him the Grandeur of a Sovereign, yet is he not in a
more happy condition then his Wife; if he sets her Laws, he is often
constrain^d to receive some too, and if he lays Commands upon her, he is forced
to be subject to her humors, if he would have them fulfilled. Pride is natural
to that Sex, and cannot be suppressed but by Violence, he must either become
her Slave or her Tyrant, to render her obedient. Though her perfections are
charming, yet to be constantly possessed with them, they become unattractive, and
cease to be pleasing when the Man must be forced to have no other
Entertainment. Whatever Beauty he brings into his house, he quickly spies some
blemish in it, her Brisk and Airy humors proves troublesome, and he very
indifferently looks upon her who before was the object of his felicity.
Marriage is like old Age, all wish to arrive ^o it, and as they think that
Wisdom is a Label fixed to the number of years, so they reckon that Pleasure is
the Heritage of Married persons. But scarce have they committed Matrimony ever
they condemn their Vows, and are mad almost to see them change into Effects,
and desire to be delivered from a society which is as disadvantagious to them,
as it is importune and troublesome.

Now Continence happily frees both Persons from these Miseries, and leaving
them in a natural condition, she assures them against all things that may
prejudice their Liberty or Repose. It discharges them from the concerned Care
of bringing up Children, of providing Masters to instruct them, of finding them
Callings according to their humors, and of keeping them in respect after they
have left them to themselves. None doubts the Pleasure there is in being
deprived from so many Disquiets, and that a Man may count himself happy, who
has no Wife to please, no Children to bring up, nor Family to take care for.

Some persons have thought that Viduity was a Martyr, that the pleasure which
preceded it was its torment, and it was difficult to abstain from a Delight to
which one was accustomed, Quid some nias teneros a^^us, and exquisi i^s edu^^tos
d^lici^s longum (...) s^r^e Ma^^imo ^um. (...) Epist. 41.
without a great Affliction. That a Woman might pass for a Prodigy, that is
Chaste after Marriage, who circumscribes her Affection to the Tomb of her
Husband, and yields not her self up to the prevalency of her frailty, all the
while that the blood runs warm in her Veins, and her age authorizes a second
Alliance. In short, it seems that Nature is her Tyrant, the pleasure she has
tasted becomes her Enemy, her inclinations exercise the office of Executioners,
and her most agreeable motions conspire to be her Torment. But the reasons that
are brought to forbid a second Marriage, are but little better then
insignificant and Nonsense, to give Epicurus satisfaction; This Philosopher
condemns it in all his Writings and though he believes it may be permitted, yet
he neither judges it honest or reasonable. He can never persuade himself that a
Woman had any Affections for her former Husband, who ingages her self to
another, and he accounts her Infamous every time that she proves unfaithful to
him. He instances to us in beathenish Women, who have preferred Death to the
bonds of Marriage, and chosen rather to burn in the Fire, then to lose their
Liberty a second time. It Is to be ignorant of the miseries of her first
condition, to aspire at the same again, and to be insensible she has ever been
unhappy to entertain the Addresses of her new Votaries after she has once been
re^eased from the grievances of Marriage. But peradventure her first Affections
have been very Fortunate, and she found in the person of her Husband rather an
Amorous Ga^lant then a Domi^eering Master: Who then can assure her that he who
shall succeed him, will have the same passion for her? Since that which ought
to feed it, will be dying daily, her Charms will diminish, her Beauty languish,
and all the Pains she can possibly be at to conserve it, have not power enough
to keep her from growing Old. A Husband looks not upon another's leavings but
with Disgust, and he without any Regret can see that Face decay, of which he
has not cropped the Flower. If her Marriage has been Unfortunate, dares she
venture her Person a second time, and run the risque of being miserable all the
days of her life? Surely she must have lost her Senses that is in love with
Slavery, and purchase the pleasure of a Beast at the expense of her Liberty.

If Heaven has given her Children, let it be all her care to bring them up, and
be afraid always to give them an Enemy instead of a cherishing and tender
Father, and to make a Tyrant succeed her and their lawful Sovereign. Let her
reckon that those she will have by a second Husband, will be continually making
a division in her house, the former will be still an Eyesore to them, and
she will often be obliged to hate them for fear of being suspected that she has
yet a kindness for the Father of them. How happy then is the Coelibate Life, if
compared to Marriage, and how redevable are those persons to the goodness of
Heaven, who are exempt from those Frailties which engage even the greatest part
of Mankind to it! For if Virginity be a Grace, Continence is a Virtue, it is an
aspiring to that Sanctity that preferrs the Spirit to the Flesh, and to conte^n
the Inhabitants of the Earth, to pursue the intelligences which the Hea^'ns are
employed in. This happiness did seem so considerable in past Ages, that Women
were seen to defend it at the peril of their Lives, who have been less afraid
of the company of Executioners, then of that of their Lovers, and who have
chosen a shameful death, rather then fall into their Embraces. Marriage is the
partage of those who are either Incontinent or Slaves, and that person must
needs lose his Liberty, or his Reason, who will engage himself to it, without
an unavoidable Necessity.

The Fourth Discourse.
That there is a great Glory and Satisfaction in forgiving Injuries.
What high Opinion soever I have conceived of the Doctrine of Aristotle, and
what Esteem soever I make of the Judgment of his Disciples, I cannot yet be
persuaded that the Passions can be profitable to Man, and that those which so
often make Revolts against Reason, can favor the party and side of Virtue. For
as they have no other guide then Opinion, they easily slip into Disorders, and
following the Counsels of this Fantastical and Hair-brained Mistress, they
almost continually engage those whom they possess into dangerous Extremities.
Love, even brings us to become Foolish, it seduces our Judgment after it has
abused our Credulity, and overturning the order of Nature, it submits us to a
Sex that is inferior to us, Griefs, are the abaters of our Courage, and
Exasperating the causes of our Vexations, they insensibly conduct us to
Despair. Envy makes us Miserable, it gives us our punishment in the prosperity
of our Neighbor, and by an ingenious Tyranny, it makes the cause of our Grief
to proceed from the occasion of his Love.

But of all the motions of our Soul, none is more cruel then Revenge; it is an
Aspick that gna^s our Heart, a Fury that bewitches our Spirit, and that makes
us taste the greatest part of the Poison we prepare for our Enemies. Joy steals
softly into our Souls, and we think our selves happy when it arrests the
violence of our Desires. Hope entertains us not but with good things to come,
and it leaves off Soliciting us to their pursuit, when they cease to be
further useful or agreeable to us. Jealousy and Grief, have Charms to draw us;
if they afflict us, they likewise comfort us, and know so well how to flatter
our Inclinations, that we become their Slaves with Pleasure and Contentment:
But Revenge is always Fell and Cruel, it gets possession of our Soul with
Violence, nor stays it there but with Dispite and Spleen, and animated with the
Fire that consumes it, it thinks of nothing but Murders and Homicides.

The virtue that keeps Passions from taking root, and that represses these
indiscr^et Sallies which transform themselves so often into Vices, arrests the
fury of Vengeance, and equally condemns its Insolence and Baseness. It teaches
us that Offenses are but imaginary, and we must be very Weak or Proud to be
sensible of the Outrages of Impious Persons, and though Injuries should be done
us, and the authors of them should be our professed Enemies, yet should we be
obliged not to hate them, but to stifle in us all thoughts of Revenge.
Genero^ity invites us to Pardon; it is a mark of Courage to forget Outrages,
and to do Voluntarily and out of Kindness, what Sovereigns often do by
Constraint and Compulsion. They never punish an Affront done against their
proper Persons without Infamy; the Judgment they give upon it, dishonors their
Puissance, and they lose the name of Judges, to take that of Culpable, when
they descend from their Grandeur to revenge themselves of particular Injuries.
If they are Generous, they love their Enemies, their Virtue makes them
respected, and with out any difficulty do they raise them up to public Charges
and Employs, after they have treated them like Rebels. They judge of their
Fidelity, by what they have testified to their Adversaries, and turning their
aversion into Love, they recompense their Rebellion and their Infidelity.

Porus had not obtained Alexander's Friendship but by this way, and he had not
seen his Empire enlarged but because he had before opposed his Victory. This
Conqueror let himself be wholly vanquished by his Valor, he lo^'d a Man that
had indeavor'd what he could to destroy him, Aegrum curavit, ac si pro (...)
pugnisset, mox done vit ampliori Regao quam tenuit.
and following the motions of his Generosi^y, he made his Favorite of the most
Opiniastre of his Enemies. This action we admire in this Conqueror, and which
has procured him so many Elogies in History ought to be the common practice of
Christians, they should cherish those that persecute them, Curtius.
and look upon with the same Eye, both Favors and Outrages, and deceiving the
Sentiments of Nature, make the object of their Hatred, the subject of their
Love. The Gospel subsists but by the observance of this Maxim, we must forgive,
to be imitators of the Son of God, and do good to his Calumniators, if we would
hope to have a part in his Glory. Faith is unprofitable to us without this
Perfection, its light serves but for our ruin, and if not animated with
Charity, it is not so much our Guide as our Condemnation.

But though the Gospel should be unknown in the World, and that this God-man,
who came into it to establish Peace, should not have commanded us this Virtue,
Nature ought to make it familiar to us, and to learn us that Revenge is nothing
else but the vice of the Cyclops and Charybdes. Man naturally is an Enemy to
Cruelty, he cannot enter into Choler and Rage without doing himself a
Violence, and he degenerates into Bestial, and takes upon him those qualities
every time he breaks forth into fury against his Neighbor. There is glory in
pardoning an Offense, when it is Weakness and Cowardice to revenge it. This
ambition is Commendable, and that person may boast that he is above his
Enemies, who despises their injuries. It is true, this Perfection is not much
relieved, and there wants but a mean Virtue to receive with indifference an
Outrage coming from the mouth or hand of a Wicked Person: But Generosity goes
further, it would have us do good to those that have hurt us, to oblige them to
Repentance by our favors and kindness, and to make their Malice be the rule of
our Liberality.

Man ought to be a friend to Clemency, and to persuade himself that he labors
his Happyness, when he remits an injury, that Pleasure is fixed to virtuous
actions, and that none is more solid then that he derives from the love of his
Enemies. That wise King who is so celebrated in the Scripture, for having
triumphed over his Passions, and taught Moderation to His Subjects by His own
Example, was of this opinion, when he recommended the life of Ab alom to His
Soldiers, and forbad them to touch his Person in their re-encounters, Servate
mihi puerum Absalon.
or in the Battle. This Insolent Son, after he had abused his Power, embrued
his hands in the blood of his Brother Amnon, forced the Palace Royal, and
obliged his Father to a shameful flight, had yet so much Temerity as to have
designs upon his life, and to meditate a Parricide to set the Crown upon his
own head. And yet David did command Joab the Leader of his Army to spare him,
to have a care of his Life, and to put him safe again into his Arms. He had
learnt the great Advantage there was to be conquered by Mildness, that Revenge
is always infamous, and one cannot be cruel to his enemy, without offending his
Conscience or Reputation. Nature does not oppose this Sentiment but in the
minds of those that are weak and cowardly, and notwithstanding some
difficulties that may be met with, they are easy to be overcome by those who
are lovers of Virtue, and who have proved its force and power.

The Fourth TREATISE. OF FORCE.
The First Discourse.
Of the Nature of Force.
IF nothing in the World is more Bloody and Cruel, then Victory, there is not
any thing more Splendid and Glorious. All Orators are busied in making its
Panegyric, and those persons that are so lavish in their Praises, would be
very barren and narrow in their Expressions, if they had no Battles to relate
of, no Overthrows to describe, nor Triumphs to proclaim. Conquerors look upon
it as the fruit of their Travels, they speak of it as the Masterpiece of their
Courage, and of a good they bring clear away from their Enemies, through their
Prudence and Conduct. Politicians consider it as the support of States, the
glory of their Army, the defense of their Frontiers, and as the inhancement of
their Reputation, and Wealth. But as this advantage is Pompous, so it is
difficult to acquire, to deserve the name of Victorious, we must engage our
selves in Wars, expose our persons to infinite Dangers, and abandon to the
Discretion of Fortune, both our Liberty and Life.

Now Force and Magnanimity ^urmounts all these difficulties, it glories in
seeking out the Enemy, in setting upon Afflictions, in faceing Death, and in
making up to whatever appears Terrible in the world. I^ we will credit a Roman
Philosopher, it is a generous virtue exalting us beyond a capacity to ^ear: a
Science that teaches us to beat back Dangers, contemn Travels, and provoke unto
Sufferings and Calamities. For Evil is the object of this Noble Habitude, and
it cannot be said to subsist in nature, if it has not Enemies to combat with,
and Difficulties to conquer. Some have confounded Force with Valor, they have
thought that Courage was reserved for Conquerors, and that one ought to be
constantly in Battles, and gaining Kingdoms, to merit the name of Mighty and
Victorious. But Certainly they have but imperfectly known the nature of Force;
the most Glorious Actions are not always the most Dangerous. An affliction is
often more difficult to get the master of, then an Enemy; and I question if a
Man deserves not more to be Renowned for enduring Death with a firm resolution
in his Bed, then for despising it in a Battle.

Who is there but knows that the valor practiced in Armies, is more ^ure and
true in Beasts then in Men? that those of the Female kind are as capable of it
as the Males? and that both of them do strive with as earnest a contention for
the possession of a Meadow, as Kings do for the Conquest of a Nation? But there
is this difference, that the force of Beasts is true and real, and that of Men
oft-times but in show and appearance, the one is Natural, the other is mixed
with Artifice, the one purely regards Profit or Glory, the other ingages us in
Perils, but ^^ough the fear of Death, or apprel (...) of the Poverty which
threatens us. Who observes the addresses of Humane Valor, wil^^te that it is
but a Sage dejection and weakness of mind that fore-sees the Danger, so as to
avoid it, that overcomes one Passion by another, and that suffers one Mischief
to secure himself from a greater. To what purpose serve the managing of Horses,
and the Hall of Arms, but to teach us how to turn tail with a good Grace, and
to become an honorable Coward? there is no doubt but a Shop-prentice might
overcome the most Courageous, if that Valor consists in taking his time,
keeping himself in Posture, and in observing all those rules that teach us to
beat back our Adversary. But true Valor despises Artifice, it considers it to
be the evil, but not the means of escaping, and it is as little accustomed to
ward off Blows as to fear them. The Lacedaemonians have bannish'd all masters of
Arms out of their States, and chose rather to be redevable for their victory to
Nature, then Industry. There is none but will commend the valor of that person
who dares engage with a Bear, cope with a Lion, and grapple with a wild Boar
that is coming with full force and power upon him; because Art and Cunning has
no part in this combat, but he makes an abso^ute Exposal of himself to the fury
of his enemy.

As Valor rejects all craft, Validum quid est veritas. and dolus imbecilis ubi.
so it is an enemy to all Circumventions; it will not have a victory that shall
be Dishonorable, it fancies it derogates from its Grandeur when it has recourse
to Fraud for the obtaining of it. Que. Theophilac. ad luc. 12.
It hopes to conquer, as soon as it begins its combats by Counsel and Arms, and
looks upon it self inferior to its Adversary, to make use of Stratagems to
subdue him. Fraud is a discovery of weakness, and we must confess our selves
conquered when we are fain to use shameful means to arrive at our designs.

If Force should be without disguise, Fortitude est virtus justa contemnens:
aut Scientia periculorum repellendorum, ex^^piendorum, provocan. lorum.
and if it should contemn those low subtleties that may give it advantage, it
is also necessary that it should be illuminated in its Conduct, that it should
know the danger it has to surmount the difficulties that may hinder its
Victory, and that it find out ways of vanquishing, or at least diverting them.
For Force is not a blind Temerity that loves danger, or that ingages its self
in it, but upon necessity; but a Science that teaches us to distinguish Evils,
Sense. de ^^n^fic. lib, 2. cap. 34.
to separate them from their contrary, and to prefer the imaginary and
apparent ones to those that are effectual and true. That Man is not to be
accounted valiant, that is pushed on by the violence of his Choler, or relying
upon the strength of his body, praecipitates himself into dangers, and seems to
be afraid of nothing, only because he would be thought above the power of being
frightened and shaken; but well may he, who, knowing the evil, and abhorring it,
does yet attacque it with Courage, and put himself in a posture of giving it a
Repulse, according as it needs, and the occasion will suffer him.

A valiant Man's engagements ought also to be Just, he should not fight but for
the defense of Equity, and he should rather regard the subject of his
Enterprises, then their recompense. Victory is not always the reward of Valor,
the most Courageous are generally the most unfortunate, and oft-times they are
forced to yield to their Enemies, who have neither their conduct nor courage.
To teach us that true Valor resides in the heart, that it is rather a product
of the Soul then Body, and that he may call himself no longer Victorious, then
whilst he is braving of Dangers, despising Death, and making head to his
Enemies.

From all that has been said, it is easy to infer that force as well as what
accompanies it, is obtained for Pleasure, that it does not give Battles but to
obtain it, that it is as well its end as its recompense, and that it never
attacques Troubles but to procure us Pleasure. For Evil is odious, it shocks
our inclinations instead of drawing them, and we should never resolve to
destroy it, if we did not promise to our selves joy and satisfaction from the
Defeat, Death is the terriblest of all evils, it makes a separation between the
Soul and Body, it breaks the most strict and perfect Friendships that ever were
in the world, and taking upon it the state of a Sovereign, it brings down the
goodliest works of Nature to the Dust and nothing. This snatches the dear Wise
from the arms of her most affectionate Husband, robs the Father of his (...)
only Son, and brings sadness into Families, and desolation into Kingdoms. But,
have we overcome the fear of Death, then will this Monster appear to us as a
favor from Heaven, and we shall look upon it as a way that leads us to
Felicity. Our Repose begins from its contempt, and we derive our Pleasure and
Contentment from having obtained a pre-eminence over an enemy that triumphs
over Victors and Conquerors.

The Second Discourse;
That the sufferings of Martyrs are mingled with abundance both of Profit and
Pleasure.
THose that are Idolizers of their bodies, and think they offend a Divinity
when they do any thing to hurt them, cannot be persuaded that Parricide can be
innocent among Christians; that a Man may lawfully conspire against his own
person, and expose his life for the glory of his Creator. They condemn all
those of Simplicity and Folly, who render themselves up to this Generous
Passion, and who abandon themselves to Executioners upon the hopes of
Recompense. What, say they, is God become a Tyrant, since he has sent his Son
upon the Earth? has he, who has Saved us, now a design to Destroy us? and will
he have us dye because he has given us our lives? he suffered for all Men, his
Death procures their Happiness, and we but unprofitably aspire to be Martyrs,
since he has expiated upon the Cross all our Offenses by the sacrifice of
himself. God is not delighted with Cruelty, he refuses the blood of Bulls and
Goats, and he is satisfied when he finds Repentance in our hearts, and hears
his Praises in our mouths.

These Reasons, Sapi^ntia immo lavit victimas suas, vel fi ios suos, Sapi^nter
jugulavit in vitam, and (...). advers Gnosticos.
though they have some semblance of Truth, only content base and abject
Spirits, who have a horror for all things that may incommode them, and who
reject the Martyr, because they know not his advantages and his pleasure. But
those, brought up in the school of the Son of God, know that Martyrdom is a
favor and not a cruelty, that if he is bleeding, yet he is dutiful, that he
comes to help our weaknesses, that he wounds us but to heal us, and that he
does not give us death, but to lead us to a life of Immortality. Tyrants are
the Ministers of Heaven, the blood they draw from our Veins, open to us the
Gates thereof, and makes us enter into it with violence. Also God proposes
Martyrdom to us under the name of a Combat, that so we may vanquish the Demon
that has overcome us, beat down him that has defeated us, and cause Glory to
succeed Infamy and Servitude. Virtue is the Dispensatrix of Honor, she
distinguishes the orders of the Happy, seperates the Widows from the Virgins,
and establishes the Martyrs in a throne above the Confessors. But where should
be this diversity, if there was an equality of Merits in Heaven? and how would
these Stars differ between themselves, if they had all one and the same beauty
and luster? Preference is the mark of Merit, not to be obtained but by Force
and Sufferings, Life must be despised here on earth, if we will pretend to
enjoy an honorable place in Heaven. So that Martyrdom is an ingenious Tyrant
that kills us to save us, and an innocent Crime, that o'rwhelms us with
Confusion, to crown us with Glory.

If we will believe Tertullian, it is an obliging Cruelty that tears away our
life to give it us again, that despoils us to make us Rich and that, making us
to be the imitators of the Son of God, assures us to have a part in his
felicity. In short, Tyrants rather deserve the name of Benefactors, then
Enemies, since they oblige in persecuting us, and it is more for our advantage
to have their hatred, then their kindness and their promises. For all the
cruelty they can invent conspires to our happiness; Torments stifle our
Passions, flames kindle our Charity, their rage is the beginning of our Merit,
and carries us up to Heaven to receive its recompense. From thence it is that
we call the passion of Martyrs their birthday, because it ingenders them to
Life, in engaging them to Death, and causes them to begin an Eternity, in
ending their miserable life.

But that which still he igntens the glory of Martyrs, and renders their death
more Illustrious, is, that they seem to add a perfection to the passion of
Jesus Christ, and to end what he begun on the Cross. Ad impleo ^a quae desunt
passionum Christi in came meai. St. Paul. ad Colloss. cap. 1.
St. Paul presumed to boast of this honor, he was assured that his afflictions
were the accomplishment of his torment, and that his dejections and his
miseries derived their Elogies from his sufferings. He knew his actions were
valuable only from the motives that begat them, that his passion might dispute
pre-eminence with his, since the cause of it was more Noble and Lofty. St. Paul
suffered for Jesus Christ, and Jesus Christ suff'red but for the World. St. Paul
was persecuted for his Saviorus sake, but the Son of God endured death for the
sake of Rebels. St. Paul combated for the glory of his Master, and Jesus Christ
was exposed to infamy and death to give liberty to Slaves. Cicatrices illae
utique invidiosae apud Christum. Ter. lib. de pudicit.
Tertullian likewise, whose Sentences are so Pompous, and weighty, has said,
the passions of Martyrs might be desired by those in Bliss, that the Son of God
might wish for them in Heaven, and that their wounds were capable of making him
jealous, if he was susceptible of this passion.

Then if Sufferings are so advantageous to Martyrs, they are not sure less
agreeable to them, if they exercise their Courages, they charm their Wills, and
if they cause pa^n and anguish in their Bodies, they fill their Souls with
delights and pleasures. G^udent pati^ntes Apostoli, quia fidentes passion^s ad
voluntatem Dei pertinere. Ter. lib. advers. Gnosticos.
They rejoice in the midst of Torments, because they rest upon their
Sovereign's word, whom they know is as true as he is powerful, and that he who
is a spectator of their combat, will be the glory and recompense of it. They
know that what they endure, is nothing comparatively to what they hope for,
that their Pain is short, and their happiness will be Eternal; that their
torments are not of many moments continuance, and the reward they look for,
will be more lasting then all the Ages yet to come. This hope relives their
Courage, charms their Griefs, confirms their Constancy, and renders them
Victorious in the midst of all their afflictions. This pleasure then must needs
be mighty, since it works such strange Effects, and makes these Champions
contemn all the sentiments of Nature. For as if Pleasure had enchanted their
minds, they still are preferring Infamy to Honor, they go into Prisons as into
places of safety, they receive Stripes as favors, they are thankful to those
Executioners that tear them in pieces, lie down on burning Coals as on beds of
Roses, and with joy they suffer the plucking out of their Eyes, cutting off
their Arms, and the distilling of their Bodies drop by drop upon flaming Coals.
The grace that works all these Miracles, is a charm that elevates their minds,
increases the strength, excites their courage, and causes them without Pain, to
triumph over the cruelties of their Tormentors, over the malice of Demons, and
over the extremity of their Tortures.

Though the quality of a Martyr be so Illustrious, and that Almighty God has
reserved it for these Heroes whom he has brought into the world, to make his
Power be admired and dreaded; yet notwithstanding all the Faithful may acquire
it, every Christian is permitted to be his own Executioner, and without
swerving from his duty, to be his own Tyrant and Persecuter. It Is not a small
torment for a Man to conquer his Passions, to pacify his Choler, to put out
those impure Flames that consume him, to bring down and humble his Pride, and
to stifle in his breast the desire of Riches and Honors. It is not the shedding
of Blood only that compleats Martyrdom, other Evils dispute this glory with it,
and that person may very well boast his being in the List and Number of
Martyrs, that afflicts his Body, that contends with Infamous Pleasures, that
patienly suffers Pains and Miseries, and that readily submits himself to that
Justice that punnishes him.

The Third Discourse.
That Patience conceals a real Joy under apparent Miseries.
IF Patience be not the most attractive and glorious of Virtues, it is that
which is most necessary; it gives Life to all the other, it assists them in
their Enterprises, and those that cause Wonders in the world would be
unprofitable or languishing, were they not aided by the power of this. Faith,
which is the Basis of Religion, and which leads our mind to the first Truth,
owes its discoveries to Patience; the Patriarchs became faithful in suffering,
and those Men, whose memory is so sacred to us, would have been unknown in the
world, had they not purchased their Faith by their Travels. Hope charms
Afflictions by her presence, and injoys in some measure, the happiness she
wishes for when she attends it with Resignation. Charity is grounded upon
constancy, she has all her beauty and merit from it, and one may assure
themselves of her faithfulness when she surmounts the difficulties that combat
with her. Repentance slackens, when deprived of her company, and easily falls
under the weight of its afflictions, when it is destitute of her succor.
Chastity is indebted to her for her Glory, she only by her favor and indulgence
triumphs over her Enemies, and it is not so much an effect of Modesty as
Patience, when she resists the weaknesses of the body, or rejects the shameful
solicitations of the dissolute and wanton. So that Patience is the perfection
of Virtues; and to possess it, is sufficient to make one Just and Faithful,
Chaste and Penitent.

But as Religion and a Holy life is almost continually miserable, and
Calamities seem to be annexed to Virtue, its spectators have a horror for it,
those who revere it, shun it likewise, and judging of its worthiness by outward
appearances, they do suspect it of Hipocrisy or Superstition. It is a hard
thing to make them believe that Man, whom Almighty God loves, should be the
object of his wrath, that he should persecute an Innocent instead of obliging
him, that he should turn his love into cruelty, and only heap up miseries and
afflictions upon him, whom he consigns for happiness in Heaven. Superabundo
gaudio in omni tribulatione nostra. St Paul. 2 ad Cor. cap. 7.
But those who are brought up in the school of Piety, know that the suffering
of the Righteous are but in appearance, that their representation takes away
their nature, and that they have nothing less then what they make the greatest
outward show of. The wise Man glories in his afflictions, and terms those
favors which others possibly call by disgraceful Appellations. That holy pride
he discovers in his actions, and that Joy which almost continually possesses
his countenance, is an evidence of the Tranquillity of his mind; Tempests do not
disturb his repose, and he seems to be never more unshaken, then when most of
all he is tossed up and down. All things have their changes in Nature, and those
bodies which are so necessary to the Conservation of others have their
Vicissitudes and their Periods. The Earth does tremble under our feet, and the
Fire or Wind which moves its Bowels, puts divisions between its parts. The Sea
is an image of inconstancy, it is scarce ever at quiet with its self, whether
the Moon causes the motion of its Waters, or whether it be the Winds which it
conceals that stir it, it never holds long in one and the same posture. The
Sun has its Eclipses, and that Planet which is the parent of Life, is sometimes
reduced to a Disappearance and an Agony. The Seasons of the Year are not always
equal, if there be some fruitful Summers, there be those likewise that are
St^rill and barren, and if there be very sharp and severe Winters, there are
some also so mild, that they resemble the pleasantness of the Spring. We have
never yet beheld any thing constant in the world, all that appears in it
dissolves its self, and one need not much to wonder at it, since even the same
principles that make them submit, conspires likewise to their ruin.

But the Joy of a wise Man is stable and permanent, it is as equal in all
Disasters, as in Prosperity; if that Accidents approach him, he is not much
concerned, and what violence soever they exercise upon his Person, they do not
so much move his Courage, as they strengthen and confirm it. He resembles those
Stars that never change their luster, but are as bright in the most Tempestuous
as in the clearest and calmest nights, and which abate nothing of their beauty
though they are berounded with Clouds and foggy Exhalations. Nothing is capable
to trouble his repose but Sin, he looks upon Health and Riches, no otherwise
then as goods that do not concern him, and as he does establish all h^^
happiness in himself, so he derives the greatest part of his glory from their
contempt and slight, Let Fortune force his Riches from him, let it reduce him
to his Scrip and Wallet, and oblige him to beg his Bread at the gates of those
that have been his Servants, he knows his Treasures are hid in Heaven, and
that it is not in the possibility of Mankind to take them from him. Let a
Tyrant bannish him out of his Country, let him separate him from his parents
and kindred, he has this assurance in him to meet with one more happy and
glorious in Heaven, and there to have God for his Father, the Saints for his
Brethren, and Angels for his Friends. Let Injustice condemn him to the Prison;
and load his body with heavy chains and shackles, he knows his Soul has ample
liberty, that it can get through Iron-gates and Chink-holes, and that all the
diligence of Jaylers can never keep it from ascending up to Heaven. Let cruel
Executioners dismember him by piece-meals, and tear away his life by exquisite
tortures, he knows his body shall resume its former order, that he shall rise
again with the Happy, and that Glory shall be the recompense of all his
sufferings and afflictions.

Who questions but that a Man is filled with Joy, Mayor est re^^ibutio L^gen^is
when he does conquer such cruel enemies, and that it is Patience that renders
him victorious over Misery, quam pauperis and mitis: plus enim gaudere in R^gno
quam habere. St. Tho. Clo. sup. Mat.
Captivity, Sufferings, and Death. Virtue is inseparable from Pleasure, the
evils which attacque it were never yet capable to part them, but she is happy
though judged most miserable. Those who fly from Affliction, very much resemble
those Children who are terribly frighted with the sight of those they love,
because they have got Vizards on, and not considering their persons, mind
nothing but the Visage, which makes them tremble. Miseries are no otherwise
then imaginarily Austere, they conceal the Pleasure under an appearance of
Evil, and he is unacqainted with their merit, who looks upon 'em but as the
enemies of his happiness. Infamous pleasures convert themselves into torments,
and our nature must needs be under a great depravation, not to be sensible of
their afflicting circumstances. But the Christian makes Sufferings become
pleasurable, he esteems himself happy when he is accounted worthy to suffer any
thing for his Savior, and Patience animating him for enduring, gives him a
fore^ast of that Joy he looks for in Heaven.

When the Son of God sent His Apostles to the Conversion of the World, he
called them his Sheep, and said He was their good Shephard, he would have them
receive this Mission as a favor, and not as they were for it so much redevable
to their Merit as to his Goodness and Bounty. Yet notwithstanding he sent these
Sheep among Wolves, he exposed them to the unmerciful fury of Tyrants, he
promised them nothing but des Croix.
Deaths and Tortures, and to encourage them in this office, he assured them
that the executing it would cause the loss both of their Honor and their Lives.
To teach us that persecution is not without its delights, that Miseries are the
nourishment of the faithful, that Torments keep virtue alive, and in breath,
and that Infamy makes up the happyness of those that are miserable.

The Fourth Discourse.
That there is satisfaction in supporting ones self up under the deformities of
the body.
What invectives soever have been made against the beauty and comeliness of
the Body, and whatever Reasons have been deduced from the writings of
Philosophers to abase its Pride; it has been yet impossible to persuade the
Women that it is dangerous, and that that which does appear as a Divinity to
our Eyes, can be destructive and pernicious to Humane society. They have
recourse to the commendations of their Idolaters to authorize its Empire, they
say that it is an Emanation of the Soveraign-Good, it is the beginning of Love,
and it has never yet met with any other enemies in the world, then those that
are bizarre and blind. The Law allows its address, and obliges us in some
measure to prefer Beauty to Deformity; if we will believe Plato who was its
Panegyrist, Love is not happy, but because she is the object of its
entertainment, and does pleasantly flatter the Senses by insinuating its self
into the mind. Specios as personas accipere deb^mus Clarissimas u^riu^que
Sexus. lib. 100. (...). de ve^bor, sig^i^.


But what praises soever may be given to Beauty, we must acknowledge that it is
not without its blemishes and imperfections, and that the Philosophers were not
altogether void of Reason, when they many times preferred even unhandsomness to
its perfections. For not to instance that it is a frail gift of nature, which
decays with time, deceives its admirers, and is in the power of the least
Distemper to do it outrage: besides how it is fain to borrow the greatest part
of its Charms from the opinion of the beholders, that its Puissance is
malignant, that it makes impression only upon the purblind, and its possession
is not so much a true, as it is an imaginary good. It persecutes the Subject
whose glory her self is, and as if It had conjured his ruin, it troubles his
repose, robs him of the greatest part of his life, and fills him with thoughts
only after infamous or criminal things. It is an Enemy that accompanies him
wherever he goes, that torments him in his retreat as well as in pu^lick, and
that after it has hood-winked his ^yes, will not suffer him to discern between
truth and false-hood, nor to distinguish the vice that flatters him, from the
virtue he ought to aspire to. Also those who are acquainted with its vanity,
with satisfaction suffers its loss, and no whit are troubled to be deprived of
an Ornament so prejudicial to their felicity. They judge their body ought to be
without attraction, since it is the vilest part of them, every day tending
toward Corruption, and that it is but justice it should be humbled, since it
was born to obey.

Reason is Man's only good, it is an advantage that he can dispute with all
other creatures, and he may esteem himself happy, being reasonable. Beauty is a
stranger to it, that gives place to Flowers and Birds, and we see even Insects
dispute it with the most charming and powerful Beauties on Earth. As Homeliness
is a remedy against Love, it puts out, and extinguishes Concupiscence, and by a
wretched kind of happiness, makes us often disesteem those persons we cannot
affect without doing violence to our selves. The deformity of the body is not
an enemy to the beauty of the mind, the most precious things are ordinarily
such as are most hidden, and they are most valuable from the obscurity of the
places where they lie in. Pearls are shut up in shells of Fishes, Crystal is
buried in stones and Rocks, Gold is locked up in the barren ground, and the
Earth produces nothing that is choice and curious, but what is embowelled in
Dirt and Filth. The mind is oft-times retired under a frightful deformity, and
if we will take Antiquity for our warrant, the subtle Philosophers have made
their Wisdom shine forth through the casements of most dreadfully hideous and
deformed Bodies. He, who made the Beasts to speak, and who in one little Volume
has coutched up all humane policy, was a Monster in appearance, and approached
nearer the shape of a Bear then of a Man, and if his Reason should not have
broke forth at his tongue, he might have been taken for the debauch of a
disorderly Father.

It does not depend upon us to be Handsome, but it is in our power to be good;
Honesty is fixed to our will, and whatever defects may happen to our bodies,
they cannot hinder us from being virtuous. That person who does aspire to this
glorious Title, can easily laugh at the advantages of the body, and as he knows
that the mind is above that gross and heavy lump, he contemns its
imperfections, that he may seek his Sovereign. We have beheld some Virgins, who
have disfigured their Fa^es to conserve their Chastity, and have chosen rather
to make themselves hated by Men, then to get them be their humble Servants. If
Nature has rendered us deformed, it has delivered us from this trouble, it was
willing to be her self the Tutress of our virtue, and to learn us Purity by
depriving us of the means that might put it into hazard. It is always less
glorious to be born Beautiful then to become so; since the one is only the work
of Fortune, but the other is the production of our Industry, the one comes to
us without any trouble, In Galham (...) Eloquentia (...), sed gibb^ deform^m
ita Lusit Laeli^^, ut dic^r^t i^ge^ium Gal^ae ma^e habitare.
the other is only valuable from the choice of our will. Virtue has the
pre-eminence of Fortune, it does not relieve us from its empire, but it
deserves as much respect in a diseased body, as in one that is sound and
healthy. Laelius his raillery was unjust, when he said that the wi^ of Galba
was ill-lodged, since the house contributed nothing to the glory of its Host,
and as a Robust and strong Man may come out of a sorry Cottage, so may a frail
and deformed Body contain in it a firm and generous Mind. Thrin. i^ Ap^fg.


Wholly to be fastened to the Body, is to become too sensual, and to value ones
self only upon these vain appearances which can do nothing but arrest our Eyes.
Virtue stands in no need of Ornaments, it is August and splendid in what place
soever it is to be beheld, and it is to be ignorant of its Merit to think it
can borrow any perfections from the beauty of so vile a matter.

Blindness seems to be most insupportable, and a Man may be said to be reduced
to his last misery when he has lost the use of his Sight. What pleasure can it
be for him to live in the world when the light does not affect his Eyes when he
sees no Stars but in imagination, when his days are confounded with his
nights, when the Sun warms him, but not inlightens him, and when more
unfortunate then Moles and (...), he sees as little in darkness as he does in
the noonday-light. And yet there have been Men that have preferred Blindness to
Sight, and who have looked upon it as a means that leads to wisdom. They have
been persuaded that being not able to see Heaven, they could more freely
contemplate upon its Creator, that this exchange was more advantageous to them,
since they did cease from beholding these created things, to entertain
themselves with the Sovereign of the world. They had questionless learned by
experience that Folly is the Regent Queen of the world, that all one meets with
in it, is nothing but Extravagance, and that it is a kind of Consolation not to
be obliged to consider those actions which shock the maxims of Reason. Who
knows not that vices have their rise from the Eyes? and that they would have a
long time been bannished from the Earth, if they had not been conserved in it
by their means. Covetousness would never make Men fordid, but that they
discover to them the pomp and splendour of Riches, and make them believe there
is a world of satisfaction in keeping the preciousest of Metals close
prisoners in their Coffers. Impurity steals in its poison throw the looks, and
Women could never make the hearts of Men their captives, if the eyes did not
plead the cause of the most fair and charming. Envy has its beginning from the
Eyes, and could never torment the base and unworthy, but that the Sight
furnishes them with occasions for their torture. In short, most Sins would not
have the vogue and sufferage of Mankind, were they but blind; and they would be
obliged to acknowledge the mercifulness of Nature, for having deprived them of a
good which is the beginning of all their evils.

It cannot but be a great satisfaction to be deliv'red from those things that
are prejudicial to us, to be disingaged from any farther concern with those
guides that have betrayed us, and to have the loss of those lights that have
led us into places of darkness. Virtue has no need of light to produce its
self, and if we will believe the Poets who have described them, even the most
excellent among them all are blind. Faith sees not but by the Ears, Hope has no
other Organs but the Hands. Love knows nothing but by the means of the Heart;
and if Justice its self had eyes, they ought to be hard bound down with a
fillet, to oblige its Lovers to despise the things of the Earth, and to exalt
their thoughts to those of Heaven. If Nature has deny^d us the use of Sight, it
is tomake us of the household of God, to rank us in the number of the Virtuous,
and to make us pertakers of the glory of happy Souls.

THE FIFTH TREATISE. OF JUSTICE.
The First Discourse.
Of the Nature of Justice.
THe profane Historians never give us more pleasing Charms, then in their
descriptions of the Golden Age, and in making us to see the innocence and
pleasure of that happy State. If we will take their words, the Earth was a
Mansion of Delights, it produced all things without the trouble of Cultivation,
the Laborers did not ripp up its Entrails to get its nourishment from it, and
it was so orderly and regular in its works, that it satisfied their necessities
according to the Seasons of the year. Temperance was so natural to its
Inhabitants, that they took for favors whatever the Sun and the Rain gave unto
them; Their productions made them neglect the creatures of the Field, and they
thought it a desilement to their Consciences to embrue their hands in the blood
of Innocents. The waters of the Fountains supplied their thirst, and they as
yet were unacqainted with that liquor which disturbs our Intellects, and makes
those who drink of it to excess, become stupid or mad. All Men lived in a
profound tranquillity; fewds and contentions had not as yet made a division in
their Families, and as they were just in all their actions, they were fearless
of Judges or Magistrates. Love had not yet corrupted their inclinations, they
were faithful to their Wives as well as Children, and Adultery was as much
abhorred by them, as Incest and Homicide. Every one observing the Laws of
Nature was honest without Artifice, and as they never made any unjust Vows, so
they were afraid of nothing to shock them.

But as soon as this Community was driven out of the World, that Ambition
succeeded Modesty, that the Rich made their attempts upon the goods of the
Poor, and that Tyrants climbed over the heads of them that were their equals,
it was then necessary for to have Laws found out, to conserve Right and
Property to every one, and to maintain Humane society among so many divisions.
So that Justice took its Origin from our disorders; and as first the
Distempers ought to be known, before any suitable Remedies can be applied to
them, so our outrages and irregularities have preceded our Laws, Justitia est
per^etua and constans voluntas sus suum ^uique tribuendi lib. 10. de Just. and
Jur.
and have obliged Men to make Edicts for their repression. For Justice
according to our Civil Lawyers, is a constant and immutable Will of rendering to
every one what of Right does belong to him: Or to speak more clearly, it is an
Idea in the Soul, that prescribes things just, and forbids those that are
dishonest. But as Self-love is the rule of that which we have for our Neighbor,
this Virtue obliges us to begin at our selves, every Man to be first equitable
toward himself, and not to commit any thing that may trouble the repose of his
Conscience. It would have reason to be our guide, and us to submit our passions
to its conduct, and not to undertake any thing it does not command or approve
of. It ingages us to bring down our Flesh, to rebate its insolence, to submit
it to the Judgment, and to keep it from such exorbitances that are
disadvantagious to it. It teaches us to make our interest stoop to our duty, to
prefer innocence to our Reputation, and more to be afraid of our own
Conscience, then the presence of Judges and Sovereigns. It obliges us to be
circumspect in what we choose, to make a good use of our Judgments to prescribe
to us such objects as ought to employ them, and not to let them seduce us by
their unfaithful relations.

But as Man is not only born for himself, but Nature has allied him to his
fellow creatures, and he ought to live in Community with them; Justice
prescribes him different duties, and obliges him to satisfy every one of them
according to his condition. It shows him the difference he ought to have for
his Superiors, the love he should bear toward his Equals, and the Empire he
ought to keep over those that are subject to him, the patience he should
exercise toward his Enemies, the charity and consolation he ought to render to
the Poor and Afflicted. From thence it came that a Philosopher did confound
Justice with the other Virtues, and that he imagined it sufficient to be
aquitable to become Prudent, Valiant, and Temperate. It Is that which conserves
the harmony between the Soul and its faculties, which guides it in its
operations, which submits the sensitive Appetite to Reason, and which shows to
the will, the good it ought to choose, and the evil it ought to avoid. It Is
that which procures the body health, which moderates the Elements that compose
it, and that so exactly adjusts its parts that it causes the Astonishment of
all its beholders. It Is that which governs the Universe, which gives Laws to
Monarchs, which maintains love between God and Man, and which obliges him to
regard his Creatures as his Children, and them to revere God as their
Sovereign. It Is that which continues Peace in Cities, which keeps Husband and
Wife in perfect accord, which inspires that respect in Servants they owe unto
their Masters, and which creates a union between People most remote and
distant. The Master-Pyrates who live in a kind of War in the midst of Peace,
and get their livelyhoods by the goods of their Neighbors, are constrained to
keep it in their Thefts; and to be just in their distributions to their
assistants. They hazard their lives every time they falsify their words, and
withhold the recompense due to their toil and travel.

But that which still advances the merit of Justice, and which exalts its
Majesty, is that it imitates Almighty God in its procedure, that it admits of
no distinction of Persons, and has as little consideration for Relations as
Enemies. It would be thought to betray the truth it defends, if it loved the
one and hated the other* or if it apportion'd its favors with an inequality. It
has a resemblance to the ^arth which upholds the Sick and Diseased as well as
the Healthy, which nourishes he poor and oppulent, and which is as favorable to
Salves, as to Princes and Monarchs.

It is not to be doubted but that a virtue so August and Splendid, should give
a great deal of pleasure to the persons that possess it, and that labors to
conserve Union and Peace among his fellow creatures. For what can stand in his
way to oppose his happiness, who is right and at peace with God, who is afraid
of none upon earth, and whose actions are above the surprises of his enemies. A
Man esteems himself happy, so long as he lives honestly, that he gives offense
to none, and that he renders to every one his proper due.

The Second Discourse;
That Piety has a respect to Pleasure as its last end.
AS we have our Being from God, Totum quod est homo, and ^otum quod potest, and
quod habet ordinandum est ad deum.
so we are redevable to him for all that we are. It Is to offend his Majesty to
divide our affections, and to give to Creatures what is only due to their
Sovereign. Love takes upon him the state of a Mo^arch, it suffers him not to
have a companion in its Empire. But as Almighty God governs the World without
any dependence, St. Thom. 1. 2. q. 2^.
so he has an absolute influence and regency over Man, who is the Epitome and
contraction of it. He requires the affections of our hearts, because we are his
Creatures, and obliges us to consecrate ourselves wholly to him, because he is
the only good that can be our satisfaction and contentment. He looks upon him
Adulterous, who inclines himself to profane objects, who quits Heaven to
admire Earth, and who prefers a transient Beauty to that happiness he promises
to those that love him.

This Obligation seems but just and reasonable, since that God has no equal in
the world, his Charity is infinite, his Power uncontrouable, and his Glory
beyond both our Merits and Apprehensions. We must be ungrateful not to
acknowledge his benefits, and doubt his greatness not to offer to him all its
puissances. This Principle supposed that Almighty God is the Ultimate end of
Intelligent Creatures, and that all our inclinations must terminate in him as
in their Center. If our love ought to be disinteressed, if all the movements of
our hearts ought to be referred to him, and we ought purely to desire his Glory
without any Reflections upon our selves; who will presume to defend that
Pleasure is the Term and Result of our actions, and that in loving God withal
the extent and powers of our Soul, we may have designs for the Pleasure that we
expect and wait for in Heaven?

Never theless we must acknowledge that natural Piety is inseparable from this
Sentiment, and Man never acts so purely, but has some respect to his own
person. Laetentur omnes qui sperant in te, in aeternum exultabunt and habit
abis in cis. Psa. 5.
The Scripture is pregnant with passages for the proof of this truth, which
assures us that God is the Recompense of his Servants, that his favors are the
motives of their affections, and they love him either because he has remitted
their Sins, or made them to overflow with his Graces and benefits. Hope
oft-times causes the love of the Faithful; if they contemn hunger, suffer
troubles and (...), or expose themselves to death, it is because they know that
Heaven shall give an end to their Miseries, that Life shall succeed Death, and
that their Torments shall be changed into Ravishing Delights and Pleasures. If
they exercise Charity, relieve the Poor, visit Hospitals, and enter into
Prisons to get the miserable out of them, it is because they have regard to the
Crown of Justice, which has been promised them from the beginning of the World.
Christians are permitted to sigh after the Mansions of happy Souls, to have
respect to those delights that wait for them in Heaven, and to desire to come
to the enjoyment of Him whom they loved and served upon Earth.

If it is objected that we are the Children of God, that the Eternal Father has
admitted us into His family, and that it only belongs to Slaves and Hirelings
to look for the price of their labors, we shall not offend the sentiments of
Nature, if we say a Child loves his Father with so much the greater affection,
as the favors he has received have been multiplied upon him, and as he promises
himself after his death the possession of his Estate. A Slave would dispute
this glory with him, had he but the same assurances from his Master, and
possibly this Son, whose affections seem so sincere, would convert his love
into hatred if his Father should drive him out of his house, and make a show of
deputing another to be Heir in his place. In short, who would trouble himself
with adoring God, if he did not take care of his creatures? why should we
bestow on him our affections, since he neglects to take any cognizance of them?
and why should we afflict our bodies, and curb our inclinations, and employ our
whole life in the defense of his interests, if our combats were to have no
rewards, and our victories no Laurels? Also Almighty God, who knows our
weakness, and that we act but through interest, allures us by the hopes of
Felicicy, he promises his glory to those who will keep his Commands, and he
ingages himself to make them pertakers of his happiness. He assures his
votaries that all the powers and faculties of their Souls shall be satisfied,
that their understandings shall behold the truth of what they have believed,
that their minds shall enjoy the good they have sought after, and that their
memories shall be filled with the bounties they have been entertained withal,
during the time of their residence upon Earth.

But though we should have Sentiments sufficiently purified, as not to consider
the glory that attends us in Heaven, that all our desires were terminated in
God, and that we hoped for nothing from him, but only the honor of giving him
our whole love, we could not deny but there was abundance of sweetness and
contentment in this duty, that his commands are mixed with pleasures, and that
He, who obliges us to render him our affections, does invite us to it by
innocent and harmless Delights. He assures us that his Law is very agreeable,
that there is great satisfaction in the doing of his Will, and that Peace and
Glory ever do attend those who engage themselves in his service. The Charity he
influences in our hearts, and the Grace whereby he prevents our desires, give a
charm to the difficulties which are incountred by us, they make our Fear give
place to Love, and thrust us on to embrace with eagerness and pleasure, that
which Nature looks upon with horror. There is nothing able to Astonish us when
we are seconded by his power, and can see him as Coadjutor in all the
rencounters of our life.

Martyrs do laugh at Tyrants, and contemn the cruelty of Butcherly
executioners, when they are animated with his Spirit. They account their
Punishments in the number of their greatest favors, and are so charmed with the
pleasure it pours into their Souls, that they are often fearful, least the
mildness of their Passion should be a prejudice to their Merit. We see them
likewise extended upon the Cross as upon a Throne, embracing their Tormentors
as their Benefactors, acknowledging the indulgence of their Tyrants when they
are sentencing them to death, and preferring the most violent Torturs to those
that are most gentle and easy. It Is this same pleasure that takes away Children
from the arms of their Parents, that makes them choose a Cloister, to be buried
there alive, to be spoiled of their rich and costly Habits to cloth themselves
with Cords and Sack-clothes, and to quit their delicate and sumptious Dishes
only to feed upon Roots and Pulse. It Is this innocent satisfaction and pleasure
that animates Christians against themselves, that obliges them to the
mortifying of their bodies, to bring them unto the subjection of the mind,
which stirs them up against their proper passions, and which forces them with
much agreeableness to make an absolute and entire Sacrifice of themselves for
the glory of their Redeemer.

The Yoke of Jesus Christ is only uneasy to sinners, the hardness of their
hearts makes the weight of it heavy to them, and they do not account his
commands grievous, but because they are the vowed slaves of the Devil. But have
they broken off with this enemy of Mankind, In eo quod amatu^, aut non
laboratur, aut labor ^^se Amatur. August. de bo^. viduit.
has grace taken possession of their hearts, and are they left charmed by its
attractions? then they perceive their Pains converted into Delights, what
seemed before impossible to observe, appears now facile and easy, and they are
amazed that they have stood out so long the bearing of a burden which gives
them such Pleasure and Contentment. Love finds nothing difficult to be
conquered, it charms the affliction that attacques it, and as if it had
borrowed the secrets of Magic, it changes pains and miseries into very
pleasing and agreeable Divertisments. It meets with sweetness in suffering, it
treats its persecutors with the name of friends, and never reckons its self
more happy then when it becomes passive for the cause that it reveres. It is
delighted with difficulty, because it is a proof and trial of its Constancy,
the labors and travel it indures, relieves its faithfulness, and the joy it
looks for from its possession, shall complete and end its happyness.

The Third Discourse.
That Repentance is a chastisement very agreeable and advantageous.
THere is no necessity at all to have a notable piercing and discerning
judgment to find out that Sin is the greatest of all Evils, that it perverts
the Nature, changes the Man to become bestial, and makes of a Child of God, the
Slave of the Devil. Neither need we be learned in Theology, to know that Malice
is prejudicial and bloody to the Soul, that it reduces it to nothing, and
brings death to a Spirit that God has made Immortal. Holiness, which is the
form of it, quits it as soon as it receives this Monster, and makes a divorce
with Grace, to fall into the embraces of its enemy. Its empire would be
Eternal, if that Almighty God did not come to our succor, and furnish us with
weapons to expel this Usurper. Often by an excess of bounty, he adds his favors
to our deliverance, and renders us happy after he has redeemed us from
Servitude. For Repentance which abolishes our crimes, stifles our evil
inclinations, and reinstates us into Grace and favor with our Maker, does
contribute our felicity, and obliges us to call our faults happy ones, because
it changes our Pride and Insolence into Modesty, causes innocence to succeed
our malice, and equals our condition to that of the greatest things that ever
have been upon the face of the Earth.

The Holy Scripture observes none more famous then St. John the Baptist,
according to its Language he was the greatest and most Holy of the Sons of Men,
and though he was conceived in Sin, we have this assurance that he never bore
the quality of a Criminal in the world. He was a Virgin to the death, and
Impurity never made a breach upon his So^l. He was a Martyr, and lost his Head
in the defense of Justice. He was an Anchorite, and past the greatest part of
his life in Deserts. In short, He appeared as an Angel upon earth, and living
amongst Men, he entertained himself with those in happiness. Repentance causes
part of all these advantages unto Sinners; it changes their wantonness into
continence, and teaches them to become Virgins after they have lost their
C^asti^y. It makes them Martyrs, and causes them to feel the pains and miseries
of those generous Champions, who are dead for the cause of the Son of God. It
renders them Hermits in banishing them into Solitudes, and making them find a
retreat in their Hearts in the midst of their Cumbers and troubles in the
world. It exalts them to the quality of Angels, it teaches them Purity,
sanctifies their dispositions, and gives them a foretast of the pleasure of
happy Souls.

Though the Crime be always odious, and it is not permitted us to commit a
fault that so we may reap advantage from it, yet it is certain Repentance gives
a new birth to our former Virtue, derives good from our Sins, and adjoyns a
fresh sanctity to that which those had ravished from us. S Math. cap. 9. v. 9.
This Apostle, whose Avarice had fixed him to a table, who deceived almost all
who came to him to enrich himself, who was reckoned as a public Robber, and
who even sucked the blood of the poor by his extortions, has deserved the name
of the first of the Evangelists, his penitence acquired him that honor, and he
became as famous in merits, as he had been execrable in his usurious dealings.
The Church Universal is redevable to his labors, his Writings are become her
Oracles, she reveres all the words that are there recorded, and He, who was
known for an Imposture among his Citizens, is become the assurance of the
highest Mysteries of our Faith. His Repentance rend'red him in some measure
presumptuous, and made him aspire to a dignity which Faith and Hope could not
dare to promise him.

Who can believe Adam and Eve were Ambitious amidst their tears, and that those
who had their Mouths open only to breath out sighs, who covered their shoulders
with Sackcloth, who wet the Bread they did eat with their weeping, could have
thoughts for grandeur? Yet those glorious Slaves had hankerings after Liberty,
and remembering the honors they had lost, they essayed the utmost they could to
recover them by their Repentance. The torments they exercised upon their
bodies, the Sobbs they sent from their hearts, made them hope to re-enter into
their former Rights and Privileges; they assured themselves that Original
Justice would follow their Repentance, and they should regain the good
affections of that God whom unhappily they had offended. Consuevit Deus ho^o
rare poenite^^es magis quam ^^nocentes P. Damian Sermon. 56.
This Hope was not utterly Temerarious, since that Almighty God shows such
favor and mercy to the Penitent, that he always hearkens to their Prayers, and
does more usually honor the repenting then the innocent Person. When the
Evangelists exhort us to appease divine Justice by grief and sorrow, and to
punish upon our bodies the sin we have committed, he does not put us in the
middle between Penitence and the Kingdom of Heaven, but inseperably unites this
virtue to Glory, and seems to prefer the grace bestowed upon us through our
Affliction, to that which we have conserved by our Innocence.

But though Penitence should not work this Miracle, should add nothing to our
first Grandeur, nor make us dispute with the Saints the qualities that render
them famous in the Church, yet should we be obliged to acknowledge, that in
remitting our sins, it puts us in a state above Calumny; and has freed us from
the blame which consequently would have followed them. It makes us to hold up
our heads in the midst of our enemies, renders us insensible of all their
reproaches, and does not suffer us to pass for Criminals, though we have been
culpable. Indeed it is to be unjust toward ones self to revive a Crime which
we have washed away with our tears, and to refresh our memories with what God
himself has pas'd over with forgetfulness. It Is to be severely malicious to our
selves to ripp up a fault which divine Justice has abolished and cancelled, and
to give an infamous name to that which has left off being in Nature.

There is nothing more dreadful then to fall into the hands of the Son of God,
the Scripture speaks of Him, as of an inexorable Judge, and as if it had a mind
to inhance and amplify the severity of his decrees; it gives him all the
qualities that may render him Rigorous. It calls him a living God when He
punishes the guilty, and as if his justice exceeded his mercy, and that he was
more set upon the chastising of Offenses, then recompencing good works, it says
he acts freely, that he is the absolute Master of his Creatures, that his Power
is above all their Laws, and that he follows no other motions then those of his
will in the exercise of his Justice: Yet his rigor does not extend its self
but to actual faults, Discedite a me qui operamini iniquitat^m. Math. 7.
it condemns only those who persevere in wickedness, who seek still to offend
him after death, and who still keep affections for Sin, though they are under a
state of Disability to commit it. He will not be ma^ful of past faults, for
fear of being injurious to Penitence, and of reviving those offenses which
Grief has detested, Tears washed away, and Punishments abolished. From thence
is it that the Prophet Esaias promises those who subdue and mortify the Body,
and who by Repentance appease the anger of God whom they have provoked, that
their sins shall be changed from their nature, they shall become white as Snow,
and soft as Wool, and what ought to tumble them down to Hell, shall raise them
up among the Blessed. For as all things cooperate to the good of those that
love God, their Malice shall be turned into Piety, their sins which merited
eternal Punishments shall bring upon them as Ample Recompenses, and Grace
taking away what was horrible in them, makes thereof the occasion of their
Felicity and Glory.

There is no person but receives an extreme Joy and satisfaction when he finds
himself clear from Servitude, that his Tyrants cease to persecute him, his
vices are vanishing, and Innocence taking new possession in his heart. Who does
not leap with joy when he sees his Safety arise from his Ruin? his Miseries to
be the cause of his Happiness? and that his crimes which rank him in the number
of those to be reproved, crown him in Heaven? Penitence still produces these
wonders in the Church, and animating Sinners against themselves, it gives them
a blessedness in Heaven, after it has made them Martyrs, and Anchorites,
Virgins and Angels upon Earth.

The Fourth Discourse.
That Friendship augments the happiness of a wise Man.
THe wise Man now is become so advanced above the dominion of Fortune, and the
virtue which causes his happiness, is so little depending upon its empire, that
he may very well glory in the contempt of all its favors. The brightness of
Honors, the Pomp of Riches, the charms of Pleasures and Delights no whit
concern him, and if at any time they strike his Imagination, they have never
power to imprint themselves upon his Will. He is content with those Goods
Nature has given him for his own, all his Glory springs from his advantages,
and he esteems himself a happy Man so long as he has the liberty to converse
with himself. But yet he does not reject the conversation of a Friend, the
severity of his disposition does not render him rude, and Savage, and though he
be satisfied with his own perfections, he will avow that the company of a
person he honors, may enlarge and heighten his Happiness.

Indeed nothing seems more profitable in the World, then I^riendship; it is the
bond of Nature, the support of Humane Society, the sweetness of Life, and the
most reasonable Pleasure we meet with here below. Nothing is more essential
unto Man then Unity, it is the difference that seperates him from all those of
his Species, and according to the Language of Logitians, it ceases to subsist
in the world as soon as it is confounded in their Community. And yet does
Friendship every day overthrow this principle, it unites the Souls of those who
are in Love one with another, distance of places does not hinder their
approaches, and we may affirm they are inseparable though they are at a great
remoteness each from other. Their number does not at all combat with their
unity, In Societate and communion^ posita est Amicitia. Arist Mor. lib. 8. c.
12.
and they do but one and the same thing, though they be of different Natures.
Though their Riches do replenish their outward Man, yet have they no assured
Master, those that share in their friendship, may pretend some kind of right in
them, and presume to dispose of that which their affection has acquired to
them. Their goods and their evils are common, what wounds the one grieves the
other, and their Wills are in so strict a union, that even one and the same
thing does equally both rejoice and afflict them.

They are ignorant what Dissimulation is, their words are the interpreters of
their thoughts, their Heart makes its residence upon their Tongue, and if they
but conceal the minutest secrets to themselves, they believe that they betray
that Virtue which unites them. Some have (most unwisely) thought that
Friendship was the only consolation of reasonable and intelligent Creatures,
that Darkness was preferrable to its absence, and that they ought rather to
desire they might be deprived of the light of the Sun, then to live and not be
Friends. The malice of an Enemy may render them blind, Justice may bannish them
into obscure holes, and bury them quick under Earth. But Miseries can make
friends flock together, they support and stay themselves in what place soever
they find them, the diversity of their conditions does no whit alter their
Virtue, but they do cherish them under misfortunes as well as in prosperity.

What is there can befall a Man more to his heart's desire, then to have a
confident to whom he may discover his thoughts? who knows his Secrets are safe
in his breast, who less fears his friends Conscience then his own, and who is
assured that he as much interesses himself in his disgraces as happiness.

Yet we meet with but a few of this sort of People in the World, and I dare
affirm, it is long since that true affection has been bannish'd from it,
Orestes and Pylades are dead, and those who would succeed them to this day, are
no otherwise then Apes and Imitators. Flattery now among us, keeps the place of
sincere and loyal Friendship, and that Person seems to enter farther into our
Interests, who can best accommodate himself to our Inclinations. As Vices are
ingenious, Adulatio quam similis est Amicitiae, non imitatur tantumillam sed
vincit and Praeterit. Sen, Epist. 45.
they are brought in among us under the guise of Virtue. Fear imitates
Prudence, Temerity takes upon it the name of Valor, and Avarice covers it self
under the mantle of Economy; Flattery borrows the attractions of Friendship,
it insinuates it self into the souls of those that harken to it, and renders it
self so much the more agreeable as the Venom that it infuses into it is
dangerous. It is hard to know an enemy that carries himself toward us with an
obliging respectfulness, and who makes it the greatest part of his study to
please us. The Praises they give us are always dear and charming to us, we
easily swallow the belief that we are Virtuous, that Honesty is born with us,
and that Prudence is familiar and at home in us, and that no person comes near
us but is sensible of our liberality, though we know their words belly their
thoughts, and our Conscience reproaches us for our Injustice, our Indiscretion,
and our Avarice.

Fatterers, who may very well be called the Impostors and Pests of Humane
Society, have corrupted even the justest Men, and have in sinuated into their
hearts both Insolence and Presumption. Princes, who have hearkened to them,
have oft-times changed their Empire into Tyranny, and engaging themselves in
unprofitable Wars, have hazarded their Persons and their States. They have
broken the Peace that was necessary to the conservation of their Subjects, they
have attacqued enemies, whom Policy has obliged them to respect, and have
yielded themselves rather to be overcome, then forbear pursuing their
Enterprises. To Conclude, the Flatterer is a Devil that troubles the Soul of
all those he approaches, that disposes of their Wills, and inspi^es them but
with the motion of Pride and Vanity. But the true Friend is Sincere in his
words, he discovers his Sentiments without Constraint, he regards the Advantage
of him He loves, and not his Pleasure and Satisfaction; and he should think
himself unworthy of that name he bears, if he should rather have a
consideration for his Fortune then his Person; He should believe he defended
his faults, if he permitted them; and did render himself responsible for all
the mischiefs that befell him, if He did not oblige him to follow Reason rather
then the motions of that passion which possesses him.

As he is a faithful councellor of the person he loves, and interesses himself
wholly in his happiness; he rejects not his Advice, but becomes without trouble
his Disciple after he has been his Director: and receives his Advertisments
with the same tranquillity and ease of mind, as he had given them to him. From
thence it is that Friendship is not found but among the Good, and there is
nothing but Virtue can make one Soul pass into two different Bodies.

As Love according to Plato, Ve^a Amicitia tantum inter bo^os prosicit, inter
Optimos consummatur. Cassiod. Sup. Psalm.
is the bond of the Universe, and causes that good Intelligence to arise, which
is observed in each of its parts; Friendship has not its subsistence but
through Virtue, it derives all its Glory from its Merit, and ceases being True
as soon as it leaves off further Converse with it. The Ancients, whose
Ignorance and Infidelity had buried them in darkness, had of it but an
imperfect shadow, and the cause of its birth, being wanting to them, they could
never engage themselves but into affections that were Illegitimate. But as soon
as the Eternal Wisdom dissipated their darkness, that Faith began to cast its
beams into their hearts, Friendship was re-established in the World, Men lived
in a Community, their thoughts were no more divided then their goods, and all
agreeing in one and the same Principle, they discovered in their Republic the
image and representation of an Eternal Peace. So that Virtue is the soul of
Friendship, it is requisite that the knot which unites the Hearts should be
sacred, and derive its Force from Piety, to become True and Real.

FINIS.

