The Manner of ORDERING Fruit Trees

London Printed for Hamphrey Mosesey



The Manner OF ORDERING Fruit Trees. By the SIEUR LE GENDRE, Curate of
HENONVILLE.

Wherein is treated of Nurseries, Wall-Fruits, Hedges of Fruit Trees,
Dwarf-Trees, High-Standers, etc.

Written originally in French, and translated faithfully into English, at the
request of several Persons of Honor.

A Piece so highly approved of in France, that it has been diverse times
printed there.

LONDON, Printed for Humphrey Moseley, at the Prince's Arms in S. Paul's
Churchyard. 1660.

To the RIGHT HONORABLE John Lewis de Faucon, KNIGHT;
Lord of Ris, Marquess of Charlevalle, Counselor in Ordinary to the King in
all His Councils, and first President in His Parliament of Normandy.
My LORD,
WEre you not so great a Lover of Gardens and Gardening, as you are, yet such
are my obligations to You, that I could not, without extreme injustice, grant a
dispensation to my self, should I not dedicate this work unto you. It Is unto
you I owe all that I am, and that honest leisure which has given me the means
of informing my self in the knowledge of ordering Trees. I should be truly
ungrateful, if, upon this occasion, I gave you no mark of my Respects and
Acknowledgements. Be pleased then, My Lord, to receive this Book as a Homage
which I owe unto you; the payment whereof gives me very great contentment. If
at any time your Great and Noble Employments permit you to give your self the
Recreation of your Orchards, you will find nothing there, I confess, which is
new to you; yet there you will see, at least, some shadow of this pleasant Art,
the secrets whereof you are so perfectly acquainted with: You know how many
Charms this lovely part of Agriculture has, that it affords us Joys, which
are altogether pure, and Hopes as sweet as innocent. I have my self been taken
with them from my tender years; but when I consider, that this Love has found
a place in your Heart, and that the same Hand, which so worthily holds the
Balance of Justice, disdaines not sometimes to cultivate Trees, so noble an
Example redoubles my passion. The glory of imitating you is a new spur unto me,
and binds me more strongly to this dear entertainment of my days: Indeed, my
Lord, if one consider the wonders of your Life, he that sees those eminent
Qualities, which render you admirable unto all France, that invincible Fidelity
to the service of your King, that high Prudence, which in the midst of so many
Tempests, knew how to preserve a Calm in our Province, will doubtless have
wherewithal to flatter himself, when he finds that he follows in the paths of
so excellent a Person; that he loves at least what so Great a Man has an
affection for, and that he has some inclinations common with him: I know, my
Lord, that I take up too much of your time, thus to entertain you with our
rustic Divertisements: But expect not, that a Gardener should entertain you
with any other discourse, than that of his own Art, I leave the whole Field of
your Praises to be tilled by those great Spirits, whereof our Age is so
fruitful: Posterity will read in their works all that which our eyes have
seen; And, like us, will wonder how one single person, in such difficult
Conjunctures, could manage so many Spirits, and dis-entangle so many and so
different Interests. As for me, I can discourse of nothing but our Wall-trees,
and those benefits which I have received from your hand: Assuredly, when I
think upon your Goodnesses, and all those Favors which you have so liberally
heaped upon me: I ought, methinks, to have nothing in my mouth but Thanks, and
nothing but thoughts of Gratitude in my heart: This, my Lord, is my thought,
and this is what I am able to do to acquit my self toward you: This is that
which this Book shall publish in every place where it shall have the fortune to
arrive: It is an Infant, which now I dare to present unto you; hitherto it
appeared not without trembling, and showed it self in public, only to try
whether the World would judge it worthy of you; now, that it has found amongst
good men more approbation than it could hope for, I present it unto You wholly,
and without reservation: Suffer it, My Lord, to call it self Yours, that under
so powerful a protection it may pass through all those Climates where our
French Muses are known to instruct or recreate all those that love Gardens and
Gardening.

I am, in all sorts of Respect (MY LORD) Your very Humble, Obedient, and
Faithful Servant, LE GENDRE, Curate of Henonville.

The Preface.
IT is now a long while that some of my Friends have solicited me to publish
the principal Observations I have made concerning Fruit Trees, by endeavoucing
to persuade me, that the Curious would be very glad to have, by this means,
communicated unto them, that which I have been able to learn upon this subject,
by an experience of almost fifty years: During which I have employed all the
time that I believed I might justly take for my Divertisement about them. At
the last, I have yielded to what they desired of me, performing that design
with the most exact order that it was possible for me to do; wherein I am
rather obliged to excuse my self, if any thing be faulty in my Observations,
either for the substance or manner of writing them, than to recommend the
matter of my work; for, I am well assured, that will of it self be agreeable
enough. And were I so happy to have as many Approvers of my small labor, as
there are persons which love Plants, I might safely boast of the approbation of
the greatest part of good men. Indeed, never did men so much employ themselves
about this noblest and most pleasant part of Agriculture, as they have done of
late. There is scarce a person which talks not of Fruit Trees; nor is there
any, but such as lack land, that do not plant; and even those, too, are pleased
with the discourse of it, and with the divertisment they take in seeing Fruits
and Trees well ordered in the Gardens: All imaginable Curiosities tending
thereunto are sought after; men ran even to excess and superfluity; and our Age
and Country have now no less improved themselves in this agreeable Recreation,
than in those high Speculations and great Employments of the most eminent
Professions, for which it is at present as famous as any other that ever was;
which gives me occasion to say, that, If this Art deserve not to be put in the
number of the best Sciences, and principal occupations of the mind; it has,
nevertheless, this advantage, that it has always kept some proportion with
them, and has almost inseparably followed them throughout the world.

All Antiquity gives us assured proofs of this Truth; for, not to insist upon
the times of the ancient Patriarchs, who were the first in cultivating Trees,
as well as in forming the Manners of men; It is certain, that the politeness of
understanding, the knowledge of Excellent things, and the studies of
Philosophy, were no sooner entered among the Persians and the Greeks, but that
Agriculture followed them as their faithful and innocent Companion.

From hence we read, that the Kings of Persia thought they did not any thing
beneath that supercilious Majesty (which made them to be adored by their
Subjects as Gods upon earth) when they took care of their Gardens, in the
ruling and ordering their Plants, and in forming the squares of them,
themselves: On the contrary, they beasted to the Ambassadors which came unto
them from that Nation of the world, with they most esteemed and feared, that
they had planted the Trees in their Orchards with their own hands.

As for the Grecians, their most ancient Philosophy, treated of by their Poets,
is all interwoven with Precepts of Agriculture: And the chiefest of their
Authors, who have given unto men the Rules of living well, by the knowledge of
Morality; and have raised their Spirits to the search of the most hidden parts
of Natural Philosophy, piercing even into the secrets of their profane
Theology; have, at the same time, and in the same writings, taught them the
Art of Tilling the Earth, and of soliciting her; as she desires to be, before
she will enrich men with the abundance of her Fruits: I pretend not to make a
deduction of all the Ancient Worthies of that famous Nation, whereof some gave
up themselves wholly to this business, as the most proper and commodious, in
order to the leading of a quiet and virtuous life; believing that there was
nothing more comely and agreeing with a veritable Philosopher, than by
reasoning with the Earth, to learn how to reason well with Men, and yet better
with himself; Others, amidst the great employments of their Estates, have at
least looked upon it as the worthiest and most excellent divertisment of Great
Persons.

When afterward the study of Arts and Sciences passed into Italy, and Rome
began to rob Greece of its Rarities; the love of Trees did at the same time
transplant it self thither, and the knowledge how to order them did there
increase in the same measure, as Great Men and Noble Spirits appeared in that
place: The Scipio' s and the Laelii, not only pleased themselves in this
Exercise, but did also very well understand the practice and the secrets of it;
they knew what things were necessary for the embellishment of those Gardens,
which they cherished with so much tenderness; and planted in order and method
the Trees which these ancient Consuls (having only the inclination without
knowledge) set confusedly in the earth, when they came with diligence to resume
their labor, after they had triumphed over the enemies of the Commonwealth.

As soon as politeness and the knowledge of excellent things, could arrive in
Africa, the curiosity of Plants came also thither; and, amongst other praises,
which History gives unto Massinissa King of Numidia, it takes notice that he
had so great a care of his Gardens, and bore so much affection unto Trees, that
his Labors overcame the drouth of his Territories, and made all sorts of
Fruits to grow there, that seemed to require such Climates as differed most
from his; that is, a more pleasant and favorable Heaven: So that Art
surpassing Nature, Africa was her self astonished to find within her self so
many excellent productions of the Earth, whereof before she knew not so much as
the very names: It is very likely, that this King had received his
instructions, and followed in this the example of Scipio the Great, his
intimate Friend, who, out of that affection which he had unto Plants, would
doubtless plant trees in Africa as well as Trophies.

I cannot but further take notice, how much Cicero (that admirable Spirit, who
alone was capable of equalling the vast greatness of the Roman Empire) loved
this agreeable divertisment: It is impossible so much as to read that which he
makes his Cato to say of it, without taking up the same affections, and without
being charmed, as well by the Subject whereof he treats, as beauty and graces
of his Expressions. But can any thing be added to those inimitable Delicacies
of the great Poet, when in his Georgicks he does, at once, witness unto unto us
the exact knowledge and the extreme passion which he had for all that which
concerns trees.

At length, this knowledge descended unto us, after it had passed through so
many illustrious Nations; and it may seem, that our French men have taken it up
as a part of that universal succession which is fallen to them, of all the
excellent qualities of those great Personages, of whom antiquity so much
boasts: For it is certain, that there is no Nation of the world, amongst whom
it flourishes, at present, with more lusture, especially about Paris, which
being the France, as I may call it, of France it self, is also, as it were, the
center and perfection of the best Agriculture.

Some, perhaps, may accuse me of straying too far for a Gardener, because that
I may seem, while I thus wander through stranger Nations, to forsake the matter
in hand; wherein I only proposed to my self the deduction of those
Observations which I have made, during so many years, and to expound the
method, which I esteem to be the best, in order to fair Trees and good Fruits:
But it is impossible for me, in this rencontre, to hinder myself from
flattering my passion by so great and noble examples; and I persuade myself,
that there are diverse persons who will not think amiss of it; for such as are
pleased with this recreation will not blame me for having an affection for what
they themselves love, and for discoursing upon it with the greatest advantage
that I can; and if the desire of imitating such worthy Persons, be capable of
making those men relish these innocent delights, who, until now, were ignorant
of them, I am assured that they will wish me well, and that they will entertain
some good thoughts of him, who has given them an inclination unto that thing,
whereof they will find every day more and more the Charms and Sweetnesses: For
our Agriculture has in it this singular property, that such as have once loved
it, do never forsake it, but, on the contrary, do every year take much more
delight in it than before; which shows, that it has in it somewhat of
solidity and truth, which attracts men, by reason, and not by fancy: Indeed,
all other pleasures vanish, or do at last grow less by time; some are ruined by
Reason, others worn away by Time, the greatest part are destroyed by
themselves; and, being but weak Remedies of our continual Labor, or our
ordinary Indigence, they become troublesome and unpleasing, so soon as they
have produced their effect: But the affection which is taken unto Trees, grows
up every day with them: It strengthens its self in well-governed Spirits, as
trees put forth stronger roots in a good Soil. So that I persuade my self, I
might borrow those words of the Poet to make up the Motto of a true Gardener,
Crescent illae, crescetis amores.

Experience has taught me this truth in mine own person; for having already
passed atmost through all the degrees of Age, and being now entered into that of
an old man, I have found, that this inclination which I took up from mine
infancy, has ever since, from time to time, increased in me; so that I may
boast my self to have been one of the first that has searched out the true
method of oringing trees to perfection, particularly Wall-trees and
Dwarf-standers; for I remember, that in my youth my curiosity led me to visit
all the Gardens then in reputation; I frequented all such as desired to have
fair Fruits, and would pass for able men in this affair: I saw, even at that
time, some great trees ordered well enough; but for all other sorts of Plants,
such as are most now in esteem, and do ordinarily prove best, I could not look
upon them without compassion: Those which then took in hand to plant them
against Walls, set them with the same confusion, as if they had been planting
thorn-hedges: And when they began to grow up, some did cut them into A^tile
Croissant, with a Half Moon, perhaps with an Instrument of that figure or shape.
Works, as they do Hedges of Witch Hasell; others suffered them to grow up at
liberty, so that their tops growing immediately above the wall, there remained
nothing under shelter, but the Trunk; and all the bearing bougis received no
advantage by it: The Gardiners, which would be accountedmen of abilities in
places of the most curiosity, did order their Dwarf-trees after a much more
outrageous manner, so that they might be called Monsters rather than Dwarfs;
for they put them into a thousand extravagant postures, making them to
represent all sorts of living creatures, in a manner altogether ridiculous.
Thus by making very bad Figures they spoiled very go^d Trees, their works
deserving to be equally detested by expert Statuaries and good Gardiners: for
my part, making at the same time some small reflection upon that which trees do
of themselves require, to bring them to their perfection; It seemed unto me,
that these which I saw maimed in this manner, did groan under the tyranny of
their Masters, and complained unto me of their cruelty: Guiding my self,
therefore, by reason, in a matter whereas yet I had no example, I found that it
was impossible to receive that satisfaction, which ought to be expected from
the beauty of a Tree, and the abundance of its Fruits, by forcing it thus
against its nature; and so was quickly persuaded, that, to do well, an order
must be searched out, quite contrary to that which I saw practiced; and that
the nature of the tree ought principally to be observed, that it may be
followed as much as is possible, in preserving unto it the shape and extent
which it desires to have; and that in cutting off what is superfluous, and
making it handsome, care must be taken not to disfigure it. I applied my self
principally to the culture of Wall-trees, working according to these
principles; and in few years I found the advantage which this sort of Plant
gives us above others. In which I was much assisted, by the invention of
graffing upon a Quince stock, and may say, that I also was one of the first
that brought it into vogue, and which took notice of the profit and commodity
of it.

I will not enlarge my self in this Preface, to discourse upon this subject,
because I have made very ample Observations upon it in the sequel of this
Book: But I shall only say beforehand, that as Wall-trees please me much
better than all other Plants; so I love Quince-stocks for Plants against a wall
more than all others: There are still some persons that are not of this mind,
though but few; such as will not endure, that men should speak to them of
Wall-trees, professing that they will have no other trees, than such whose
fruits and shape were known in our forefathers days; They would have this way
of planting to pass for a Novelty, which has nothing in it deserving the cost
that is to be employed about it: they say, that the fruits thus produced are
not good, losing thereby the taste that is natural to them: That such trees
die immediately, not being able to endure the torture which is put upon them;
and that the pains and care taken about them passes without comparison the
pleasure received by them. These are the great accusations brought against
Wall-trees: But, should I undertake their defense, I would make use of no other
arguments, than to lead such enemies of this sort of Plant into Gardens that
are well kept, where they might see walls wholly covered with Fruit Trees,
whose boughs are guided in a handsome order fully garnished with leaves, and
laden with those admirable Fruits, whose bigness, savor, and color do
equally satisfy the taste and eyes of such as eat or behold them: This sight
would doubtless cause them to change their opinion; and, if idleness, or an
aversion for excellent things, or covetousness (which causes the most part of
men to cry down such things as they will not be at the charge of having) do
hinder them from choosing this pleasure for themselves; at least, I am sure
they could not blame others for being delighted with them. It would also prove
very easy to answer, otherwise, whatsoever can be said against Wall-trees:
For, as to the beauty of their Fruit, no man so much as doubts that they far
exceed all other trees: And as for their goodness, I deny not but that there
are some sorts of Fruits which have a higher and more perfect taste, when they
grow upon great trees in the open air, than when planted against a wall, as
amongst others, the

The name of a delicate small Pear.
Rousselet, which being the most delicate of all Pears for taste, seems to give
some disadvantage to this form of trees which we esteem: But then there are
diverse other kinds which are much better upon Wall-trees, nay which canscarce
come to perfection otherwise: Were there no more of these than the Bon Crestien
only, it were enough to make Wall-trees to be esteemed above others: For sure
it is, that this Pear deserves more looking after than all others, because it
surpasses all, without comparison, both for its beauty and its long
continuance; and being certainly the best of all that are eaten for six whole
months of the year, it is second even in taste to very few of those that are
the most excellent in those seasons, which do most abound with Pears, which
are, the end of Summer and the Autumn: Now Experience teaches us, that the
position of the Wall contributes very much, as well to the goodness, as to the
beauty of this Fruit, because it requires much of the Sun to come to its
perfection, and does extremely fear great winds and overmuch cold; whereas, by
this means, it finds the beat of the one increased, and a remedy against the
inconveniences of the others; so that at present we see, by the help of this
invention, a very great abundance of them in such places, as heretofore had no
more than were brought out of far Countries, or, at least, if some did grow
there before, it was upon trees well ordered, that were planted in some Court,
and could not otherwise be preserved, but under the shelter of a whole house;
and yet for all this they came not to their true color, but, by their
greenness, witnessed, that they could not arrive at their entire maturity. It
is a wonderful advantage which planting against a wall has, to afford heat
enough unto such fruits as require much more than our climate yields, and yet,
notwithstanding, not to give too much to those which are content with that of
ordinary trees, or which bring their fruit well enough to perfection in colder
Countries: For by this means, we see in one Garden alone, that which heretofore
could not be met with, except in many different climates; and the position of
walls helped by the address of the Master, incloseth within one and the some
place all the different qualities of far distant Countries, so to at now we are
no more obliged to fetch our Bon Crestiens from Touraine, our Amadotes from
Bourgogne, our Portail from Poictou, nor the S. Lezin from Anjou: All these do
now grow at home with us, and the Gardens about Paris do now abundantly furnish
us with them all, which each of these Countries gave us but in part, and by
retail. As for that objection which says, That Wall-trees last but for a
while: it is true, that they come to ruin in few years, when they are ill
kept; but when they are carefully ordered, and as they ought, they afford a
pleasure unto a man during his whole life; and if they last not so long as
great trees, yet they come to perfection sooner without comparison; For if they
be well planted, and the trees well chosen, they may bear the first year, and
are at their perfection in their fourth or fifth: Whereas great trees are so
long in coming, up, that the expectation is able to weary out the most patient
man. As for the charge which many persons fear in giving themselves to this
curiosity, it is not so much as they would persuade themselves; those that are
at much cost about them, do certainly bestow more upon what is useless than
what is necessary; the ability of the Gardener, with time, and practice, is the
principal, all the rest consists but in a few things: And therefore I can
assure them, that, amongst all other divertisments, to the which they can give
themselves, as there is none more innocent, so none that will cost them less
than this: I will say further, though I have undertaken this work only for the
satisfaction of ingenious men, and at the desire of them that love the best
Agriculture, and not to give precepts for housekeeping, that, notwithstanding,
such as will consider the profit more than the pleasure of Wall-fruits, shall
from them be sure always to find their expectation answered.

In the last place, I cannot endure that any should complain of the care which
this kind of tree requires, because that in this consists the chiefest pleasure
of them: It is this care, which by its secret charms fetters the Gardener to
his work; it is this which gives him a pleasant divertisment throughout the
whole year, even then, when the trees are unprofitable, and seem to be entirely
dead: it is this which gives life to that pleasing hope, which is oftentimes
more agreeable than the very enjoyments of the Fruits themselves, and which
assords us almost as much pleasure in the planting of the Trees, as in seeing
them arrived at their perfection: It Is this which makes us to look upon these
productions of Nature as our own handy-works, and to make that disserence which
all the world takes notice of, betwixt that which we have obtained by our
Industry, and that which we have only borrowed: And do we not see in all other
things of the world, that pains and pleasure, which seem to be of a very
different nature, have nevertheless a natural society, which binds them
together by an inseparable consequence? It is an effect of the Divine goodness,
which having condemned men to the just punishment of perpetual labor, was
pleased that they should find their consolation in their pains, and that they
should, in them, meet with sweetness, which very often surpasses the bitter of
them: Indeed, those that have a strong affection for any thing, never complain
of the difficulties which they encounter in it. These rather do, for the most
part, serve but to increase their pleasure, because they do set their desire on
work; and this being seconded by hope, renders not only the enjoyment more
agreeable, but also forms a present delight, which oftentimes surpasses even
the enjoyment it self: For this reason, we do not hear those that love Hunting
complain of the wearinesses of that painful Exercise: It being so true, that
they place their delight in this trouble, that oftentimes they would not so
much as regard those beasts which they took so much pains to follow, if they
could have them with the same ease that men take tame beasts out of their
yards. But, besides all this, where, I pray, is that great trouble which men
would afright themselves with, in the ordering of Plants? Is there any exercise
of the body which requires not much more? And besides, Are all Masters
condemned to do themselves the work of their Gardiners? I know very well that
such as do sometimes work upon them with their own hands, do from them receive
more pleasure than others; yet they also do receive enough, who are able to
work themselves, when they please, and to know whether such as they employ do
their business as they ought; for in vain does the Master search after good
Gardiners, if he himself be not able to judge of their sufficiency; and besides
that, he deserves not to enjoy these benefits of the earth, who knows not how
to relish them. It is almost impossible that he should be well served, when he
knows not whether those that serve him do well or ill: For this reason, I dare
boldly affirm, that such ought wholly to be excluded from our Agriculture, who
desire to continue in their ignorance, either through an affected indifference,
or a blameworthy idleness. It is not for their sakes that I write this Book;
and if I could, I would willingly forbid them, even to read it: But if there be
any one who desires to taste of these innocent Pleasures, and finds himself
transported with this inclination, which is common to so many deserving
persons, I can assure him, that he shall not meet with all those difficulties
wherewith the enemies of our Plants do threaten him: From this Book, he may
presently receive as much knowledge as is necessary for him to have for his
divertisment therein: provided, that at the same time he set apart some hours
for practice, and make application of my Rules upon Trees, or cause some other
to do it in his sight: Here he will find, in short, all that which mine own
experience, and the acquaintance which I have had all my life long with the
Masters of this Art, could gain unto me after so long a time; and will, in a
few hours, make his advantage of that pains which I have daily continued for so
many years. For it is certain, that a long Study, and great Practice are
required to make Observations in those things which must be learned by
Experience and Reason both together, and in which a man must oftentimes attend
many years to make one single Experiment, especially where searce any one has
gone before, from whom he may take instructions with assurance: But he that
finds gathered into one, all that a man could get by his own experience, during
his whole Age (and that long enough) or draw from the communication of others,
will find these things very easy, by making use of his labor, to whom, at the
first, they were very hard.

I say not this, as pretending to boast that I have set down all that can be
said of this matter; for then should I have written more than I know my self:
On the contrary, I am thoroughly persuaded, that I may yet learn many things
entirely new; wherefore I do with much earnestness entreat all those that are
able to add to my observations, or else can correct them, as I doubt not but
there are many who can; I entreat such, I say, not to envy their skill to those
that love Gardening, and to my self inparticular, since I so freely communicate
unto them all that which I my self have gotten. I know there are some great
Personages of these times, who are of the most knowing in this Affair, whom, as
they have all their life long mixed this divertisment with their public
Employments and profound Studies of the highest Sciences; I do conjure, that
they would be pleased not to deny a few hours more of their leisure, to
instruct such as follow them in their inclination; and that they will not
refuse to adorn those Gardens which they have always so much loved, with the
beauties of our Language which they have in such perfection; or at least, that
they will permit somewhat of this subject to fall from their hands, amongst so
many noble Works, which daily proceed thence, and do ravish into admiration all
such as behold them: It is not that I think of entering the lists with them, or
disputing against them the prize of Agriculture: For, although I know that it
is this sort of Contention which is esteemed good and profitable amongst men,
by one of those ancient Philosophical Poets, whose Authority I have made use
of at the beginning of this Preface notwithstanding I have no other thought in
it, but that of exciting them to appear in this field, being ready to yield
them the p^ace so soon as they shall be pleased to take it; and shall believe,
that I have entirely satisfied that passion which I have always ^ad to be
serviceable to the Gardiners, if I may be so happy as to procure for them so
good Masters.

THE Manner of Ordering Fruit Trees.
CHAP. 1.
Concerning Nurseries.

THe first and principal care which they ought to take, who would have store
of Plants, and those fair, is, to have Nurseries of their own, in which they
may bring up Trees wherewith to plant their Gardens: it being certain, that
Trees taken from such domestic Nurseries, thrive much better then others
procured from abroad; because that being replanted presently after they have
been taken up, and meeting with earth of the same nature with that, to which
they have been accustomed, they do thereby grow again with the greater
facility: whereas, on the contrary, Trees brought from afar off are always
much changed in the transportation, their roots often battered and spoiled, and
run a hazard of being hurt by Frosts; so that they grow again with much more
difficulty, and ordinarily a great number of them die. Besides that, it is a
great advantage to a Planter to be assured of the goodness of his Trees, and
of the kind of their Fruit; and by that means to avoid the displeasure which
oftentimes befalls those that buy, of being forced to re-plant new Trees, or
to graffe again such as they have bought, when they might have expected to
enjoy their fruit. To which may also further be added, that such as bring not
up Nurseries of their own, cannot make large Plantations without great cost.

Some judge it more advantageous to take such Trees as have been brought up in
a dry and barren soil to replant them in a better, than to choose them from a
good Ground: being persuaded that these thirsty trees meeting with a fresh
Earth, do immediately perceive that change, and spring with the greater
vigor; But, Reason and Experience teach us, that Trees brought up in a hungry
ground, finding but little nourishment there, do likewise put forth but few
roots, and can therefore have but a small growth of body, and that yellowish
and mossy; And although they be afterward replanted in an excellent soil,
having but few Roots they are not capable of drawing abundantly that good
nourishment which there they meet with, and consequently of growing to any
purpose. Besides that, their bark being already dry and withered for want of
nourishment, by reason of that small moisture which they found in that barren
ground, cannot easily receive the sap when it begins to ascend into the
branches: On the contrary, Experience lets us see that Trees taken from a good
ground, have always good store of Root, the body strong and vigorous, and that
when they are re-planted in a soil as good (be it by Nature or Art) they do
take again very easily, and sprout with great force.

CHAP. II.
The manner of planting Nurseries, and keeping them in order.

TO make a good Nursery, care must be had especially of three things: The first
is, To choose good Plants: The second, to place it in a good soil: And the
third, to dress it well; because the want of either of these three, renders
the two others useless.

To bring up a Nursery of Pear Trees and Pommiers France, that is, Apple Trees
as are not wild.
Apple Trees for High-standers, and proper for the producing of large Trees,
you must choose Pear and Apple-stocks of one years growth only: These come of
the kernels of those fruits, which to that end must be sown in March upon beds
of earth well prepared after the same manner that Gardiners sow their seeds.
These kernels so sown and weeded during the Summer, will put forth a twig
strong enough to be planted in a Nursery the Winter following: The way to
procure such kernels with ease, is to sift the husks or remainder of Apples
and Pears, when the Perry and Sider is pressed from them: But without taking
this trouble, you may buy, or cause to be brought, out of Normandy, both these
sorts of Plants already grown, where they sow great quantities of them. The
best Plant to graff such Apple Trees upon, as you would have to grow against a
wall, in Pallisades or Hedges, and such as you desire to keep low for
dwarf-trees, is that of the A kind of Codling.
Paradise-Apple-tree, which grows but little into wood, bears quickly and much
fruit. These kinds of Plants are brought up of spriggs, or cuttings, put into
the ground, as also those of Quince-trees, whereof I shall speak hereafter.

The Diulcain.
Sweeting is another kind of Apple Tree, which comes very near to that of the
Paradice-Apple, and which likewise grows from a sprig; but the Plant of it is
not good for this purpose, because it grows too much into wood, and cannot be
kept low, as a dwarf or shrub.

To graff such Pear Trees upon, as are proper to be planted against a wall, and
Contr' espallier, properly such a hedge as is planted over against a wall on
the other side of the walk.
in hedges, or to be kept low for Dwarf-standers, the Plant of a Quince-tree
proves the best, because the Quince is naturally of a dwarfish stature, and may
very easily be kept low. Such as are raised from the kernels of Pears or Apples.
Tree-stocks are not so proper for this use, because they by nature shoot up
too fast; and if you cut off any branch to stop their growth and keep them low,
they put forth diverse others with more force, and so till they arrive at their
full growth, do produce nothing but wood, and very little fruit: And further,
that small quantity of fruit which they do bear, is ordinarily greener, more
lateward, and worse colored than that of such trees as are graffed upon the
Quince-stocks; except the Portail, which graffed upon a Pear-stock becomes very
good, provided that it be planted in a hot and gravelly soil, for in rich and
cold grounds it has no taste. Next after the Portail those of Bezi-d'heri, the
Butter-Pear.
Beurre and the Orange-Pear prove better upon a Pear-stock then any others,
because they do ordinarily bear much: Since then the nature of Peare-trees
graffed upon a Peare-stock, is to raise themselves into a great tree, and to
grow much in wood, it is easy to be judged that if they be not plashed against
very high walls, where they may spread themselves with freedom, they cannot
take effect, nor be proper for hedges or walls of ordinary height, or be kept
low, except in a dry, stony, or sandy soil, where meeting with a scant
nourishment they cannot shoot upward with much force, and therefore in such
grounds they will soonest bear.

Some do more esteem those Peare-trees that are graffed upon a Tree-stock than
those that are graffed upon a Quince, because they think the fruit of these
latter to be harsher and less delicate than the others. Experience
nevertheless teaches us, that this opinion is not true, and that the
harshnesse which is sometimes found in those fruits that are graffed upon a
Quince is not natural to them, but is either caused by the over-moist and
gross earth which nourishes them, or by the too great quantity of dung
wherewith the ground was manured when they were planted. And indeed we may
easily mark, that this harshnesse grows less, and passes away as the dung
consumes and the trees grow older: It Is for this reason therefore that trees
ought never to be dunged when they are planted, unless there be a necessity
for it; because the dung renders their fruit less delicate.

There are three several sorts of Quince-trees: The first is that which is
called the Apple-quince-tree, which bears a small fruit, flat and round like
an Apple. This kind is not good to graff Pears upon, because its nature
enclining to that of the Apple Tree agrees not with the Pear, so that we see
the Syens which are graffed on it, do languish or dye immediately. This sort of
Quince-tree may be known by its leaf, which is round and small; and by its
wood, which is rough and full of suckers; as also by its bark, which is
whitish. The other two sorts of Quince-trees, though both good to graff Pears
upon, and both bearing fair fruit, are yet very different, the sap of the one
being much sweeter then that of the other, and consequently better. This
difference may be observed at the foot of old graffed trees; one of these sorts
not waxing big according to the proportion of the graff it bears, and
therefore makes a knobbe round about the joining of the graffe in the fashion
of a roll, which spoils the shape of the stem, and shows that this kind of
Quince-tree has not the sap so plentiful nor so good as that which increases
equally with the graffe. From whence we may easily conclude, that this last
kind is the best of all the three, and that this is the true Quince-stock upon
which a Pear should be graffed; it being a certain sign that the sap is
the most pleasant and most conformable of all others to the nature of the
Pear Tree, because both of them are so perfectly joined together, and do grow
equally great: this best kind of Quince-tree may be known by its fruit, which
is longer and bigger then that of the other sorts; it may also be known by its
bark, which is smoother, blacker, and clearer; and by its leaf, which is longer
and bigger than the others.

Quince-stocks may be raised by sowing the kernels as I have said before, but
the best and more ready way is to have them from Shoots: to which end you must
plant great stocks of the best sort of Quince-trees, about four foot assunder,
and at the time of the new Moon in March, cut them at an inch above ground, to
the end that they may put forth store of young Shoots, which must neither be
stripped nor pruned for fear of withering; but after they are shot up to the
height of about a foot and half, they must be covered a foot high with good
earth, to which must be mingled a little rotten bedmould to make them take root
the sooner; The Winter following, if these young Sprouts have put forth any
roots, they may be taken away though feeble, and planted in the Nursery: After
these shoots are all taken off, it will be necessary to cover the old stocks
all the winter with a little earth, and to uncover them again in February, to
the end that they may put forth new Shoots, which when grown up, must be heaped
with earth as the former: and by this means you may gather every year good
store of plants: There is yet another way of raising Quince-stocks in good
ground, by couching some of the boughs of the trees in the earth in winter
time, as they do with Vines. The same course may be taken to raise young plants
of the Paradise-Apple, but they are longer in growing then the Quinces.

The Plants proper for such Nurseries as are designed for the graffing of
Peaches, Peach that cleaves to the stone.
Pavies, Abricots, and Plumms, are those of young Damson-trees and S.
Julien-plums, because their sap is more pleasant than that of other Plummes,
and also because they last the longest: Some there are that plant stocks of
Abricots and Almonds, to incculate upon them Peaches and Pavies; but these are
very subject to a gum which gathers about the Scutcheon (or Bud) so that if
the Gardener be not very careful to take it away or prevent it, the bud is
oftentimes enoked and killed by it: True it is, that when they do take, they
bear very fair fruit, and, amongst others, admirable Nectarines. For this
cause, the best and surest stock for these kinds of fruit, is that of Damsons,
and the S. Julien, but especially that of Damsons, because it lasts longer, and
has the sweeter sap. This sort of stock is bred at the foot of Damson-trees,
and the S. Julien, which do put forth many suckers.

The Almond-tree is likewise not bad for this purpose in such grounds as are
hot and sandy: but it proves not ordinarily from a Nursery, because that being
replanted it takes again but very seldom; It is for this cause necessary to
breed it in the place where it must stand; which is done by sowing sweet
Almonds there at the beginning of March, after they have lain in sand to bud
during the winter: and there likewise to inoculate them with a Scutcheon, A
Locil dormant, a close shot bud.
the bud not shot forth, that very year at the end of August, or the beginning
of September, when the greatest force of the sap is past; or else the second
year, if they be too weak the first. In the same manner the stones of Peaches
or Abricots, may be sown and inoculated; and these without staying for the
month of March, may be put into the ground as soon as the fruit is eaten: but
the trees graffed upon them, last not so long as upon an Almond-stock.

Peach-trees and Pavies may also be brought up from a stone, but they do very
often degenerate; and there are no Peaches but those of Pau, Persiques,
Violet-peaches, and the common Peaches, which do ordinarily take this way.

Abricot-trees, although they may be graffed upon all sorts of Plum-stocks, do
nevertheless bear the fairest fruit upon those that have the biggest Plums,
and especially when they are white. When they are inoculated upon Damsons,
their fruit is dryer and more firm: those Abricot-trees which come of a stone,
bring forth less Abricots, but earlier ripe, and of a quicker taste then
others, which. makes some to esteem them the more; but they do not agree with all
sorts of ground, and are better in those that are hot than in the richer soils.

The good sorts of Plummes may be graffed upon all kinds of Plumme-trees,
except such as bear small sower Plums, because their sap is too harsh.

To make Nurseries of Cherry-trees and other red fruits, you must plant the
Suckers of white and red Merisiers are trees bearing small and sour Cherries:
Of this fort are our Honey-Cherries and ordinary black Cherries, especially the
wild kinds of them.
Merisiers, because their sap is more pleasant and nourishing then that of the
black Merisier: There is nevertheless a sort of the red Merisier, whose fruit
is bitter, upon which the ordinary Cherry and Hart-cherries being graffed, the
tree becomes as strong and as big as upon other stocks, but there grows a
great knob about the joint of the graff, which marres the beauty of the Tree,
and shows that this sort of Merisier has its sap very sharp and bitter,
because its stock increases not in proportion to the graff.

The best stock to inoculate or graffe May-Cherries upon, is that of the
Suckers of forward Cherries, though it be true that thereby the fruit becomes
not so big or fair, nor the tree it self so strong as those which are
graffed upon good Merisiers. The Cherry-stock is also better then the Merisier
to graffe Grosses griotes
Morella-Cherries upon, because that tree ordinarily blooming much and bearing
but little, it comes by being graffed upon a Cherry-stock to bear more
plentifully, and preserves its fruit better, because the sap of a Cherry-stock
is not so plentiful as that of the Merisier.

It is in vain to have procured good plants, if care be not taken to plant them
in a good soil. To this purpose, a soft earth must be chosen somewhat fresh,
and which is rich enough to be planted upon without dunging, especially when in
it you would plant Nurseries of Pear Trees and Apple Trees brought up from
kernels; for the dung breeds in the ground great white Worms, which eat the
roots of the Plant, and cause it to die. Besides that, Earth too fat and too
much manured, breeds Cankers in the bark of the Trees, which destroys them
utterly: but if the earth be not otherwise good enough of its self without
being amended, it is better to stay till the Plant has put forth its third
leaf before it be dunged, because that after three years it will be strong
enough to resist those Worms which the dung breeds.

The ground most proper to plant a Nursery in, is such as has neither been too
much cultivated, nor too leight; but contrarily, that is the best which has a
body; and provided, that you have some short small mould to put about the roots
in planting: that which is new broke up and has lain long, is the most
excellent of all.

Having then found a good plot of ground proper to make a Nursery, you must
there open trenches of the largeness and depth of a spade-bit, placing them
three foot, or three foot and half from one another, and observe, as much as
you can, to make them so that one of the ends lie toward the South, and the
other toward the North: For being thus disposed, and the Nurseries well
graffed, that is, the Graffes set with their backs toward the South (which
must always be observed if you would graff well) or as near it as is possible,
the trees do the better uphold one another, and defend themselves much better
from the great Winds of the South.

The ground being thus prepared, you must in the month of November, or
December, choose a fair day to plant it in, because that in fair weather the
earth is short, easier to work, and better encloses the root of the Plant; but
in such soyles as are moist and lateward, it is better to stay till the end of
February before you plant, because too much moisture and water corrupt and rot
the roots during winter. For this reason therefore, in cold and moist countries
the water must of necessity be dreyned out, and the earth heighthened in the
form of ridges, upon which the trees are to be planted: but the hot and early
grounds must be planted in November, that the roots beginning before winter,
whilst the warm weather lasts, to put forth some small filaments, may so unite
themselves with the earth, that the trees at Spring may thereby grow and
flourish much the better.

Having chosen a good Soil, a proper Season, and a fair Day, he that would
plant a Nursery of Apple and Pear-stocks brought up of kernels, must observe to
cut off half the root of the Plant, and to pare off the top to about seven
inches: then to place them in the trenches at the distance of seven or eight
inches betwixt each twig, and to put them no deeper within the ground than they
were in that place from whence they were taken: the trenches, after this, must
be filled with mould that is soft and small, that it may the better enclose the
roots of these small Plants; and the earth must be dug on both sides, and
heaped about the Plant, that no more of it appear above than the height of
half a fingers breadth.

Nurseries of Quince-stocks, and such as are designed for the bringing up of
Dwarf-trees, be they Pear Trees, Peaches, or Plum-trees, must be planted after
another manner: For these Plants must be placed in the trenches at the distance
of two foot from one another, and must be cut at 2. or 3. inches from the
ground, to the end that they may put forth young wood upon which to graff;
only the Paradise Apple Tree must not be cut lower then a foot and half from
the earth, because this kind of tree being a long time in growing big, it will
be necessary to preserve its old wood to graff upon in a cleft, and to enjoy it
thereby the sooner. For by this kind of graffing it comes much more quick then
by inoculating it with a Scutcheon.

Nor is it sufficient for the bringing up of fair trees, to have procured good
Plants, and to have planted them well; but it is further of very great
importance to be careful in the well ordering of them. To this end, about the
month of May, when the little Pear or Apple-stock begins to bud, you must with
your finger carefully take off all the buds but one from each stock, so that it
may put forth but one shoot only, and at the same time cause all the weeds to
be taken away which are grown about them; and at the beginning of June in a
fair season, the Nursery must be dug and laid even the depth of a good
spade-bit in the middle of the furrow only; for the Gardener when he comes
near the Stocks at about a foot distance, must carry the spade lightly, and
not enter it above half so deep as before, for fear of hurting the roots. This
being done, it must be covered all over with Fern, while the earth is yet
fresh, about four inches thick, yet so that it choke not the Stocks:
Afterward, about the end of October, the Fern must be handsomely gathered
together with the spade, and cast into the middle betwixt the rows of the
Plants, and the Stocks must afterward be uncovered about the depth of half a
spade-bit in manner of a trench, that during the Winter the raines and snow may
the more easily fall to the roots of the Plants to moisten them. In uncovering
the Plants, the earth that is taken away must be thrown upon the Fern, to
cause it to rot the better; but care must be taken to leave the earth about the
foot of the Plants an inch or two thick, that they may be preserved from the
frost, and for fear of cutting or uncovering their roots.

When the Winter is past, the Plants must be covered again in the month of
March in a fair season, and the whole Nursery dug again and laid eeven. In
digging it, the Fern must be cut with the spade, and mingled with the earth,
because it serves for soil, and has a particular property to make the Stocks
put forth a great many Filaments, or small haire-roots. It is necessary that
the Nursery be thus kept and renewed after the same fashion every year, until
the Plants have been two years graffed: But in those Countries where Fern is
not to be had, the Nurseries must be leightly dug thrice during every
Summer, to keep them fresh, and to hinder the weeds from growing: These three
stirrings must be in March, May, and July; and in the month of October, the
Plants must always be uncovered, as I have before showed.

If the Nursery being thus dug profit not, it must in the month of November
of the third year, be dunged; the earth being every where and equally
overspread and covered with good, fat, half-rotten dung, to the thickness of
four inches, and at the same time dug to mix the earth and dung together.
When the Nursery is to be dunged on this manner in the month of November, it
will be needless to dig it, or to uncover the Plants in the month of October.

Care must also be taken when the Plants begin to form their stemmes to cleanse
them by cutting off all their shoots to the height of six or eight inches only
to prepare a place for the graffe; and then to cut off nothing above that
height, because these young Stock are so tender that no branch can be taken
from them, or their tops be cut without altering their sap, which keeps them
back, and much hinders their growth. For this reason, you must observe, not to
strip or cut off any of the wood of the Quince-stocks, Plumme-stocks, or
Merisiers, planted in a Nursery before the month of March in their second
year; but then in stripping them it must be observed, that not above one branch
(or two at most) is to be left upon each root; which must at the same time be
cleansed to the height of about eight inches, to make place for the Scutcheons;
and each stump must be cut close, that it may be recovered when it shall be
time to inoculate. In the same manner the stocks of the Paradice-Apple are to
be prepared, that they may be graffed upon a cleft.

The Nurseries of Stocks, being in this manner well planted and dressed, will
be strong enough to be graffed in their third or fourth year: those of
Quince-trees and Plum-trees in their second.

Those that would make Nurseries of Wall-nut-trees, Chest-nuts, or Oaks, to be
planted in Walks, and Avenues before their Houses, or in their Woods, must
procure of the fairest Wall-nuts, Chest-nuts, and Acorns, which must
immediately be put into beds of sand, either in Vessels, or else in some Cellar
or covered place, where the frost may not hurt them, until March, when they
must be planted in good ground well dug; with this difference nevertheless,
that the Nuts must be set in trenches made eight foot from one another, and
seven or eight inches betwixt each Nut. The Nuts, being so set and dressed, as
is before-said, for the Nurseries, will put forth trees strong enough at 4. or
five years to be taken up and set in the places where they are to grow: but the
Acorns and Chestnuts must be scattered very near to one another, and confusedly
in the trenches made at two foot distance, and covered with earth at the depth
of four or five fingers only: afterward they must be kept with some small
slight dressing and digging for three years, without pulling or stripping them;
after which time they are to be taken up and planted in Woods: Or if you be
desirous to raise them into tall trees, for Walks or Avenues, they must be set
in a Nursery like Peary-stocks: And then, when they are set into the Nursery,
they must be cut at an inch from the ground, and so left at liberty to shoot
out till March, of their second year; when they must be stripped to the height
of half a foot only, and but one sprigg left upon them: After which, they must
not be touched, nor any branch of them be cut, till they be taken up to be
placed where they must grow.

Although, according to the order of my design, I am to speak of no Trees, but
such only as bear fruit, having enclosed all my Walks within the compass of a
Garden, yet has the beauty of Woods and Walks carried me insensibly out of it:
And now I find my self so far engaged, that I believe I may, returning to the
path from which I have strayed, speak a word or two of the different sorts of
wild Trees, with which Woods and Avenues may be planted, and the manner also of
breeding them.

For Avenues, men commonly plant Lime-trees, Elmes, Pines, or Firretrees. For
the bringing up of Lime-trees and Elmes, the seeds of them must be gathered,
and sown in the month of March, upon beds of Earth, after the manner already
mentioned, for Quince, and Pear-stocks, then covered with small mould, or
rotten leaves of trees: For 3. years you must keep them with a slight dressing,
that the weeds grow not: These Seeds thus sown, shoot forth Plants which may
well be taken up after three years, to be planted in Woods, or in Nurseries, if
you desire to have them fair Trees, proper for Avenues; you may likewise take
Suckers of Elms, and plant them in a Nursery like the Srocks grown from Kernels.
Tree-stocks, or the Shoots of Quince-trees.

To bring up Pines and Fir-trees, you must, in the month of October, sow the
seeds of them, scattering them without any order in shady places, covered with
leaves, as in Woods that are somewhat open: And when they are come up, leave
them there till they be three or four foot high, when you may take them up, and
set them where they must stand, because being removed when they are young, they
do the more easily take again. They may also be brought up in a Nursery; but
then they must be taken up, being very small; and if they are to be carried
far, care must be had of coning them in bags, with their Roots well wrapped up
in moss or earth, that they come not to the air; and observe to plant them
immediately in good ground in the shade, three or four foot distant every way
from one another, that you may take them up with the earth about their roots,
when they are fit to be set in the places where they must stand.

CHAP III.
The manner of graffing the Nurseries.

THere being many different ways of graffing, each where of is to be spoken of
particularly and apart; I suppose, that not only by the order of this
Discourse, but also according to that of the Seasons, I am to begin with that
which is performed in a Cleft, and to give the Rules which must be observed in
it.

Graffing in a Cleft is that which takes best upon the Pear and Apple-stocks,
because it comes much sooner then that which is performed by Inoculation. When
the Stocks of these Plants are strong enough to be graffed, the first Rule
which is to be observed, is, to graff them all at one time; and to that end, to
pull upall those Stocks that are too weak, and plant them in some other place,
for they would otherwise choke the Graffs, and hinder them from growing: Then
you must graff them in Febr. or March at the full Moon, that they may spring
with the more vigor: For it is certain, that if they be graffed in the Wane,
they will bear too soon. Care must also be taken to cut the Syens from such
Trees as are in their year of bearing, and full of Fruit-buds; and when they
are grown, they must be cut in the Wane, at six or seven foot high, to form the
head of the Tree.

To graff well after this way, you must cut off the Stock you would graff upon
toward the bottom, five or six inches from the ground; it must be cut aslope
like a Hinds foot, to the middle of the stemm, and the other half flat, that
thereby the Syen may the better be placed upon it: Because the Tree being this
cut, does the more easily recover it self. You must also be careful to cut
this slope toward the North, for two reasons: First, because it will not dry
so soon as if it were exposed to the South, and therefore recovers it self the
sooner: And again, because the back of the Graff must (as I have said before)
always be turned toward the South, or as near it as may be; in as much as
thereby it better resists the great winds: And on the contrary, when turned
with the back toward the North, it is by the least wind loosened and broken.
Now that the back of the Graffs may be turned toward the South, it is easy to
be judged, that the slope of the Cut must be on the side exposed to the North.

It is further necessary to be observed, that no more but one Syen be put upon
each Stock, how big soever, to the end it may form but one stemm, and also that
the Graff may become proportionable to the bigness of the Stock, that is,
strong if that be strong, and little if that be weak: As soon as the Tree is
graffed, it must presently be covered handsomely, and without shaking the Syen)
with clay or galt, mixed with very small Hay or Moss, lest it dry and crack.

This way of graffing in a Cleft is also best, upon Paradice-Apple-stocks, and
Plumm-stocks, when you graff other Plumms upon them: It is also good for
Cherries and Merisiers.

Inoculating by a Scutcheon, with a A Ocil Dormant, with a sleeping or close
Bud.
Bud not shot forth, is better then graffing upon Quince-stocks; and upon
Plumme-stocks, when you put upon them Peaches, Pavies, and Abricot-trees. But
the Scutcheon must be placed upon young wood, and where the Stock is not too
big, because when the bark is hard, they take with more difficulty, and are the
longer before they be recovered. Now for as much as these trees are seldom
brought up with a high stemm, for Standers, but are for the most part designed
to be planted in Hedges, against Walls, or kept low, as Dwarf-trees, and for
that reason ought to be branched from the foot, there may two Buds be put upon
each Stock, when they are inoculated; only care must be taken not to put them
both upon one side, one above the other: For by that means they will harm one
another, and coming to shoot will give an ill shape unto the tree. The best way
to place them is on both sides, and one higher than the other, because when
they are put over against each other, it proves very hard to cut off the head
of the tree betwixt the two Buds; and the place cut, will the more hardly
recover it self.

Some there are, who do most esteem the trees that come of one bud only,
accounting them handsomer then others: Wherefore in the inoculating of them,
they put but one bud upon each stock; for my part, though I am of their opinion
so far, as to think those trees which have but one stemm to be more natural,
and consequently more beautiful than others, especially Dwarf-standers, which,
to be well fashioned, ought to have their stemm about a foot high; yet I would
counsel the putting of two buds always upon every stock, because, if either of
the two take, the Stock may not fail: But then too, it is only upon condition
to leave only the best growing, and to take off the other at the beginning of
the second year.

This kind of inoculating, with a bud not shot forth, is to be performed in the
wane of the Moon, in June, July, or August, always upon young wood, because it
has more sap, and the bark, by consequence, more tender, and easy to be taken
up: For this reason, in the planting of Quince and Plumm-stocks, they must be
cut at two inches from the ground (as I have said before) to make them put
forth new wood, but not inoculated until their second year, to the end, that
they may be strong enough: For if they be weak, the Graff cannot shoot forth
but with difficulty, and does but languish. There being no more certain means
of procuring fair trees, than by graffiing and inoculating upon a Stock that is
strong and vigorous.

The time proper for inoculating, depends upon the quality of the Territory,
because according as that is early or late, so must the work there be earlier
or later; it being easy to judge, that in hot Countries, where the sap begins
to ascend betimes, it descends also sooner; and on the contrary, that it lasts
longer in moist grounds, where the Spring is more lateward: For this cause, the
Gardener must not always stay for the second sap, but often inoculate after
the first, especially upon Plum-stocks: It is true, that it is better to stay
for the second, when Abricot-stocks, Almonds, and Peach-stocks, are to be
inoculated upon: Because their first sap is so abundant, that if, while it is
in force, the bark be cut to put in a bud, it issues out, and causes a Gumm
about the Scutcheon, which oftentimes chokes and kills it.

To hinder this mischief, the Gardener must be careful to untye the Scurcheon
betime, to give way for the passage of the sap; but the best and most assured
remedy is, not to inoculate these sorts of trees, until the end of their
second sap, after that the greatest force of it is past: He must also be
careful, not to inoculate them, but in a dry season, for the rain mischiefs
the bud, and hinders the taking of it.

Peaches and Pavies must always be inoculated with a Scutcheon, upon
Damson-stocks, or the St. Julien, Abricot, or Almond-stocks. But, as I said
before, the Almond-tree, if re-planted, very seldom takes again; wherefore,
such as would put Peach-trees and Pavies upon it, must sow Almonds in the place
where they desire their trees should grow; and those sweet Almonds only,
because they have a better sap to nourish the Graffe than the bitter ones.

The Almond-tree takes much better than the Plumm-tree, in dry and hard
grounds, because, having but few roots, it needs not so much nourishment; it is
also not so subject to put forth many suckers from its foot as the Plumm-tree,
and wears not out the ground so much: But it decays and dies much sooner then
the Plumm-tree.

Plumm-trees may be graffed upon other Plumm-trees, both by Inoculation, and in
a Cleft; but the Graff upon a Cleft comes to its perfection very much faster
than that which is inoculated.

Abricots may be inoculated upon all sorts of Plumm-stocks; but they bear the
fairest fruit, when they are put upon such as bring forth the biggest
Whiteplumms, because these are somewhat of their nature: And by the same
reason, when they are inoculated upon the stock of a small black Damson, their
fruit is dryer, firmer, and more proper for the Confectioner.

Cherry-trees, and other red Fruits, may both be graffed in a Cleft, and
inoculated A Ocil-dormant, with a shut bud.
with a Budd not shot forth; but it is a better way, and more assured to
inoculate them A Ocil poussant, with an open bud.
with a Budde shooting forth: This kind of inoculation is like the other, by a
bud not shot, save only that it must be done about mid- June, and that
presently upon it the Head or Branches of the tree must be cut three inches
above the Scutcheon, to the end that the sap, finding no other course, may come
freely to it, and cause it to spring.

There is another sort of graffing like unto that which is performed in a
Cleft, which they call Emporie-piece.
Taking out a piece, because in this manner of graffing the stock is cleft but
very little, instead whereof a place is cut in the wood to enter the Graff.
This way of graffing is principally put in practice upon great trees, because
they cannot wholly be split, without harming them much: and in graffing them it
must be observed, not to cut off their heads too short, nor too near the stemm,
because they recover not without great difficulty; and being so wounded, do
very often die: You must also observe, to leave them some small branches here
and there upon the top of the tree uncut off, to receive a part of the sap; for
when that begins to ascend, and instead of meeting great branches (as it was
wont) in which to spread it self, meets with nothing but small Graffs, too weak
to receive it all, it chokes them through its abundance, and causes them to
dye: But then after the Graffs are taken, and have well shot forth, you must in
March, the next year after, take away wholly all those boughs which were left,
and cut them as close as may be, to the stemm of the tree, that their places
may the more easily be covered again. This kind of graffing must be put in
practice in February, as well as the other which is in a Cleft.

If these great trees have their bark too hard, and their wood too stubborn to
be graffed upon, it will be better to cut off their heads somewhat high, to
make them put out young wood and new branches, upon which you may graff, in
their third year: But seeing these great trees cannot be graffed but very high,
and at the end of the boughs, care must be had to put some twiggs about the
Graffs as soon as they are put in; for coming to grow, their shoot is so
tender, and so full of leaves, that during the two first years they are very
subject to be broken with the least wind. These twigs also serve to hinder the
Birds from settling upon the Graffs, and spoiling them.

There are, besides these mentioned, diverse other different ways of graffing,
as that which is called Enter en flusteau, is, To lodge a short Graff (cut off
with some more bark at the foot then needs to cover it) within the tender bark
of a shoot or branch that is little bigger then the Graff it self.
En flusteau (or, In a Flute) which is used for Chestnut-trees about Midsomer,
when the trees are in their full sap; And that which is made betwixt the bark
and the wood upon great trees, which have their bark too thick: But this last
sort of Graff is not so good, because it is very subject to be broken with the
least winds, and the stemm can very hardly recover it self. Some use yet
another way of graffing, very extraordinary; They take the end of a twigg
(about as long as the breadth of 3. fingers) of that Fruit which they would
graff, which they sharpen flatwise, and in the month of March or April, when
the sap is in the tree, having made an Incision, across in the bark of the
Stock, they place the Graff in it, tying it with hemp, as in inoculating: This
sort of Graff does not ordinarily take, no more than that which is made by
Approach.

For graffing in a Cleft, it is indifferent, whether you cut your Syens in the
increase of the Moon, or in the wane, because, that in the month of February
(which is the proper season for this sort of graffing) there is no sap in the
trees: For which reason, you may, if you please, cut them even in the month of
December, or January, and keep them until Febr. or March, provided
nevertheless, that they be put halfway into the ground, every one apart by it
self; but in Summer, as all graffing must be performed in the wane, to bring
forth much fruit, and the boughs cannot be graffed too fresh, being then in
their full sap; so they must likewise be cut in the wane: But that which ought
principally to be observed for all sorts of Syens, is, that they must be
gathered from such trees as are in their year of bearing, that is, very full of
fruit, or of buds in order to it: For it is certain, that the Syens contain in
them the same qualities with the tree from which they were taken: and therefore
if the tree be in the year of its rest, in the which it bears none, or but
little fruit, they cannot be so good: And indeed, Experience teaches us, that
the Graffs which are cut from trees without fruit, bear always but very
little, and that very seldom. This hinders not, but that one may take Syens
very good for bearing, sometimes from Graffs of two years: For although these
trees have no Fruit-buds, because they are yet too young, they may nevertheless
be in their bearing year, and so communicate that good quality to their Syens:
But because the bearing year cannot be distinguished from that of their Repose,
but only by their Fruit-buds, it is always most certain, to gather the Syens
from such trees, as are full of those buds.

The Syen, which is a shoot but of one year, when the wood of it is become
firm, is as good to be graffed in a Cleft, as that which bath old wood upon it:
It is true, that this last bears fruit sooner then the other; and in case of
necessity, when Syens of the last year cannot be gotten, one may cut such as
are of two years growth; but these shoot not forth with so much vigor, as
those which are younger, and by the same reason do also bear fruit sooner.

The Nurseries being graffed, must be diversely cultivated, according to the
nature of the trees which you bring up in thom: To keep those Plants well which
are graffed in a Cleft, and designed for Trees with a high stemm, such as
Pear Trees, Apple Trees, and others, for standers, you must be careful to pull
off all the buds of the Graff as soon as it begins to shoot, leaving only one
bud upon it, that it may grow up but with one single stemm: After which, they
must be left to grow at liberty, because the young sprout is then so tender and
delicate, that the least branch cannot be cut off without much altering the
sap, and wronging the stemm; which by that means would be the longer in growing
big: For this reason, those that are overhasty to cleanse their Nurseries, by
taking away the superfluous branches too soon, do hinder them and spoil them;
for the Graffs, instead of growing big, and strengthening themselves at the
foot in proportion to their growth, do, when they are pruned, shoot up
suddenly, and not being able any longer to uphold themselves, must of necessity
be kept up with sticks, which spoils them, and hinders a good part of the
Plants in the Nursery from coming to good: It is therefore necessary to stay
until the third year, before you begin to strip the Graffs; and then also at
the first you must be content only to writhe the branches, which you intend to
take away, with your hand, at three or four inches from the body, unto the
height of two or three foot, to the end only, to stop the sap, and to hinder
it from quitting the stemm, and spending it self in useless branches; but in
the month of April, in the year following, those branches must be wholly taken
away, and cut off as near the stem as may be, that they may recover again the
sooner, and no knot be caused in that place, from which each of them was cut.
In this manner, the taking away all useless branches from the trees must be
continued from year to year, according to their strength, to raise and bring up
their stemm to six or seven foot high; at which height they must be stopped
(by cutting them) in the month of March, and the wane of the Moon; to
strengthen them downwards, and form their heads.

Those that are curious, to have Apple Trees with a fair stemm, and strait,
must graff their Nurseries with Syens, taken from the Apple Tree, called de
Suraut, which bear great sour Apples; because these Syens will the first year
put forth a shoot of six or seven foot high, growing more in one year than
others in two, and so in four years do make great trees fit to be taken up, and
set in the place where they are to grow; upon which, two years after they may
graff any kinds of good Apples, which they desire to have.

For such Nurseries as are inoculated with a bud not shot forth, being for
trees designed to be planted against a wall, or to be kept low, as shrubs, or
dwarf-trees, they must be ordered otherwise than those whereof I have already
spoken: For the stock upon which you inoculate must not be cut off till after
the Winter, when the bud is taken, and ready to shoot forth; and then you must
observe, not to cut it lower than at three fingers breadth above the bud, for
fear of altering it; and for the same reason, to cut it aslope, with the cut
outward; and after that, let the bud grow without touching it, except it shoot
upward too strongly without putting forth any branches: For then it will be
necessary to stop it at half a foot high, by pinching it with your fingers, to
make it grow strong, and put forth nearer to the foot; it being the beauty of
Trees planted against a wall, or kept low, to be well furnished with branches
from the foot.

Pear Trees graffed upon Quince-stocks, cannot be fit to be re-planted, till
after their second, third, or fourth year, when their bark is well recovered:
But Peaches and Pavies, when they are strong, and have shot well, are better to
be taken up after their first year, than after their second or third leaf;
because, as they come very quickly, so are they sooner fit to be removed than
others: Besides that, being of a dry wood, they spring again the better, when
they are young, and have a tender bark. For which reason also, care must be
taken in the re-planting of them, to cut off the stump which remains above the
Graffe, and then to cap it with galt, or clay mixed with hay; by which means
the bark will the more easily be recovered.

The order of graffing differing sorts of Fruit in the same Nursery, depends
upon the Ingenuity of the Master But the best, in my opinion, is either to
graffe the same kind of fruit upon a whole row of Stocks, or if but a part,
then next to one another; and at the same time, to write in a book the names of
the Fruits, the quantity of stocks that are graffed with them, and in what Row
they be: And if in the same row there be diverse stocks graffed with different
fruits, to mark with a great stake the beginning of each sort, to the end,
that when you would take up a Tree, you may not be mistaken in the kind of
fruit which you desire.

Such as are curious to procure from all parts the best sorts of Pears, must,
when they graff their Nurseries, graff many fruits of the largest kind, such as
Pound-pears, Summer Bon Crestiens, and others, which have store of sap; upon
which afterward they may graff in a Cleft other sorts of rare Pears, whereof
the Syens cannot be had in Summer, either because they are at too great a
distance, or else because their wood is too tender and delicate to be
inoculated: Those that are curious, may likewise re-graff upon the same trees
Winter- Bon Crestiens, and Bergamots, which will thereby become bigger and
fairer.

Graffing may be practiced all the year long; that is, in a Cleft, in the
months of February, March, and April; by inoculating with a bud shooting
forth, in May and June; with a bud not shot, in July, August, September, and
the beginning of October, upon Almond-stocks and Peaches, grown from a stone:
And again, in a Cleft, in the months of November, December, and January: But
in these last seasons they do not ordinarily take, so that it is always better
and surer to graff in the proper seasons.

Curiosity has persuaded some to invent extraordinary Graffs, by mingling the
species of trees entirely different, that thereby they might prevail with
Nature, to bring forth new monstrous Fruits: They were persuaded, that by
passing the branch of a Vine through the body of a Walnut-tree, pierced with a
Wimble, and afterward exactly stopping both ends of the hole, this branch
would take its nourishment from the Nut-tree, and so might produce Grapes full
of Oil, instead of Wine; they believed, that by graffing a Rose-bush upon a
Holly-tree, or a Broom, it would bring forth green or yellow Roses; that having
graffed the An Apple with a blackisn rind, and red within, like our Queen-Apple.
Calville-Apple upon a black Mulbery, or Peach-trees upon Quinces, they might
gather black Apples, and Peaches without stones: But Experience has taught
them, that Nature is most chaste in her Alliances, and most faithful in her
Productions, and that she cannot be debauched, or corrupted by any Artifice:
Indeed it is but a vain imagination, to believe that the Syen can quit its
Species, to take that of the stock upon which it is graffed; it being certain,
that it takes nothing from it besides its nourishment. And, as every one knows,
that things which are contrary in their nature, endeavor always to destroy
each other, and that they can never be perfectly united together, because union
cannot consist but betwixt things of the same nature; so may every one easily
judge, that Syens cannot prove, or take effect, except upon stocks of the same
kind, or which have a sap conformable to them: Experience showing us, that they
either grow or languish according as the sap of the stock, that nourisnes them,
is more or less proper for them: For this reason, a Pear Tree can never take
upon an Apple-stock, nor Peaches upon Quince-trees, because their Species are
wholly different. I deny not, but the stock or foot, of trees which are
graffed, does in some manner communicate its quality to the Graffs it bears;
but it never causes them to change their kind. The Winter Bon Crestiens being
graffed upon the Pear as big as a Man's fist.
Gros Rateau, the Pound-Pear, or the Summer Bon Crestien, bear always the same
kind of fruit: but they bring forth bigger Pears, because the sap of those
trees, upon which they are graffed, is very abundant: For the same reason
Peaches become very fair, being inoculated upon an Abricot.

Hart-Cherries, and A kind of little, sweet, and long Cherry: Merisier is a
small, bitter, and wild Cherry-tree.
Guisnes, are bigger upon a Merisier, than upon a Cherry-stock: And the
Morella-Cherries set upon a Cherry-stock, prove better than the Hart-Cherries
so put, because of the likeness and conformity of their sap; wherefore it may
be concluded, that to graff well, you must never put any trees but upon such
stocks as are proper for them: As the great kind of black Mulberrie, upon that
of the small kind; it being certain, that it takes better upon that, than upon
the white Mulberry; the Almond-tree upon the black Damson; the small Medlar
upon the white Thorn, or Quince-tree; the Chesnes verts, The Holm Oak, or
French Oak, which never casts its leaves, but is always green.
green Oaks must also, for the same cause, be graffed in a Cleft upon the
common Oak, but somewhat late, because their sap is more lateward.

CHAP. IV.
Of the several kinds of Ground, and the Trees which prove best upon each of
them.

AFter you have brought up fair Trees in your Nurseries, before you can have
Fruit of them, you must of necessity plant them somewhere else, be it against a
wall, or in the open air. But as the best trees cannot prosper, unless they
meet with a good soil, very great care must be taken before they be planted, to
prepare the earth well for them, and to make it good. According to this order,
therefore, having already treated of Nurseries, I come now to speak of the
different sorts of earths, and of those trees which agree best with each of
them.

Those who have Gardens and Orchards, situated in a very good soil, need not
all these instructions, because the excellent nature of their ground does more
of it self, and without any pains, than that which is amended with the greatest
care. The only design of this Discourse, being but only to help Nature,
presupposes her to be sick, and to have need of succors from abroad.

Those then that would plant, must, above all things, observe the quality of
their ground, and know whether it be strong or light, whether it be too dry or
too moist, soft or stony; not only, that he may give it such helps as are
necessary and capable to correct its fault, but also to plant in it such sorts
of trees as are proper for it: Because it being impossible, so to dung or amend
a ground, as to make it absolutely to change its nature, especially for great
Plants, it is certain that we must conform to it, and set no trees but such as
will take, in it: For to endeavor to force Nature is but to lose our labor.

Every one may easily know the quality of the earth of his own Garden;
wherefore I think it sufficient to say what sorts of Fruit Trees will take best
upon each ground.

Garden-Pear-trees will thrive best in a soft earth, and of a great depth, for
their roots grow downwards, and always search toward the bottom of the
ground; so that it is observed, as soon as they meet with hard rocky Tuff, a
kind of white sand, or soft and brittle stone, oftentimes lying in flakes in
goodground.
earth, or Glaise; A moistslimy white soil.
Galt, they turn yellow, their tops dry up, and they diminish rather than
increase.

But for Apple Trees, seeing their roots tend not downward, but spread toward
the superficies of the earth, they need not so great a depth of it. But then it
must likewise be strong, so that they may there find store of nourishment, and
fresh also, that their roots may run into it the more easily: I deny not, but
Apple Trees may grow in a sandy ground, and bear very good Fruit, though
finding less nourishment there, they cannot put forth so many branches, nor
have those they do put sorth so strong.

Quince-trees thrive best in a soft ground, and somewhat Tresch, fresh or moist
in a lower degree.
fresh, because their roots, which are tender, do there spread without pain,
and gather together good store of nourishment; and, because they grow not deep
within the earth, it is enough for them if they find a good soil of two or
three foot deep; in strong and moist grounds they increase much in wood, and
maintain themselves very green; but then the Fruits graffed upon them, are
harsh, and without color, especially Winter-fruits, as the Bon Crestien:
Whereas, on the contrary, Quince-trees planted in a dry, gravelly, and light
ground, grow not so much in wood, but their fruit is better, fairer colored,
and more tender. The cause of this difference is easy to be known, by him who
considers, that the beauty and vigor of trees depends upon that of their
roots; and that according as they delight themselves in a ground, or else
disagree with it, so the trees must either flourish extremely, or languish,
since it is from their roots, that they draw all their nourishment: for this
reason, when ever you see a tree grow yellow, or diminish, be assured that its
roots are sick.

Now the roots cannot suffer, but either through too much moisture and cold, or
else through too much drought; because both the one and the other of these two
extremes destroys that temper which is requisite in the earth, for the
nourishment of Plants; the water by its cold drives out that heat, which
animates the earth, and so renders it dead and incapable of production: It
stops the sap, and consequently makes the trees to suffer. Hence we see, that
cold rains in Summer, if too frequent, make the greenest trees turn yellow: but
too great heat does likewise cause the same effect; for it dries the earth too
much, and dissipates all that moisture which should nourish the roots. From
this, seeing that the Sun more easily penetrates such grounds as are dry, and
without moisture, it is easy to judge, that Trees growing there must turn
yellow, and changed, sooner than in stronger grounds, which defend themselves
better from the heat.

For the same reason must fruits be tender, and well colored, in dry ground;
and, on the contrary, very harsh rnd gross, without color or taste, in grounds
that are cold and moist: Because it is the Sun, which by its heat dissipates
the cold and gross moisture of the Earth, and renders it more subtle and
delicate: In those grounds, therefore, into the which it pierces most, the
roots finding but little moisture do consequently increase but little in their
wood; but that sap which they do draw from thence, being well prepared, and
very pleasant, makes their fruit sweet in substance, and of a thin skin, which
takes a better color, and causes them to ripen the sooner: Whereas, on the
contrary, the Sun not being able to pierce into strong grounds, the trees are
there nourished with a grosser moisture, which renders their fruit harsh,
unpleasant, and longer in growing ripe: And as Winter-fruits are longer upon
the trees, and do need a greater heat to ripen them, so they do the more
participate of the harshness of the earth which nourished them: Experience
confirms this Truth; insomuch, as we see that in cold and rainy years, the
fruits have neither taste nor beauty, especially in such grounds as are strong
and moist.

After this discourse founded upon Reason, and confirmed by Experience, it is
easy to know what ground is proper for each kind of fruit; and I conceive it
almost needless, to go on to speak more particularly of it; nevertheless, that
I omit nothing, I shall add, that the Plum-tree grows very well upon dry and
stony grounds, because its root is strong and vigorous; that the Almond-tree
takes well also upon the same sort of ground, because it requires but little
nourishment; and that Cherry-trees, with other red fruits, are more delighted
with a soft and sandy earth, because their roots are tender, and spread upon
the surface of the ground.

I must end this Chapter, as I began it, by saying, that it is not written for
such as have Gardens and Orchards, situated in an excellent soil, because that
all sorts of Trees prove well in a good ground. But the ground not being good
every where, and men resolving rather to cultivate and plant that place where
their lot falls, though bad, then to quit it and seat themselves in a better
soil, I conceived it my duty by this advice, co help them in making a good use
of their ground, and to draw all possible advantages from their bad situation,
by planting such trees as may prosper in it.

CHAP. V.
Of the several ways of manuring grounds, what dung is proper for them, and
how it ought to be used.

HE that knows the fault of his ground, whether it be too dry, or too moist,
too hot, or too cold, may easily judge, with what dung it is to be amended,
provided, that he know the different qualities of his dung. For it being
certain, that no fault can be amended, but by its contrary, he must conclude,
that if his ground be too dry, he must moisten it; if too hot and burning, he
must refresh it; as also, that ground too cold and moist, must be heat and
dried. I shall, for this reason, content my self to speak only concering the
different qualities of the several sorts of Dung and Soil, wherewith the ground
may be manured; leaving it to the prudence of the Gardener how to apply them,
and to make use of them, according to the different quality and necessity of
his ground.

Cow Dung, which is, of all, the most common, being thoroughly rotten, is also
the best, because it is the fattest of all others, and so does the more correct
the most ordinary fault of grounds, which is, that they are too dry and hungry.
It preserves it self a long while in the earth, and not having too much heat,
it must be carried and buried before Winter, which is the best season for
dunging, because the Dung upholds the Soil, makes it more movable and light,
and causes the Snow and Rains, which fall in the Winter, to sink the deeper
into it, and by their moisture to render it the more fruitful.

Sheeps dung is also very fat, but being hotter than Cow Dung, it is more
proper for cold grounds; this must be laid and buried in the month of November
before the depth of Winter.

Horse-dung is the least fat of them all, and therefore is not very proper for
Trees, which have always more need of fat and nourishment, than of heat: for
this reason it is most ordinarily used for Kitchen Gardens, to heat the ground,
and thereby to bring up the herbs quickly; it is upon the same account
exceeding good in such grounds as are very moist, to dry them, and thereby to
make them more light and short. It may, notwithstanding, be employed for all
uses, when it is thoroughly rotten, or when mingled with other sorts of dung,
that is, when it has lost all its heat. This must be spread betimes, and
buried in the beginning of Winter, to the end, that all its heat may be
dissipated before the Spring: For if you should stay till Winter is past,
before you make use of it, it might heat too much, and even burn the roots of
the Trees.

Hogs-dung is the coldest of all, and therefore best for the hottest soyls; and
seeing that trees do ordinarily turn yellow, by reason of too much drought, it
is very proper to cause them to flourish again; it must be buried as soon as
ever it is spread on the ground.

Pidgeons-dung is too hot to be used when it is fresh, but when its heat is
extinguished, it does wonderfully reenliven Trees, and give them a new vigor.
It loses its force, and is consumed in the earth in two years: it must be
spread in the beginning of Winter, and not buried till the Spring, by reason of
its heat: It may nevertheless be carried, fresh as it comes out of the
Pidgeonhouse, to the foot of old trees, to renew them; but then, it must be
spread in the beginning of November, two inches thick only, and care must be
had to lay it no nearer than within afoot of the stemm, and not to bury it
until Spring, that, during the Winter, it may receive all the Snow and Rains.

In those Countries, where Dung is hard to be procured, it is very good to make
use of the cleansings of Pools or Lakes, and of the earth of Turfs out upon the
Highways; the scourings of Ponds, being very fat and moist, are excellent
good for such Lands as are light, and which have no Body nor Moisture: But they
are not to be used before the Sun and the Frost have passed over them for a
year or two. The mould of a Turf, out upon the Highway, is always the fattest,
and the best of the whole Country, both because it it is least used, and also,
because it receives the dung of the Bea^ts that pass over it; there must be
taken of it but the depth of half a foot, or a foot at most, according to the
goodness of the soil: It must be well out and chopped into small morsels, before
it be buried, that it may mix the better with the natural mould, and
communicate its goodness unto it. This sort of Earth, being very soft, without
heat, and extremely nourishing, is very excellent to be put into the holes
about the roots of trees, when they are planted, that it may lie close about
them, and fill up all the vacuities, for which end it must be made very short
and small.

Every one knowing the quality of his Ground, and that also of all sorts of
Dung, and other Manure, which may be used, will easily judge, with which sort
his ground is to be amended; but this knowledge will be to small purpose, if at
the same time he know not how to make good use of it: For if the Dung be not
employed as it ought to be, it may hurt the Trees very much, and spoil them,
instead of doing them good.

A man can never take too much care in preparing a Ground well, before it be
planted, because the beauty of the Trees depends absolutely upon it; and the
faults which are there made at the first, become afterward irreparable: It
being almost impossible to search under the roots of a Tree, or to bring any
soil thither, when it is once planted: For this reason it is, that to prepare
the ground well for great Plants, the holes must be opened greater or less,
according as the ground has more or less need of being amended: In the
richest soils they must be made six foot square, and if for Pear Trees, they
must be dug two foot deep, for Apple Trees but one foot: for if the holes be
made deeper, the roots will follow the good mould, and descend to the bottom,
when being straightened, and not finding sufficient nourishment, they languish.
whereas, being planted very high, and their roots spread upon the surface of
the Earth, which is always the best, they profit with pleasure, and bring
forth their fruit bigger, and better nourished.

Now seeing, that in digging these holes, all the earth that is taken out of
them is not equally good, and none but the best must be taken to fill them
again, it is fit to be known, that the uppermost earth is always the most
exexcellent, not only where stone, gravel, or galt, lie very near the sword,
but also even in the best grounds; because the deeper earth having never felt
the heat of the Sun, nor received that pleasant moisture which the Rains bring
with them, is, as it were, dead and incapable of production; and therefore must
never be put again into the hole, where it would remain unprofitable.

For the same reason, if such as plant could have the patience to leave the
holes open for a year; it is certain, that the soil would thereby become the
better, and that the earth, which was taken out of them, would be made more
capable of production, when it had, for that space of time, received the heat
and influences of the Sun. These holes being thus dug, before you fill them,
you must work the bottom well, and then put in of the best mould, the depth of
a foot, and spread upon that half a foot of rotten or chopped dung, which must
then be wrought together with the mould twice or thrice over, until they be
well mixed; because, if the dung should remain all together, it would grow hot,
and spoil the roots of the trees, instead of profiting them. You must
afterward put in a second bed of earth, of the same depth with the first, and
half a foot of dung upon it, mixing them likewise well together; and if there
shall be need, you may also add a third bed, and so fill the hole, till it be
half a foot higher than the rest of the ground, because the dung settles as it
rots.

This order must be followed (as I have said already) according as the earth
has more or less need of being amended, but always rather profusely than
covetously; but if a sufficient quantity of dung cannot be procured, enough to
make three beds, care must be taken, especially to amend the bottom of the
hole, because, that after it is filled, and the tree planted, that can be come
at no more, whereas on the contrary, the upper part of the earth is always
easily dunged.

In moist grounds, and such as have no great depth, it is needless to make
holes wherein to plant the Trees; but after that the ground is well dug and
dunged, according as there is need, it is best to set the Trees upon it,
without sinking them in, and to cover the roots with the mould of Turfs chopped
very small, a foot and half high, and for the breadth of five or six foot round
about the stemm: And because in such places the roots ought to be hindered, as
much as may be, from growing downwards toward the bottom, especially those of
Pear Trees, it must be observed in the planting of them, that all the undermost
roots, and such as descend, are to be cut flat, not aslope like a Hinds foot:
Those Trees which shall be thus planted above ground, may, after three years,
in the month of November, be conveniently dunged upon the roots.

To plant Trees well against a wall, a Trench must be opened of eight foot
wide, and three foot deep; in the digging whereof, care must be had, not to
come near the wall by half a foot; and that side of the Trench also, that is
toward it, must be cut aslope, for fear of uncovering the Foundation, and
causing the ruin of the Wall. Whilst this Trench is in digging, the good
mould must be severed from the bad, and all the stones and roots carefully
taken out of it, if there be any, that it may afterward be filled in the same
manner with the holes before spoken of; that is to say, the bottom of the
Trench must be dug, then a foot deep of good mould put into it, and half a
foot of very rotten dung upon it: These must be well mixed, and the filling of
the Trench continued in the same manner with mould and dung, until it be half a
foot higher than the rest of the ground; and because that Wall-fruits must be
set with greater care than other Trees, the Planter must be curious in causing
better mould, such as that of Turfs, cut small, to be brought thither, if that
which was taken out of the Trench be not good enough; and observe to put in a
double proportion of mould to that of dung. Such as cannot at the first make
Trenches so large, must be content to open them at first but four foot wide,
and two or three years after to enlarge them, according as the Trees shall have
need of it.

When Dwarf-standers are to be planted, sometimes it is necessary to dig
Trenches, and to fill them with the same care as those for Wall-fruits; and
sometimes also, it is sufficient to make holes of six foot square, and to dung
them well: This difference depends upon the quality of the ground, and the
goodness of the soil.

CHAP. VI.
How the different sorts of Fruits are to be disposed, according to the
several Positions.

FOr the well-disposing of Trees in a Garden, there must be considered, The
quality of the Soil, its position in order to the Sun, and its Situation in
regard of the Winds.

After the reading of the Chapter where the different qualities of grounds are
treated of, it is easy to judge, that such Fruits as are tender, and full of
moisture, are to be planted in those grounds that are most pleasant and dry,
and the bigger Fruits, such as Pears and Apples, in those grounds that are
stronger and moister: Because the first (to be tender, and of a good taste) do
require a dryer soil, and the others, needing a more plentiful nourishment,
would have that which is more strong and moist. Now, as in general, all such
fruits as have stones, are more tender than those with kernels, it is better to
plant them in a dryer and softer Earth: But, to be yet more exact, it must be
observed, that among such Fruits as have stones, some are more tender than
others; and that of Fruits with kernels, some are dry, and others full of
moisture; and that they ought, therefore, to be placed in grounds more or less
dry, according to their different qualities. For this cause, such Pears as are
very sull of moisture, as the Winter- Bon Crestien, the Beurre, the Bergamot,
and the other Soft and tender Pears.
Beurrees, or Butter-Pears, are to be placed in the dryer grounds; and those
Pears which are very dry, as the Amadote, and others of the like nature, in
those grounds that are moist; because by this means the quality of the ground
corrects the contrary fault of the Fruit.

This is the reason why the same kinds of Fruit are better in one Garden than
in another: And from hence the Bon Crestien Pears are of a more tender
substance, and a higher taste, when they grow in dry grounds, in which the
Amadote is not so good, becoming too dry and stony; which, on the contrary, is
excellent in moist grounds, where the Bon Crestien has neither color nor
taste, because of the too much moisture, which makes its substance more rude nd
gross.

Some grounds there are of so just a temper, and so sweet a constitution, that
all sorts of Fruits, be they dry or waterish, tender or gross, do com to an
equal perfection in them. In these happy Situations, the Observations which we
have now made, are useless; such as plant in these, can never commit an Error;
and therefore this advice is only proper for those grounds, which being
without that excellent temperament, do approach to the one or the other
extreme, and are either too cold or too hot, too dry or too moist.

Another thing necessary in the disposing of trees, is, to observe their
position in order to the Sun, and that especially in Wall-trees. Now there are
four principal sorts of these Positions: One toward the East, upon which the
Sun shines from its rising until noon: The second, contrary unto it, toward
the West, which receives the Sun from noon till night: The third is that
toward the South, which is enlightened by the Sun from eight in the morning
till 4 in the afternoon. The fourth, which has the least Sun of all, is that
which looks toward the North, and which sees not the Sun but for three hours
in the morning, and as much in the afternoon, during the Summer Solstice. All
other kinds of Positions are comprehended under these four principal ones, and
differ no otherwise, than as they do inequally partake of the Sun, and enjoy
more or less of its heat.

The best Position for Wall-fruits, is that which has the Sun from eight or
ten of the clock in the morning, until the evening, or from the Sunrising
until two or three in the afternoon, because that is the time of the greatest
heat of the day. The other Positions are better or worse, according as they are
more or less exposed to the midday Sun; those which have it only rising or
setting, produce no effect but in very hot Countries, where two hours of the
Sun ripen Fruits more than four or five in these that are cold; for, the
ripening of Fruits proceeds as well from the Quality of the Ground, as from the
Aspect of the Sun. From whence it may be known, that the several sorts of
Fruit are to be planted according to the Situation and Position of the Walls,
and according to the Quality of the Ground.

That Position which looks toward the Sunrise, and loses it not till two or
three in the afternoon, is best for tender Fruits, such as Peaches, Pavies, and
Abricots, which in that site do ordinarily bear more Fruit, and that also
better and fairer colored; it is also most proper for early and tender Pears,
as the small Muscat-Pear; because the heat of the rising Sun being pleasant and
increasing proportionally until noon, pierces the Fruit insensibly, and makes
it more delicate.

The same sorts of Fruits prove not so well in the contrary situation, because
that all the morning they keep somewhat of the moisture and coolness of the
night, and when the Sun begins to shine upon them about noon, passing upon a
sudden from one extremity to another, they are too tender to resist its violent
heat, which scorches instead of ripening them. This comes ordinarily to pass,
especially in very hot soyles. Seeing therefore the sap of these sorts of trees
is more tender and delicate than that of others, it is better to plant them in
other situations, and to set no Fruits toward the West, but such as are
strongest, and Pear Trees rather than Peaches. Such, nevertheless, as have
store of Walls, will not do amiss in exposing the same sorts of Fruits to
different Suns, because, that in bloomingtime there do arise cold winds,
sometimes from one quarter, sometimes from another, which spoil and blast the
blooms: from whence we see, that the same Fruits do take better sometimes in
one situation, sometimes in another.

Those Walls which have the Sun from nine or ten in the morning, until the
evening, are the best for Bon Crestien, and Bergamot Pear Trees, and all other
sorts of Pears that are full of moisture; because these fruits have need of a
great heat to ripen them, and give them a good taste.

That Situation which sees not the Sun, but from one or two in the afternoon,
until night, is good for no other fruit but Pears; out of which also the Bon
Crestien, and Bergamot, are to be excepted, which cannot come to ripeness in
that Situation, unless in a territory extraordinarily hot. In this Situation
may be planted some Abricot-trees, because their fruit will there ripen more
lateward, and have less color, and so will be more proper to be preserved; but
they bear but little, for the most part, when so placed.

The best Situation of all for the Abricot-tree, is that which looks toward the
Sunrising, for in that position it bears more than in any other. But yet, if
from a Tree so placed, you would every year have good store of Abricots, you
must be careful, so long as the Trees are in bloom, to have them covered every
night with Mats, or Linen clothes to preserve them from the frost, and not to
have them uncovered when the Sun shines hot, because that heat scorches the
blooms, being already made tender by the frost and cold of the night. But in
this covering of Abricot-trees, it must be observed, to put the Mats or Clothes
at night upon the Tree, and to fasten them against the Wall, that they may be
the better preserved from the cold winds; but in the daytime, to put them at
some distance from the Wall, that the air may pass between.

Experience teaching us, that this care of covering the Abricot-trees,
preserves their Fruit; every one may easily judge, that during the excessive
heats of Summer, especially such as come upon a sudden, it is very proper, to
hinder the Sun from burning the Fruits, by covering the trees from ten of the
clock till three, either with leavy boughs, or mats, and not to bring them
nearer than a fathom from the tree, that the air may pass betwixt both. This
care does not only preserve the Fruit, but does also keep the trees always
green and vigorous, and defends the young shoots from being dried and scorched
by the too great heat. For the same reason it is, that in Countries
extraordinarily hot, the Fruits must be left more covered with leaves; and in
March the ground being newly stirred at the foot of the trees, there must be
spread some long coorse dung without heat, five or six foot in breadth, and
four inches thick, which must presently be covered with a little mould, to hide
it from sight, that the beauty of the Walk be not spoiled.

In the placing of great Plants, it is not enough to consider the quality of
the Soil, but it must further be observed, how they are exposed to the winds,
that endeavors may be used to set them under shelter; for great winds do very
much harm to trees: And for this reason trees prove better in valleys,
(provided they be not too moist) than upon hills, and high and open Situations,
where they are too much beaten with winds: Besides that, in valleys the soil is
always better, because that the fat, and best moisture of the whole Country,
descends thither with the Rains.

The Winds are to be feared, either for the Frost in the Spring, when the trees
are in bloom, or for the Fruits in Autumn: And therefore, because Cherries,
Plumms, and other stone-fruits, are early in bloom, and more subject to Frosts,
it is best to plant them under shelter from the North, and North-west winds,
because the South and the South-west winds being not ordinarily great, but in
the Autumn, they cannot incommodate those earlier Fruits. But seeing Pear Trees
and Apple Trees put forth their blooms later, and do better resist the Frost;
if in planting them they canuot be sheltred, both from the North-west and
Southern winds, it will be most convenient to keep them from the South-winds,
that their Fruit may be the better preserved, which is not gathered till Autumn.

CHAP. VII.
Of the order and distance which is to be observed in planting of Trees.

SInce that, neither all Soyls, nor all Situations are equally proper for all
forts of Fruits, It may easily be known, that, to order Fruit Trees well, it is
necessary to separate them, and to make particular Plantations of Pear Trees,
Apple Trees, Red-fruits, and Plumm-trees, to the end, that each of these kinds
may be placed in that Soil and Situation, which is the most proper for it:
Besides, that all these sorts of trees growing unequally, and some of them
coming to a greater bigness than others, they must of necessity be planted in
diverse places, and be set at different distances, for they cannot be mixed
together without hurting each other.

An order yet more exact, may be observed in the placing of trees, which is in
every particular Plantation, to place all the trees of the same sort of fruit
together, and in the same Row; as all the A delicate small Pear.
Roussellets, and so all other different kinds: In this, nevertheless, every
man may use his own discretion, and place them according to his fancy. The
keeping of a more exact order in the placing of Wall-sruit is likewise
indifferent, so that the several sorts be exactly put in such Situations, as
are most proper for them. The same sorts of Fruit may either be set all
together, or else mixed with others: In this every one may follow their own
inclination; Nevertheless, in making a great Plantation, I think it very
convenient to separate such Pears as are to be eaten raw, from the baking
Pears, the Summer-fruits from the Winter, and to plant every kind by it self;
because the seasons of their growing ripe, being different, they are more
easily gathered, when set apart by themselves; and in such Plantations as are
for Sider, it is very convenient to separate the different sorts of Apples,
because each sort makes its particular Sider.

Besides this order, the Planter must be very careful, be it in Wall-fruits or
great Plants, to set the trees at a convenient distance, according to their
kinds, not too near, nor too far from each other. That this may be done, he is
to consider of the goodness of the ground, because the trees become larger, and
grow further out in a strong, than in a light soil. He must also have a regard
to the winds, because, as the greater Plantations are more or less expofed to
them, so must the trees be set closer or further from each other: For it is
certain, that trees defend themselves much better from the winds, when they are
planted near together.

In good grounds, which are designed to be kept in tillage, that other things
may be sown under the trees, the ordinary distance betwixt Pear Trees or
Apple Trees ought to be betwixt eight or ten fathoms: But if the ground be left
for Herbage four or five fathom betwixt each tree will be sufficient; and in
places exposed to great winds, the distance must not be above three or four
fathomes, because the trees being planted close do preserve one another; In
sandy and stony grounds it is good to keep the same distance, of between three
and four fathomes.

For stone-Fruits; as Plumm-trees, Abricots, Cherry-trees, and
Hart-Cherry-trees.
Vigarro-tires graffed upon a The small, wild, bitter Cherry-tree.
Merisier, be they High-standers or Dwarfs, they must be planted at three
fathomes from one another; but if the Cherry-trees be graffed upon
Cherry-stocks taken from the roots of others, because these increase not so
much in wood, it is sufficient to plant them at 12 or fifteen foot asunder,
according to the goodness of the ground.

As for Peare-trees graffed upon Quince-stocks, planted for Dwarf-standers in
any sort of Alley or Walk, it is the custom to set them at every twelve foot,
except it be in waterish grounds, where they must be placed at 15 foot
distance, to the end, that being further from each other, they may enjoy the
more Air and Sun. Yet when they are planted in a single row, they may be set
between eight and nine foot from one another, because that meeting thereby the
sooner, they do give a better shape unto the hedge; neither can they hurt each
other, because they have air enough on both sides: But if they are to be
plashed upon a Pole-hedge on the other side of a Walk from the wall, these
trees must be placed at twelve foot asunder, and ordered in the same manner as
those against a wall.

The distance of Dwarf Pear Trees, and Apple Trees graffed upon Tree-stocks
(that is, such as are raised from Kernels) ought, in light and sandy grounds,
to be eighteen foot, and twenty four foot in stronger grounds, the same as in
great Plants; for there is no difference betwixt them, save that the one are
tall, and have a high stemm, and the other lower, and without a stemm, shooting
out their branches at a foot from the ground, and are more under shelter from
the winds.

As for Apple Trees graffed upon the Paradice-Apple, seeing that they grow very
little in wood; the ordinary rule, when they are planted in many Rows, is, to
place them nine foot a sunder: But when one row is to be planted alone, they
may be placed at every sixth foot.

In the planting Wall-fruits; Peaches, Abricots, and Plumm-trees, must be set
at fifteen foot from each other in light grounds, and at eighteen in those that
are stronger; for, all sorts of Pear Trees, they are commonly planted at eight,
ten, and twelve foot, according to the quality of the soil.

Those that plant Wall-fruits, do ordinarily mix Pear Trees and Peaches
together, supposing by this diversity to render them the more beautiful,
because by this means their walls will never be unfurnished: Indeed, the
Peach-trees suddenly putting forth good store of wood, do in short time cover
the wall, and then, when they begin to wast and diminish, the Pear Trees
succeed, insensibly filling up that place, which the Peach-trees seem of their
own accord to have quitted to make room for them; nevertheless, those that are
more curious have found by experience, that it is better to plant all the
Pear Trees by themselves, and to set the Peach-trees and Abricots together,
without intermixing them; because that the walls being set with trees that are
equal, and of one and the same kind, are the more equally covered; and the
trees themselves do thereby become the more agreeable, and easier to be kept in
order. Besides that, Peaches and Abricot trees set upon a Plumm-stock do much
eat out the earth, and rob the Pear Trees of their nourishment.

Those, notwithstanding, who are impatient, till they see their walls covered,
may plant their Pear Trees at a fathom distance; but yet with this resolution,
to take away one betwixt every two after five or six years, when they begin to
endammage one another. This manner of placing the trees at every six foot,
affords the pleasure of seeing the walls always well furnished, and also of
gathering much more fruit in the first years; but it must be observed, to set
two Pear Trees of one kind of fruit together, that when one is to be taken
away, there may always remain another in his place and order.

Besides this care of planting the Pear Trees together, and setting them at the
distance beforementioned; it is also very convenient to intermix several
kinds of Pears, and to plant Winter-pears amongst the Summer ones, those that
are early among such as are lateward, whereby the pleasure may be had of seeing
the walls always furnished with fruit.

The same order may be kept in Wall-trees of Peaches and Abricots; and also
when Pear Trees are planted in a Counter-hedge over against the wall; except
that in such hedges, there must be planted neither the Bon Crestien, Bergamot,
nor the Petit Muscat, because these sorts prove not so well in a Hedge as
against a Wall.

One may also plant Muscats against a wall, and betwixt them, at every fifteen
foot, a Peach-tree, having a stemm of four foot high, without branches, that
they may be plashed above the Muscat, and cover the rest of the wall; but then
care must be had of planting only such Peach-trees as are inoculated upon
other Peaches, or Almond-stocks; for such as are set upon Plumm-stocks ^o feed
too much upon the ground, and will rob their Muscats of their nourishment.
Pear Trees may be planted also in the same manner, provided they be graffed
upon Quince-stocks, and that the stemm be four foot high without branches as
before.

In the planting of Avenues (leading to Houses) and Walks, two things are to be
observed; The largeness of the Allies, and the distance betwixt the trees. It
is is a thing very difficult to give a certain rule for the largeness of
Allies, because it ought to be proportioned to their length, and the Situation
of their Avenues. It depends, therefore, wholly upon the ingenuity and prudence
of him that orders them.

For the distance betwixt the trees, it must be different according to the
diversity of their kind: Elms and Lime-trees must be planted two fathoms from
each other: Chest-nuts, Walnut-trees, Apple Trees and Pear Trees, at four,
five, and six fathoms. As for Oaks and Beeches, wherewith they do ordinarily
plant their Avenues in the Country of Caux, they must be set at no further
distance than nine foot from one another. But Pines and Fir-trees at four
fathoms asunder, by reason of their spreading of their branches.

CHAP. VIII.
The manner of planting, and keeping Trees well.

TRees are not fit to be re-planted till their sap be wholly spent; for if
there be any in them, when they are taken up, having now no more nourishment,
they fade, and their bark, which is yet tender, grows riveld and dry, so that
it is less capable of receiving the new sap, when it begins to ascend in the
Spring.

The Fall of the Leaves in all sorts of trees informs us, when the sap leaves
them; for it is that, by which they are nourished; and we see, that if trees
grow yellow and sick, having but small store of sap, they presently cast their
leaves: Now seeing that the sap fails sooner in dry grounds, than in those
which are moist, it is certain, that in such grounds, trees may both be taken
up, and also re-planted earlier: But to speak in general, All Plantations are
to be made in the months of November and December, and such as are soonest
made are always the best; except in such grounds as are too moist and full of
water, where you must stay till February, or the beginning of March, to the
end, that the roots of your Plants be not rotted by the water in the Winter,
which having not yet taken again, are not strong enough to resist too much
moisture.

A fair day (as I said before, when I spoke of Nurseries) is always to be
chosen to plant in; because the earth is shorter and better to be handled, when
it is dry; and therefore, for this reason, Plantations are never to be made in
the time of Rain or Snow; to both which, the month of January being most
subject, is therefore the most unfit to plant in.

The first care which must be taken, before you begin to plant, is to take up
the trees well, without spoiling any of their roots, because that all their
vigor depends upon them; they must therefore be preserved as whole and as
entire as is possible. Care must also be had in taking up a tree out of a
Nursery, not to lay naked the whole root, for fear of harming those trees that
are about it: But after that some earth is taken away from about the foot of
it, it may be turned downward halfway toward the ground, and drawn long-wayes
gently by strength of arms: For by this means the roots are preserved entire
from breaking, and the trees not endammaged that are left behind.

The tree being thus taken up with care, you must, before it be re-planted,
pare off the ends of all its roots (taking away only such as are too confused)
and strip well from them all their small fibers or filaments, where there are
too many of them, because these, when the tree comes to be planted, would
otherwise clogg together, and hinder the mould from falling easily between the
principal roots, and so from filling up all their vacuities: For this reason
the Gardener cannot be too careful in taking away the small threads; for the
greater and middle sort of roots never fail of putting forth new ones; and
those which he leaves being too confused, do always harm the tree more than
they profit it; and the great roots must also in the paring of them be left as
long as may be, and the cut must be at the end of the root, on the lower side
of it, so that the cut may be upon the mould.

The roots being all, on this manner, refreshed and cleared, if it be a tree
with a high stemm, and designed to be planted in the open air, the stemm of it
must be pared off at seven foot high, and all the small branches and buds,
which remain upon it, must be taken off with exactness; for, those shoots which
open themselves a passage in the bark, and come out of the body of the tree, do
always grow up with the greatest vigor: But if the tree be designed for a
Wall, or a Dwarf-tree, it must be left shorter or longer, according to the
strength of its foot, the quantity of its roots, and the goodness of the soil;
the judgment whereof depends upon the prudence of the Gardener: Nevertheless,
seeing it is necessary that such trees should put forth branches near the
ground, to cover the lower part of the wall, in which the beauty of Wall-trees
does chiefly consist, it will be best, if the foot be not well furnished with
branches, to cut it very short, that it may put forth many: It is true, that a
tree thus stopped, having no old wood remaining upon it, cannot so soon bear
fruit: As for Peach-trees, they being very subject to want boughs in the
middle, must always, when they are planted, be cut very short.

The tree being thus cut, must presently be planted, either in the hole, or in
the trench prepared for it, and must not be sunk into the ground above the
depth of half a foot: Afterward, all the roots must be handsomely extended,
without forcing or constraining them: And if it be a Wall-tree, the foot of it
must be placed at ten or twelve inches from the wall; and so laid, that the
upper part of the stemm or branches may come within two inches of it, that the
new branches may by that means be the more commodiously plash'd against it.
When the tree is so placed, the roots must all be drawn outward as much as may
be, and brought from the wall, that they may thereby find the more nourishment,
and be more plentifully watered with the rains during the Summer. After this,
the roots must be covered with good mould, soft and light, mixed with some
other mould from a bed thoroughly rotten, if such be to be had; for, this
causes them to take again the sooner, and put forth a greater quantity of
fibrous roots: Care must also be taken to furnish them well with mould, so as
no void space may remain betwixt the roots: To this end, after they are covered
with earth, the tree must be lifted up a little, and shaken with your hand,
that the mould (being short and movable) may fall, and slip between the roots,
to fill up entirely all the holes.

The Gardener must, as I said, observe in planting, not to sink the trees into
the ground more than half a foot; for the ground being always better above
than downwards, the roots do there find the more nourishment, and are not so
subject to be rotted and spoiled by too much moisture: Besides that, being near
the surface of the ground, they are more sensible of the heat of the Sun, and
do likewise receive advantage by the dews and small rains which fall in Summer;
whereas, on the contrary, when the roots are sunk too deep, they are never
refreshed by all those Summer rains, which are neither of such force or
continuance to pierce into the earth more than a good half-foot; so that the
earth which is beneath dries and hardens it self about the roots, and affords
them no more nourishment: From whence it may easily be conjectured, that the
most ordinary cause which makes trees to grow yellow, proceeds from their being
set too deep in the earth.

But seeing the trees so planted near the surface of the earth, may, for the
two first years, suffer from the great heat of the Sun, having their roots yet
too tender to resist it, it will be necessary to cover them, by making a bank
of ordinary mould a foot high above them, for the wideness of four foot round
about the stemm; the top whereof must be laid plain, that the waters may the
better stop there, and pierce to the foot of the tree: It is further needful
in March, after this earth has been well stirred, to spread upon it some long
dung, that is not hot, the breadth of three foot about the stemm, and four
inches thick: Or, if such dung is not to be had, to lay some fern upon it at
the beginning of June, so that the earth may be kept fresh, and the roots
preserved from the too great heat of the Sun; but if neither Dung nor Fern can
be had whererewith to cover these banks of earth, then they must be stirred
four or five times a year, only the depth of half a spade-bit, for fear of
harming the Roots; and these stirrings must be continued until the Trees be
strong, and so these banks of earth will by little and little be brought lower,
by stirring them from year to year.

Now seeing that in trenches and holes filled up with good store of dung, the
earth settles in proportion as the dung rots and consumes; It must be observed
in planting, to set the roots of the trees level with the ordinary ground,
because the earth settling in the trench, sinks lower, and carries the tree
along with it: This care must especially be had in the planting of such
Pear Trees as are ingraffed upon a Quince-stock, and Apples upon a
Paradise-Apple; because if these two sorts of trees be planted too low, so that
the Graffs come to be within the ground, they will put sorth roots, and thereby
cause the trees insensibly to partake of the Graff, and so to change their
nature.

In cold and moist grounds, the trenches must be raised (be it for Wall-fruits,
or Contr'espalliers, Hedges on the other side of a Walk from the wall, made
with poles, and the trees plashed in them.
Counter-hedges) 2 foot higher than the ordinary ground, upon which the trees
are to be planted, to the end that being further from the water, their fruit
may be better and fairer colored; for they cannot have a good taste growing in
such grounds as are always moist and wet: For this reason it is, that the
sides of hills and higher Situations are the most advantageous for the goodness
of fruits, because the waters run from them with the more facility.

There may likewise be laid in the bottom of the trench, a bed of stones, of a
foot deep, or else so much stony and gravelly earth, to draw the waters to the
bottom, and cause them to drain away; upon which it must be filled up with
sharp Sand, or Plaister-stone and Marl mixed with good mould, to diminish the
too abundant moisture, and make the trees to profit the more, and to bring
forth their fruits of a better color and taste; it is also very good in such
moist soyls at the beginning of November, when the earth, at the foot of the
Wall-trees, has been stirred, to spread some Marl upon it half a foot deep,
and six foot broad, which is to be buried at Spring, when the Winter-Frosts and
Snowes have passed upon it.

After that the trees are planted with the care abovementioned, if the stems
of the taller Plants be any thing feeble, it will be needful to strike in a
stake at the foot of each of them, which must be strong, and of the length of
five foot above ground, to keep the trees steady, and hinder the winds from
shaking them. But this stake must be shorter than the stemm of the tree, lest
it wry the branches that shoot forth.

It is further necessary, in such places where Beasts are pastured, to put
thorns about each tree, to keep the Beasts from coming near it, or rubbing
themselves against it: But because these thorns may grate and hurt the bark,
which is yet tender, and so breed Cankers in the trees, which kill them, their
whole stemms must, before the thorns are put about them, be covered with long
litter or fodder, and then be bound about with straw.

The same course must be taken with those trees that have been bred in a
Nursery, where, having been always shaded and covered from the Sun, their bark
is so tender and delicate, that if it be on a sudden exposed to hard Frosts,
and to the great heats of the Sun, especially in a soil that is dry and hot, it
becomes withered and base, whitish and mossy: For this reason it is, that to
preserve it neat and handsome, it must, for six years, be covered with straw,
until the trees have gotten strength, and are accustomed to the open air.

Such as are curious, may further observe, when they plant trees, whose bark is
not well recovered again, to turn the back of the Graff toward the South, and
the cut toward the North, because in that position it will the more easily
recover; and if they remove such kinds of trees as are tender and difficult to
grow again, such as are Fir-trees, and Pines, they must be careful to set them
in the same Situation, and so to turn them, that they may be exposed to the Sun
and Frosts, in the very same manner that they were before they were taken up;
because that by this means these tender trees, receiving the same impressions
of the air, to which they were accustomed, are scarsely at all sensible of
their change: For this reason, when they are taken up, they must be marked upon
their stemm which fide stood North, and which South, that in re-planting them,
they may be put again in the same Situation.

The first care which must be taken, in the ordering of such trees as are newly
removed, is, to take off all the buds from the High-standers when they begin to
shoot forth, till you come to the height of a foot and half, above which no
shoot is to be taken from them, until the third year, when in the month of
March they must be cleared of some of their branches, by cutting off such of
them as are weak and useless: In doing whereof, the stubs or stumps must be,
cut to the quick, and smoothed, and then immediately capped over with clay,
that the bark may recover with the more facility. But Wall-trees and Dwarfs
must be let alone, and suffered to put forth their sprouts at liberty, without
taking any branch from them, during the first year; except that, if they shoot
upwards too fast, it will be necessary to stop them at a foot high, by pinching
them once to make them grow big and strong, and also to make them put forth
such other small branches, as may furnish the bottom of the Wall.

The Earth, at the foot of Wall-trees, and such as are planted in
Counter-hedges over against Walls, must be stirred four times in a year, for
the breadth of six foot, in March and October, to some depth; but in May and
July, the depth of half a spade-bit only, to kill the weeds, and to keep the
mould short and capable of receiving the Rain in Summer.

In great Plantations, where Beasts are pastured, the Earth must be stirred
four foot wide about the stemm of each tree four times a year: But where the
Beasts come not, all the ground must be ploughed, or dug in such places
where the plough cannot pass, and sown with Wheat or Oats, each other year
one; and care must be taken to dung it well that year when it is to be sown
with Wheat, and to stir it four times in the year wherein it lies fallow: This
course is to be continued until the trees be grown so big, that their shadow
hinders the profiting of the corn; then the tillage of the whole may be let
alone, and used only about the foot of the trees, according as there shall be
need: The often stirring of the ground has this advantage, that it hinders
richer grounds from chapping, and keeps those always fresh that are light and
sandy.

In Plantations, where the trees stand at the distance of eight or ten fathoms,
(so placed, because the ground may always be tilled and sown) there is no
further care to be taken, for that which is used about ordinary tillage, but
only that such as plough them must take heed that the plough spoil not the
trees by coming too near them.

For the well-ordering of Dwarf-standers, it is necessary to stir all the
ground about them four times a year with a spade, or a forked pick-axe, not
sowing any grain upon it, save only in the midst of the Alloys, where it may be
sown; and, nearer the trees, to the distance of four or five feet from them,
may be made beds of Strawberries, and other small Sallad-herbs; for, other
herbs and flowers being planted in the tillage above their roots, do wrong the
trees; except only Anemone's and Ranunculus, which may be set at the foot of
the Wall, because they have but few leaves and roots: For the same reason there
may be planted upon the border of the tillage, at six foot from the trees, a
row of Strawberry-plants.

Such as plant Pear Trees and Apple Trees in Avenues, along the ways, or about
the sides of their grounds, should put none there but such as have a very high
stem, such as are the Apple Trees, which they call De Manerbe, and Hautbois, or
the Long-Apple-tree: For besides that, these two kinds have always a fair
stemm; they do always form their heads round, with tall and strait boughs, so
that laden Carts cannot touch them; and their Fruit is not subject to fall,
yet excellent for Sider. Another care must be, to plant there no Fruits which
are good to be eaten in Summer, lest instead of fruits they receive nothing but
a displeasure.

For the well planting and ordering of Avenues, be they Elmes, Lime-trees,
Chest-nuts, Wallnut-trees, Pear Trees, or Apple Trees, the same care must be
had which is used in great Plantations of Fruit Trees; but as for Oaks and
Beeches, the manner is very different: for these must be planted whole, without
heading them, so as you must be content only to prune them, and to cut off
their branches at two or three inches distance from the stemm, until you come
within three foot of the top; then you must put them in the ground with all
their roots, and cover the foot of each with a bank of earth two or three foot
high, rising to a point toward the stemm, which must be pressed close, and
beaten, to uphold the foot of these trees, and to hinder them from being shaken
by the winds, because, that being planted at twelve or fifteen foot high, with
all their top, they are subject to be overturned by them: For the same reason
these banks of earth must not be taken away, nor stirred, till after five or
six years, when the trees have taken a firm root; but it will suffice to open a
small trench about them, which may retain the waters to moisten and nourish the
roots.

Fir-trees and Pines, being very difficult to take root again when they are
removed, must of necessity be replanted while they are very young, when they
are not above four or five foot high; their branches also must not be taken
off, nor their roots be cut, unless such as have been hurt; but they must, when
they are planted, be banked with earth, as the Oaks and Beeches, and not be
pruned before they are grown very big: And even then you must observe, in the
cutting any branch from them in the month of March, to rub the wound
immediately with Hogs-dung or Cow Dung, to hinder the gumm from issuing out,
because that does very much wrong these kinds of trees, and often causes them
to dye.

Such as have brought them up from seeds (as I have before mentioned) may, when
they are three or four foot high, take them up with the earth about their
roots, to set them where they are to grow: Or if they desire to transplant them
with more security, they must dig a trench at three or four foot distance about
the tree, betwixt two and three foot deep, and in a hard frost undermine this
heap of earth, so as to take it up whole, and transport it so into the hole
prepared for it. This is a most excellent way of transplanting trees, because
that so they may be planted again entire, it being needless to cut any of
their boughs.

CHAP. IX.
How Trees are to be pruned and plashed.

THe skill of Pruning and Plashing Trees well, be it against a Wall, in a
Counter-hedge, or in Dwarf-trees, is that which is most considerable about
them, because that all their handsomness and their preservation depends upon
it; it is a thing very rare among Gardiners, for the doing of it well depends
more upon their ingenuity than upon their hand: It is also very hard to give
instructions for it, because it consists not in certain and general Maxims,
but varies according to the particular circumstances of each tree, so that it
depends absolutely upon the Gardiners prudence, who ought of himself to judge
what branches must be left, and which are fit to be cut away; and therefore may
be learned more easily by Experience than by a Discourse.

There are many different ways of plashing: That which is performed with
nails, and little pieces of leather or lists of Cloth put about the branches,
cannot be used but upon walls coated with Plaster, because upon others the
nails will not hold. This fashion of plashing is of all others the most neat,
by it the trees are best extended, and most handsomely couched, making a kind of
Tapestry of Greens very agreeable; it is also commodious, in as much as by it
the boughs are better conducted, with more case and less constraint:
Nevertheless, it is better for Pear Trees than Peaches, because the Pears
having a long stalk, do bear off and separate themselves the better from the
wall, so that they ripen very well: But the Fruit of Peach-trees, Pavies, and
Abricot-trees, is fastened so close unto its branch, and remains thereby so
joined to the wall, that it cannot ripen equally on all sides. Lists of Cloth
are better for this use than Leathers, for the Rain and Sun spoil them not, nor
cause them to shrink up. In this sort of plashing, you must be careful not to
girt the list too close about the branch, and to fasten the nayl beneath it:
For the branch tending naturally upwards, and drawing toward the top of the
tree, batters and hurts it self when it meets with the nail about it: This kind
of plashing is both the most convenient and the handsomest of all others, but
it is also much the longest in doing, and that which requires the greatest care.

Some few years since, an Invention has been found out of fastening into walls
the bones of Sheeps feet, and plashing the trees to them: This way is not so
handsome as that with nails, because these bones always appear betwixt the
leaves. It is likewise not so commodious, for these not being to be placed
always where they ought, the boughs must oftentimes be forced before they
can be fastened to them; Those that will make use of them, must fasten them so
into the wall, that they appear not without it more than a full inch; and they
must be placed at the distance of four or five inches from one another, that
being so near, some of them may be found fit to fasten each bough unto without
forcing it: This way of plashing has this advantage, that it lasts long, and
requires no cost to be maintained, seeing there needs no more than a Bulrush in
Summer, and small Oziers in Winter, to tie the branches to them: In those
Countries where these bones are scarce and difficult to be procured, they may
be set at two foot distance from each other, and have little rods fastened to
them in the fashion of a Lattice, upon which the boughs may be plashed: But in
this case the bones must be set two full inches out of the wall, that the rods
may with the more ease be tied to them.

The way of plashing upon squares made of round Poles, is not so handsome and
sightly as the rest, and it costs more; but then it has this advantage, that
the Fruits ripen well upon it; for being not at all kept close to the wall,
because of the thickness of the Trellis, they do the better enjoy the heat and
air, which pass easily behind the branches. Those kind of Palissades must be
often renewed, if they be not made of good wood, as of Oak, Chestnut-tree, or
Ash. In making this Trellis, all the bark of the Poles must be taken off
carefully before they be used, because so they will last the longer; besides
that, Ear-wigs, Caterpillars, and other small Vermin, which spoil both the
blossoms and fruit, cannot there find any place to hide themselves.

The best invention of all, and that which is the most commodious, which lasts
the longest, and is easiest, and of least cost to be maintained by Gardiners,
is, to make the Trellis of Laths of a full quarter of an inch square, and of
nine or ten foot long, or more, if it may be, according to the height of the
wall: These laths must be placed in squares at nine inches distance, and tied
with Iron or Brass wire, and must be upheld by small Iron hooks fastened in the
wall in a strait line, at three soot and a half from each other, and two inches
without the wall: This kind of Trellis is costly at first; but because it lasts
long, and is easily kept, it proves the best of all, and of least charge.

There are some, who, to make their Palissades the handsomer, do cause wood to
be sawn two inches square, and then have it cut and framed by a Joyner, in the
fashion of a Window-frame: But this Trellis lasts not so-long by much, as those
which are made of cleft wood, because that wood which is sawn moulders and rots
quickly.

Before you begin to plash, you must, as I said before, leave the trees to
sprout at full liberty for the first year, without taking off their buds, or
stopping them, and then stay till February or March of their second year,
before you being to cut them, or fasten them to the wall, because their first
shoots are so tender, that you cannot plash them without forcing them, which
changes them very much: Notwithstanding, when Peach-trees, Abricot-trees, and
even Pear Trees, do sprout too strongly in their first year, you must nip the
ends of their principal boughs which rise too fast, and then extend and fasten
them to some of the laths, to preserve them from the winds, and to give them
their first shape.

Trees may be pruned all the Winter long, but it is better to stay till the
hard frosts be over, and not to begin till the end of February in the wane, and
so from that time until the end of March, especially for weak and tender
Trees, as Peaches and Abricots, which are very subject to the Frosts.

Great Trees, standing in the open air, may be pruned and cleared of their wood
until the end of April; but if any great boughs be cut from them, you must
observe to cut them close to the body of the Tree, and to cap or cover them
presently; for if the wood, where it is cut, remain uncovered, and open unto
the air, it rots and causes a hollowness in the body of the stemm, which
increasing by little and little, gets at length into the heart of the Tree, and
kills it.

The same accident happens to branches ill cut, because of the stumps there
left, which hinder the recovering of the bark: Therefore the Gardener cannot be
too careful in taking off branches from his Trees, to cut them all very
smooth, and near the stemm, and if they be great, to cover them immediately
with Galt or Clay, wrought with Hay or Moss, to keep them from the heat and
scorching of the Sun, which hinders the sap from coming to the cut; those
Chissels which Joyners use are very commodious to cut off the greater boughs
smooth and handsome, doing it much better than either Bill or Saw. The great
trees being thus cleared and discharged of all their confused and useless
boughs, do ordinarily put forth great store of false sprouts, which must every
year be taken off with great care.

To plash young trees planted against a wall, after that the useless branches
are taken off, and such as cannot well be brought unto the wall, you must begin
with the Master-bough, which must form the body of the tree: this must be
placed strait upwards, without leaning toward either side, and must be left
shorter or longer at the top, according to the strength of it, and of the tree:
After which, all the rest of the branches must be put in order on either side,
and some of them laid, if it may be, within half a foot of the ground, to cover
the lower parts of the wall: In plashing of these, you must guide them all,
like the fingers of a man's hand when it is open, or like the ribs of a Fan when
extended; and care must be taken not to force or bend them, bowing like a Cats
back, for if they be so forced, they make, as it were, an Elbow; where the sap
stopping always puts forth a false shoot, which takes away all the strength
from the remainder of the bough, and hinders its growth: For this reason, the
tops of the boughs must never be fastened lower than the place out of which they
grow, but must still be conducted along, somewhat ascending.

Observe likewise, that the branches must not be crossed, nor passed one above
another, nor two fastened in one place; but they must be separated from each
other, and set a convenient distance according to the number of them and the
strength of the Ttree.

Sometimes, nevertheleless, the Gardinar is constrained, when the trees are
old, and unfurnished with boughs in the middle, to turn the smaller branches
upwards, and to bring them toward the stemm to preserve the beauty of the
tree, and hide such places as are void and unfurnished: This want of boughs
does ordinarily befall to the tree, through the ignorance of the Gardener, for
want of his guiding them well at the first; or through his negligence in
pruning them, taking away their shoots, and plashing them in such seasons as
are proper for them: For it is certain, that most trees become not unfurnished
of boughs, but only because they have been neglected, or else cut and plashed
inconveniently and out of season: And Experience lets us see, that it is easy,
with a little care and skill to keep them always fair and well furnished with
boughs, and to make them last a very long while, bearing fair fruit.

In pruning and stopping the growth of the boughs, care must be taken further,
to cut one short betwixt two long ones, that being unequal when they come to
spring, the middle of the tree may be the better furnished: In the same manner
must the branches of Dwarf-standers be cut, because that each branch, which is
cut, does put forth many more; and therefore being cut all of the same height,
they cause a confusion of branches on the top of the tree, and the midst of it
in the mean while remains unfurnished, because the sap desires always to
ascend, and runs more willingly into the higher boughs, than into those that
are lower: For which reason it must be stopped by this unequal cutting of the
branches.

The pruning depends principally upon the prudence of the Gardener, which he
ought diversely to practice, according to the different qualities of the trees,
and according to their strength: It being certain, that they must be cut more
or less short, according as their force is. I have seen some trees which the
Gardener durst not cut nor stop very much, because that being in very good
ground, their sap was so plentiful, that, if it were stopped never so little, it
would cast it self into the buds which would have born fruit, and make them
grow into wood: For this cause the pruning must be performed with skill and
judgment, and not without great care; for it contributes very much, not only
to the fairness of the Fruit; but is further absolutely necessary, for the
keeping of the trees a long time strong and vigorous.

The importance of this care is not so visible in the first years; because at
the first, the trees do always spring with great force, and do appear fair,
although they be not well ordered: But when this first vigor is past, men may
presently begin to perceive a great difference; for they see such as have been
neglected, to diminish and come to naught in a short time, and the others on
the contrary, to maintain themselves always in their strength; It being an
effect of their cutting, which renews the trees by little and little from year
to year.

Pear Trees may be pruned all the Winter long; but the best season of doing it,
is (as I said before) that of the Wane in February; This pruning is to be put
in practice diversely, according to the quality and condition of the trees; for
sometimes the boughs must be cut short, when they shoot forth too abundantly;
sometimes also, it is necessary to take off the young wood, and to preserve the
old, that they may bear the sooner; and sometimes it is not amiss to cut off
the old worn-out boughs, which have no strength left, and to let the young ones
grow in their places, that the trees may be renewed, and, as it were, made
young again. And again, sometimes it is sufficient to clear them, by taking
away those branches that are too confused.

But that which the Gardener, in pruning of his trees, is principally to look
after, is, that he leave neither the foot nor the body of the trees too much
unfurnished: For this reason he must cut them rather too short, than leave the
boughs too long, taking most from the highest branches, and such as are toward
the top of the wall, because these draw all the sap to themselves, and leave
the bottom of the tree unfurnished: This is the cause that Peach-trees are so
difficult to be kept; Experience teaching us, that if the Gardener do not
perfectly understand the way of cutting them, and taking their sprouts away, as
they ought to be, they will be ruined in six or seven years, although, that
being well ordered, they may last more than twenty years.

Trees to be well pruned, must have their boughs every year refreshed more or
less, according to their force, by cutting away the wood that springs, in the
month of August (which being the shoot of the latter sap cannot be ripened)
unless it be necessary to preserve it for want of better, or that it be found
to be strong and well nourished.

Those boughs also that shoot too fast, be stopped and kept shorter than the
others; for they draw all the sap to them, and wrong the rest which are weaker:
but the Master-bough must always be preserved, being that which grows strait
upwards; so stopping it from year to year, that it may always be the strongest,
and maintain the shape of the tree. Those boughs also which are weak and
small, must be shortened, and those which are disposed to bear fruit the year
following; to the end, that they may grow strong, and that their buds may be
the better nourished.

It is further necessary, to prune those branches that are full of fruit-buds,
for the too great quantity of blooms consumes the trees: Besides that, from
thence the fruits do become less fair; but in the pruning of these, it must be
observed, to cut them above a leaf-bud, and as near to it as may be, for two
reasons: The first is, because by that means the fruit will profit the more;
for when it is not covered with leaves, it dries, and seldom arrives to its
natural perfection, or to be so good as others: The second, because so the
branch will recover it self that very year; whereas, if it be cut higher, and
far from a leaf-bud, there will remain a little stump at the end of the twigg,
which dries up, and cannot recover it self in two or three years: As for such
boughs as are taken wholly off, they must (as I have often said) be cut as near
the stemm as may be, for so they will recover the sooner, and that without
making any knot.

The pruning of Peach-trees must be the last of all, and then when they begin
to spring, and are ready to flower; because their young wood is so tender, that
if it be cut it will be dried and spoiled upon the least frost, from whence a
great many of the smaller twiggs dye, and must oftentimes be cut again the
second time.

Dwarf-standers, which are planted in open air, must be pruned as those that
are planted against a wall; that is, such boughs as grow too fast, must be
shortened; those that are vveak must be stopped, to make them grow bigger;
those that are useless, must be taken away; and if they shape not the tree
well, they must, in their first years, be fastened unto frames, to give unto
the trees that roundness and fashion which you desire.

Some Gardiners there are, so ignorant, that they clip their Dvvarf-trees with
shears, to shape them into a bush, and to keep them the more neat, not knovving
or considering, that by this means there is a confusion of branches caused upon
the tops of their trees, which dravv all the sap unto them, and leave the foot
unfurnished; and that the same confusion of branches so chokes up that little
fruit which they bear, that it can neither prosper, nor have a good taste: For
this reason these sorts of trees must alvvayes be cut with a pruning-knife,
those boughs being kept lovv, which do shoot up too much, and those taken
away, which are superfluous, to preserve thereby those in the midst of the
tree, being those that ordinarily do bear fruit.

Plum-trees and Cherry-trees must not be cut or stopped on the top, but only
cleared and discharged of their useless wood within the tree; and for this
reason they are not proper to be kept as bushes or dwarfs.

The trees being thus pruned and plashed with care; as soon as the sprouts
begin to appear, and during the months of May, June, July, and August, you
must, in the Wane of the Moon, break the false shoots and sprouts which come
before and behind the stemm, and cut off those that shoot upon the elbow of
such boughs as are bent, because that these false shoots do carry away all the
sap of tree, and the nourishment of good boughs; you must likewise pinch such
as rise too high, to make them fork, and furnish the body of the tree; but then
you must be careful to do it seasonably, before they be too long and too hard;
for then they put sorth spriggs only at the second or third last leaf-buds,
and do not furnish themselves toward the foot; but if the Gardener has not
been careful to take off the false shoots from his trees in season, so that
they are now grown too hard, he must be content to cut them at two or three
inches from the bough, to retain that sap within the body of the tree, which
these would carry away, and stay till the Winter following before he take them
quite off; for so long as the tree is in its sap, you must never, except in
case of great necessity, cut off any branch from it, nor make the least
incision upon it, for fear of harming it.

The Gardener must be careful, as I have said, in pruning his trees, and
taking off the shoots, not to leave them too naked; it being as dangerous to
take away too much wood from them, as to leave them too confused; he must
therefore consider the goodness of his ground, the force of the tree, and the
manner of its springing, whether it be with more or less vigor: It being
certain, that if he pinch or stop those too much, which are of great strength,
he destroys all their Fruit-buds, and makes them spring to wood; and, on the
contrary, he alters and dries up those that are weak and languishing.

It is also of importance, that he take notice of the kind of the tree which he
is to prune; for, as there are some sorts of Pear Trees which do not so well
furnish themselves with boughs as others, such as the Rousselet, the
Cuisse-Madame, and the Jargonelle, it is easy to be judged, that he must stop
and pinch them shorter and oftener, to force them to put forth, and to furnish
themselves with a greater store of branches. He must further observe, in the
ordering of Peaches and Abricots, that these kinds of trees, having very much
sap, become unfurnished in the middle, and come to ruin in a short time, if he
let them grow too far, or stay too long before he pinch them; for the great
shoots which they put forth, do not only carry all the strength of the foot to
the top of the tree, but do also choke up the smaller branches that are behind,
and those which fill up the middle of the tree, and do hinder the fruit from
having a good taste or color: He must therefore fasten, to the wall, all those
branches as they shoot, and plash the Peach-trees and Abricot-trees oftener,
and with more care than the Pear Trees, because that having more sap, they put
forth their shoots with more force.

When the Wall-trees are grown to the top of the wall, and the Dwarfs exceed
the height, which they ought to have, or if they grow crowned, and are worn
out, they must be brought down, by cutting some of the principal boughs from
the body of the stemm near unto some new shoot, that they may be renewed, and
grow with young wood: This must especially be practiced upon ches and Pavies to
make them young again by little and little; for being wholly headed all at
once, they dye, very seldom shooting again; except, notwithstanding, common
Peach-trees, and those that grow of a stone, as those that are planted in the
Vineyards, which are renewed by lopping.

Pear Trees and Abricot-trees, when they are past their strength, and bear no
more fruit, but such as is small and base, may have their heads cut off in the
Wane of the Moon in February, at a foot above their division, cutting them
aslope, with the cut toward the wall, that it may be shaded from the Sun, for
so they will put forth new branches, which in two or three years do make a
new tree, and bear fair fruit.

If those trees, which stand in open air, have their bark base, and covered
with moss, you must, in Winter, after a Rain, or in a misty and moist season,
rub them with vvispes of straw or stubble, that are very rough, and scrape
off the moss with knives of vvood, that it may fall off. After which, you
must, with a Bill, take away the old bark to the quick; for the trees being
thus cleared and discharged, do shoot forth with new strength, bearing fairer
and better nourished Fruit.

Sometimes also, trees may be renewed by dunging and laying soil at the foot
of them; But, as I have said before, it must be only when they have need of
it; for dung makes the fruit more rude and gross: When you find it necessary to
dung a tree, you must in November uncover the root of it, by taking away the
earth half a foot deep, and four or five foot vvide about the stemm, according
to its bigness, so that the smallest part of the roots be laid bare, and then
spread upon good, fat, half-rotten dung for the thickness of half a foot, till
you come within a foot of the stemm; for it can do no good to the greater
roots, because the tree draws its nourishment only from the small ones:
afterward you must fling in the earth again upon the dung, and turf it on the
top, that it may consume in the Winter: When the trees are not to be dunged, it
is needless to open their roots every year, unless it be in dry and hot
grounds, where it is good to uncover them in November or December, and leave
them so till Winter be past, that the Snow and Rain may the more moysten the
bottom of the ground: But in this case care must be had to leave the foot of
the tree and the roots covered with a little earth, to defend them from the
Frost: In other soyles, if the Trees are not to be dunged, it will be
sufficient in October or November, to stir the ground well, four or five foot
above the stemm.

When it is necessary to dung Apple Trees, Peach-trees, or Abricots, inoculated
upon a Plumm-stock, or Pear Trees graffed upon a Quince, it is enough to spread
the dung upon the ground six foot round about the stemm, and so to digg and
work the Earth and it well together with a spade; for the roots of these sorts
of Trees spreading near the surface of the Earth, are easily sensible of the
amendment.

CHAP. X.
The way of procuring fair Fruit.

ALthough the beauty of Fruits depends principally upon the goodness of their
kinds, and the vigor of the Trees; and though the excellency of their taste
proceeds from the quality of the soil, and their position, in regard of the
Sun; yet cannot very fair. Fruits be had, unless care be taken, when they are
first knotted, to pluck off and disburthen the Trees of some of them, when they
have too many; for it is certain that the sap, spreading into too great a
quantity of Fruits, cannot make them to grow great, or nourish them with such
abundance, as is necessary for their perfection: and therefore Fruit must never
be left upon Trees but in proportion to their strength.

This care serves not only to make the Fruits which remain, grow fairer and
better; but it contributes very much also to the preservation of the strength
of the Trees; and indeed we see, that such Trees as bear exceeding full, and
are not eased of their Fruit, do spend all their force, and ruin themselves in
two or three years: This course is principally to be taken with large Fruits,
and Winter-Pears, because they need much nourishment, and hang a longer time
upon the Trees.

When there is too much Fruit upon the Trees, you must take off some of them at
the beginning of June, observing to leave but few upon the weaker boughs,
because they have not sap enough to nourish them: And for the same reason,
there must no more be left upon the stronger boughs, but in proportion to their
strength, and not above one or two upon every knot, especially upon the Bon
Crestien Pear Trees; for by this means they become fairer without comparison.
But in the taking of the Fruits thus, you must be careful to break off the
Pears, or cut them in the middle of the stalk with shears, and to wring off the
Abricots, Peaches, and Pavies, that you loosen not, nor harm the rest.

When the Fruits begin to grow ripe, if the heads be not too great, it is good
to take away, or turn aside the leaves that cover them, to make them better
colored: This must particularly be practiced upon the Winter-Bon Crestien,
Violet-Peaches, and Cherry-Peaches, because their Beauty consists in the
brightness of their color: But for this, the Gardener must take a proper
season, and not uncover them but when it is convenient: For if he take away the
leaves too soon, while the Fruit is yet tender, it dryes and burns away through
the too great heat; and, on the contrary, if he stay too long, the Fruit
remains without color, and of a flatter taste: This care is very necessary in
cold and moist soyls, where the Fruit being more rude and gross, has need of a
greater heat to ripen it well, and to give it a higher taste.

Every one may easily know the time that is the most proper for the gatherring
of Summer-fruits: But for those of the Autumn and the Winter, they must be left
upon the tree as long as may be, because so they will keep the better; Except,
notwithstanding, some of the Butter-pears, as the common Beurre, the Bergamot,
the Summer Bon Crestien, which must be gathered before they be fully ripe, for
so they may be kept the longer, and are better, and less harsh.

That Winter-fruits may keep well, they must be gathered in a fair season, and
carried into the room where they are to be kept; such as are the best and most
delicate, must be laid in rows upon the boards, and the rest laid on heaps, and
so left, the windows of the room being open for about a month, until they
have sweat and cast forth all their water; then the Fruits must be dried again,
and all the windows shut, and opened no more until all the Fruit be gone out:
But as soon as the room is empty, it must be carefully cleansed, and all the
windows set open, that the air may carry away and dissipate the smell of the
Fruit: The Winter Bon Crestiens being well wiped and dried, must be laid
without touching one another, in Presses close shut, and care taken not to
handle them, but by the stalk, lest they grow black.

A warm Fruit-chamber makes the Fruits to grow yellow and ripe the sooner; as
on the contrary, when it is cold, they keep the longer, and ripen later: It
ought to be so placed, that it freez not within it, no more than when
Orange Trees are kept in Winter: But if the Fruits happen to be laid up in such
a place where the Frost may enter, they must be covered with straw when the
Frost begins, and wet Clothes be laid upon that, the windows close shut, and
not be touched till the Frost and Thaw be wholly passed, and the Fruits
thoroughly dried again.

CHAP. XI.
Concerning the Diseases of Trees.

THe Diseases of Trees do always begin from their Roots, and are never caused
but by the ill qualities of the Soil which nourishes them; it being easily
judged that since from the ground they draw all their Nourishment, if that be
good, they must necessarily profit; and, on the contrary, must languish, when
that either wants moisture, or else supplies them with such as is bad: For this
reason, when a tree droops, it may be concluded, that the soil wherein it is
planted is not proper for it; and therefore either its place must be changed,
or the fault of the earth must be amended: I know very well, that the cause of
the languishing of a Tree proceeds sometimes from the ill kind of plant upon
which it is graffed, and sometimes also from having been ill planted and
ordered. But having already shown how good Plants may be chosen, and how Trees
ought to be cultivated; I suppose, that he which plants, has been careful to
choose none but good Trees, and that he orders them well, and therefore that
they cannot be sick but through the fault of the Soil, which either has not
been enriched enough at the first, or else is now worn out.

Trees do easily show their maladies by their Leaves, which grow yellow; and by
their Shoots, which are weak, languishing, and dry at the ends: Now seeing that
Trees cannot suffer, but either from the too great drouth of the Earth, or else
from its too much moisture; it is easily known, that if they complain for being
planted in too moist a Soil, they must be kept dry, either by stones, or some
other of the means heretofore mentioned: But, on the contrary, when they suffer
in dry and hard grounds, it is necessary for their cure, that they have the
earth taken from them in November, and all their Roots being laid bare, must
have Hoggs-dung, mixed with good Mould, spread upon them, because this sort of
Dung, being cold, refreshes and moistneth the Ground, which is too dry, and
takes away, consequently, the cause of the Disease. Drooping Trees may also be
helped by opening the Ground at the foot of them; and when the mould is well
stirred, covering it with Pidgeons-dung, spread two or 3 inches thick over all
the extent of the Roots: Which Dung must be left so spread until March, and
then be wrought in and mixed with the Mould; but none of this Dung must be
spread within a foot of the Stemm. Yet this is not enough for the recovery of
diseased Trees, to have thus amended the Ground about their Roots, but it will
be necessary likewise, in the months of February or March in the new Moon, to
cut them very short, and so let them shoot out all the Summer at full liberty,
without pinching or plashing them, except it be very little, until they be
fully recovered.

When Trees grow dry, and die at the top, it is certain, that their evil
proceeds from their Roots, therefore must these be uncovered, and if they be
yet sound and strong, the ends of each of them must be cut, and good Mould of
Turfs, well mixed with Dung, must be laid upon them, and the top of the stemm
must be cut off to the quick; for so the Tree having strength remaining, and
not being as yet in its time of decay, shoots forth again, and renews it self
in a short time: But if its Roots be rotten and spoiled, there is no other
remedy but to stock it up, and to plant another in its place, after the Earth
has been changed and dunged, which cannot be otherwise than much vvorn out.

Seeing that the end and perfection of Fruit Trees is to bear Fruit, it may be
said, that such as are in their full strength, and yet bear none, are
defective: This default comes either from their having bin inconveniently
graffed, or else by reason of the too great plenty of nourishment, which makes
them put forth nothing but Wood, and no Fruit; the remedy for which, is to
weaken them by taking away from them this their too great vigor: To this end,
the Earth must be taken from the foot of them in March, in the Wane of the
Moon, and the half of some of their principal Roots must be cut off: And if
they be great Trees, the stemms of them may be bored through the middle with a
Wimble near the ground, and the hole filled with a pin of dry Oak: For by
tormenting the Trees on this manner, they lose their too great force, and bear
more; but the better and more assured way, when these sorts of Trees are
capable of being graffed again, is, to re-graff them in a Cleft.

There are some sorts of Trees, as the Amadote, and some others, which do bear
no Fruit, be it against a Wall, or as Dwarf-trees, until they be old; I have
taken notice, that the best way to make them bear, is when they are fit to be
removed, to take them wholly up in November, in the Wane, and presently to
plant them again in the same, or another place, with all their roots, only a
little refreshing the ends of them, and cutting the tops of the boughs a
little, as much as you would have done, had they not been taken up: Experience
having taught me, that after this change they do, in a short time, bear good
store of Fruit.

There are some trees also, which are subject to a contrary fault to that now
mentioned, which ruin and consume themselves within a few years, by too much
bearing: To diminish this ruinous and mortal fruitfulness, their heads must be
cut off, or their boughs shortened to the half, two or three days after the
new Moon in March, and for two or three years all their Fruit-buds must be
taken off; for by this means (provided that their roots be lively) they will
grow much into wood.

Trees are also subject to other Maladies, as Cankers, which breed in their
bark, and eat it, so that they cause the death of the bough whereon they are;
Peach-trees and Abricot-trees are more ordinarily taken with this Disease than
Pear Trees, because of the too great abundance of their Sap; To heal them of
it, you must, as soon as it appears, cut off all the bark which is eaten with
it, and even the wood that is infected by it; and if it has eaten round about,
the bough must be cut off under-neath it to the quick, and the Cut must
immediately be covered with fresh Cow Dung or Hogs-dung, and wrapped about upon
that with Flax or Linen, so that no air come to it: By this means will the
Canker be stopped from going further, and the bough will recover.

There are also certain Worms bred betwixt the Bark and the Wood of Trees,
which do them much harm; when they are perceived, they must be followed, and
their track discovered with the point of the Pruning-knife, until they be
found: And if they be at the end of a bough, it must be cut off below them, and
the opening which is made upon the bark, rubbed with Cow Dung or Hogs-dung,
that it may the more easily recover.

Caterpillars are very hurtful to Trees or Fruits; for which cause the
Gardiners cannot be too careful to take them away in the Winter, and to take
heed that in Wall-trees no old leaf remain betwixt the Tree and the Wall,
because in such they shelter themselves: In the Spring, when the Trees begin to
blossom and grow green, an exact search is very necessary to take away the
Caterpillars, for then they run upon the blossoms, and spoil the Fruits as fast
as they knot; they are the cause of the unhandsomness, which we see upon may
Pears, for on that side where they have bitten or eaten them, the skin profits
no more; so that the Pears increasing, but upon one side, become hunch-back'd,
and of an extravagant shape. The time of the day most proper for the taking
away these Caterpillars, is betwixt nine and ten in the morning when the Sun
shines, because then they run upon the Blooms, and the new Shoots.

A principal Advice concerning all Trees. The CONCLUSION.
IT would be to no purpose to have examined the nature of Trees with so much
care, and to have given so many Instructions for the well ordering of them, if
I should not conclude with that advice which I hold to be the principal and
most important of all; should I not shut up all with this truth, that, No man
can have fair Plants, unless he love them: For it is neither the goodness of
the Soil, nor the quantity of Dung, nor the advantageous Situation, which make
trees to grow well; but it is the Affection of the Master which animates them,
and renders them strong and vigorous. Thus we see, that if this Affection be
wanting, if they be neglected, though they be planted in the best Grounds, they
languish and become unfruitful. Men are no longer in the earthly Paradise,
where they might eat the most admirable Fruits, without labor; they must till
the Ground, they must cultivate the Trees, if they will gather the fruit of
them. Nature no longer yields any thing of her own accord, she must be wooed
and flattered, if we would obtain what we desire at her hands; we must
love Her, if we would be loved by her. It Is this Affection which alone has
given me the skill I have in Plants: It Is that which made me note those faults
I committed about them at the first: It Is that which made me search out the
causes of them, and would give no repose unto my mind, till I had perfectly
known them. And therefore, if this love of Plants be not to be found in the
heart of the Master, or at least in that of his Gardener, I would not counsel
him to plant, because his labor will remain unprofitable, and without Fruit;
Nor have I written these Memorials for others than those that have this
inclination, and are lovers of Plants; for having this affection, they need but
small assitance besides, to do wonders: And although I know well that my
work is very rude, and little considerable, I hope, notvvithstanding, that it
will prove useful for them in their work, by laying open unto them the way
to new Knowledge; so that being already good Gardiners, they may make use of
it as a vvild-stock, upon which they may put good Graffs, and gather from them
excellent Fruits.

FINIS.
Courteous Reader, these Books following are printed for Humphrey Moseley, at
the Princes Arms in St. Paul's Churchyard.
Various Histories, with curious Discourses in humane Learning, etc.
1 Historical relations of the united Provinces of Flanders, by Cardinal
Bentivoglio: Englished by the Right Honorable Henry Earl of Monmouth. Fol. 2.
The History of the Wars of Flanders, written in Italian by that learned and
famous Cardinal Bentivoglio; Englished by the Right Honorable Henry E. of
Monmouth. The whole work Illustrated with a Map of the 17. Provinces, and
above 20 Figures of the chief Personages mentioned in this History. Fol. 3.
The History of the Wars of the Emperor Justinian, with the Persians, Goths,
and Vandalls, written in Greek by Procopius of Caesaria in eight Books,
translated into English by Sir Henry Holcroft. Knight. Fol. 4. De Bello
Belgico, the History of the Low Country Wars, written in Latin by Famianus
Strada, in English by Sir Robert Stapylton, Illustrated with diverse Figures.
Fol. 5. The use of passions, written by I. F. Senalt, and put into English by
Henry, Earl of Monmouth 8o. 6. Judicious and Select Essaies and observations
by the Renowned and learned Knight, Sir Walter Raleigh, with his Apology for
his Voyage to Guiana. Fol. 7. The Complete Horsman and Expert Farrier in two
books, by Thomas De Gray Esquire, newly printed with additions. in 4o 1656. 8.
Unheard Of curiosities concerning the Talismanicall Sculpture of the Persians.
The Horoscope of the Patriarchs, and the judgment of the Stars, by J.
Gaffarel, Englished by Edmund Chilmead, Chapter Chapter Oxon. 9. The History of the
Inquisition, composed by R. F. Servita, the compiler of the History of the
Council of Trent, in 8o. translated out of Italian. 10. Biathanatos, a Paradox
of self-murder, by Dr. Jo. Done, Dean of St. Paul's London. 11. The Gentleman's
Exercise, or the Art of limning, painting, and blazoning of Coats and Arms,
etc. by Henry Peacham Master of Arts, 4o. 12. M. Howels History of Lewis the
thirteenth King of France, with the life of his Cardinal de Richelieu. Fol. 13.
Mr. Howels Epistolae Ho elianae. Familiar letters Domestic and Foreign, in six
Sections partly Historical, Political, Philosophical, the first Volume with
Additions, 8o. 14. Mr. Howels new volume of Familiar letters partly
Historical, Political, Philosophical, the second Volume with many Additions.
8o. 15. Mr. Howels third Volume of Additionall letters of a fresher date, never
before published. 8o. 16. Mr. Howels Dodono's Grove, or the Uocall Forest, the
first part, in 12o. with many Additions. 17. Mr. Howels Dodona's Grove, or the
Uocall Forest, the second part, in 8o, never printed before. 18. Mr. Howels,
Englands Tears for the present wars. 19. Mr. Howels Fre-eminence and Pedigree
of Parliament, in 12o. 20. Mr. Howels, Instructions and Directions for Foreign
Travels, in 12o with diverse Additions for Traveling into Turkey, and the Levant
parts. 21. Mr. Howels Vote, or a Poem Royal presented to his late Majesty, in
4o. 22. Mr. Howels Angliae Suspiria and lachrymae, in 12o. 23. Marquis Virgilio
Malvezzi's Romulus and Tarquin, Englished by Hen. Earl of Monmouth, in 12o. 24.
Marquis Virgilio Malvezzi's David persecuted, Englished by To. Ashly. Gent. in
12o. 25. Marquis Virgilio Malvezzi, of the success and chief events of the
Monarchy of Spain, in the year 1639. of the revolt of the Catalonians from the
King of Spain. Englished by Rob. Gentilis Gent. in. 12o. 26. Marquis Virgilio
Malvezzi's considerations on the lives of Alcibiades, and Coriolanus, Two
famous Roman Commanders, Englished by Rob. Gentilis. 27. Policy unveiled, or
Maxims of State, done into English by the Translator of Gusman, in 4o. 28.
Gracious priveleges granted by the King of Spain to our English Merchants, in
4o. 29. Englands looking in and out by Sr. Ralph Maddison, Knight, 4o. 30.
Gratiae Ludentes, jests from the University. 31. The Antipathy between the
French and the Spanyard, an ingenious translation out of Spanish. 32. Mr. Birds
grounds of Grammar, in 8o. 33. Mr. Bulwers Phylocophus, or the Deaf and Dumb
man's friend, in 12o. 34. Mr. Bulwers Pathomyotomia, or a Dessection of the
significative Muscles of the Affections of the Mind, 12o. 35. An Itinenary
containing a voyage made through Italy in the years 1646, 1647. illustrated
with diverse Figures of Antiquity, never before published, by John Raymond,
Gent. in 12o.
Books in Humanity lately Printed.
36. THe History of Life and Death, or the prolongation of Life, written by
Francis Lord Verulam, Viscount St. Alban in 12o. 37. The natural and
experimental History of Winds, written in Latin by Francis. Lord Verulam
Viscount St. Alban, translated into English by an admirer of the learned
Author. 12o. 38. The life of the most learned Father Paul, Author of the
History of the Council of Trent, translated out of Italian by a person of
quality. 8o. 39. Paradoxes, Problems, Characters, and. by Dr. Donn Dean of St
Paul's, to which is added a book of Epigrams, written in Latin by the same
Author, translated by Jasper Main. D. D. 12o. 40. Ignatius his conclave, a
Satyr written by Dr. Done Deane of St. Paul's. 12o. 41. A Discovery of
subterraneall Treasure, viz. of all manner of Mines and Minerals, from the
Gold, to the Coal, with plain directions and rules for the finding of them in
all Kingdoms, and Countries, written by Gabriel Platt. 4o. 42. Richardi
Gardener, ex Aede Christi Oxon. specimen Oratorium. 8o. 43. The Sovereignty of
the British Seas, written by that learned Knight Sir John Burroughes Keeper of
the Records in the Tower. 12o. 44. Grammatica Burlesa, or a new English Grammar
made plain and easy for Teacher and Scholar, composed by Edward Burles
Master of Arts. 45. Artificial Arithmetic containing the Quintessence of the
Golden Rule, the true valuation of all Annuities, also to find the distance at
one station; An Art never till now published, useful for Merchants, Gunners,
Seamen, and Surveyors, by Robert Iager of Sandwich in Kent Gent. 46. Natural
and Divine Contemplations of the Passions and Faculties of the Soul of Man in
three books, written by Nicholas Moseley Esquire. 8o.
Several Sermons, with other excellent Tracts in Divinity, written by some
most eminent and learned Bishops, and Orthodox Divines.
47. A Manual of private Devotions and Meditations for every day in the week,
by the right reverend Father in God, Lancelot Andrews late Lord Bishop of
Winchester, in 24o. 48. A Manual of Directions for the Sick, with many sweet
Meditations and Devotions, by the right reverend Father in God, Lancelot
Andrews, late Lord Bishop of Winchester, in 24o. 49. Ten Sermons upon several
occasions, preached at St. Paul's Cross, and elsewhere, by the Right reverend
Father in God, Arthur Lake, late Lord Bishop of Bath and Wells. in 4o. 50. Six
Sermons upon several occasions, preached at Court before the Kings Majesty,
and elsewhere, by that late learned and reverend Divine, John Done, Dr. in
Divinity, and Dean of St. Paul's London, in 4o. 51. Private Devotions in six
Letanies, with directions and Prayers for the days of the week and Sacrament,
for the hour of Death, and the day of judgment, and two daily prayers, for the
Morning and Evening, written by Dr. Henry Valentine, 24o. 52. A Key to the Key
of Scripture, or an exposition with notes upon the Epistle to the Romans, the
three first chapters, by William Sclater, Dr. in Divinity and Minister of the
word of God at Pitmister in Somersetshire, in 4o. 53. Sarah and Hagar, or the
sixteenth Chapter of Genesis opened in ninteen Sermons, being the first
legitimate Essay of the pious labors of that learned, Orthodox, and
indefatigable Preacher of the Gospel, Mr. Josas Shute. B. D. and above 33
years Rector of St Mary Woolnoth in Lombardstreet, in Folio. 54. Christ's Tears
with his love and affection toward Jerusalem, delivered in sundry Sermons upon
Duke 19. v. 41, 42. by Richard Maden, B. D. late of Magdalen College in Gam.
in. 4o. 55. Three Sermons viz. The benefit of contentation, The Affinity of the
faithful, and The lost sheep found, by Mr. Henry Smith. 4o. 56. Ten Sermons
preached upon several Sundays, and Saints days, by Peter Hausted Mr. in
Arts, and Curat at Uppingham in Rutland in 4o. 57. Eighteen Sermons preached
upon the Incarnation and Nativity of our blessed Lord and Savior Jesus Christ,
wherein the greatest mysteries of Godliness are unfolded, to the capacity of
the Weakest Christian, by John Dawson Oxon. in 4o. 58. The History of the
Defenders of the Faith, discoursing the state of Religion in England during the
Reigns of King Henry 8. Edward 6. Queen Mary, and Queen Elizabeth. by C. L. in
4o. 59. Christian Divinity, written by Edmund Reeve Batchelour in divinity, in
4o. 60. The Communion-Book Catechism expounded by Edmund Reeve Batchelour in
Divinity, in 4o. 61. The true and absolute Bishop, wherein is showed how Christ
is our only shepherd and Bishop of our souls, by Nicolas Darton, Master in
Arts, in 4o. 62. A description of the Newborn Christian, or a lively pattern
of the Saint militant child of God, written by Nicholas Hunt, Master in Arts,
in 4o. 63. Divine Meditations upon the 91. Psalm, and on the History of Agag
King of Amalek, with an Essay of Friendship written by an honorable person,
64. An Historical Anatomy of Christian Melancholy, by Edmund Gregory Oxon, in
8o. 65. Lazarus his Rest, a Sermon preached at the Funeral of that pious,
learned, and Orthodox Divine, Mr. Ephrim Udall, by Thomas, Reeve, B. D: 66. The
Survey of Man, in a Sermon as it was delivered by Mr. John Bishop at his
Fathers funeral. 67. Enchiridion containing institutions Divine and Moral,
written by Francis Quarles, 24o.
Books in Divinity Lately Printed.
68. THE Psalms of David from the new Translation of the Bible, turned into
Meter, to be sung after the old tunes used in the Churches; by the Right
Reverend Father in God Henry King Bishop of Chichester. 12o. 69. Choice Music
for three voices, and a thorough-Base composed by Mr. Henry and Mr. William
Laws, brothers and servants to his late Majesty; with diverse Elegies set in
Music by several friends upon the death of Mr. William Laws. 4o. 70. Letters
between the Lord George Digby and Sir Kenelm Digby Knight, concerning Religion.
8o. 71. Essaies in Divinity by Dr. Donn. D. of Saint Paul's, before he entered
into holy orders. 12o. 72. Public devotions, or a Collection of Prayers used
at sundry times by diverse Reverend and godly Divines, together with divine
implorations, and an introduction to prayer. 24o. 73. The Sinners Tears in
Meditations and Prayers by Thomas Fettiplace of Peterhouse Camb. 12o. 74.
Quaestio Quodlibetica, or a discourse whether it be lawful to take use for
money by R. F. Knight. 75. Sions Prospect in its first view presented in a
summary of Divine Truths consenting with the faith professed by the Church of
England, confirmed from Scripture and reason, composed by Mr. Robert Mossom
Minister: 4o. 76. Flores Solitudinis, certain rare and elegant pieces, viz.
Two excellent discourses. 1 Of Temperance and Patience. 2 Of life and death by
I. E. Nierembergius. The World contemned; by Eucherius, Bishop of Lions. And
the life of Paulinus Bishop of Nola, collected in his sickness and retirement,
by Henry Vaughan. 77. 14. Sermons on several Texts of Scripture with a
Catechism written by Willam G^y Rector of Buckland.
Choice Poems with excellent Translations, by the most eminent wits of this age.
78. EPigrammata Thoma Mori Angli, in 16o. 79. Fragmenta Aurea, a collection of
all the incomparable Pieces written by Sr. John Sucklin Knight, 8o. 80. Poems,
Songs, Sonnets, Elegies, and Letters by John Done, with Elegies on the Authors
death, to which is added diverse Copies under his own hand, nevor before in
print. 8o. 81. Juvenalls 16. Satyrs translated by Sir Robert Stapylton, wherein
is contained a Survey of the manners and actions of Mankind, with Annotations,
8o. 82. Musaeus on the loves of Hero and Leander, with Leander's letter to
Hero, and her answer, taken out of Ovid, with Annotations by Sir Robert
Staplyton, in 12o. 83. Poems, etc. written by Mr. Edward Waller of Beconsfield,
Esquire. 8o. 84. Pastor Fido, the faithful Shepherd, a Pastoral, newly
translated out of the Original, by Mr. Richard Fanshaw, Esquire 4o. 85. Poems,
with a discovery of the Civil Wars of Rome, by Mr. Richard Fanshaw, Esquire in
4o. 86. Europa, Cupid crucified, Venus Vigils, with Annotations, by Thomas
Stanley, Esquire 8o. 87. Coopers Hill, a Poem written by Mr, John Denham Esquire the 2d
Edition with Additions, 4o. 88. Medea, a Tragedy written in Latin by Lucius
Annaeus Seneca, Englished by Mr. Edward Sherburn Esquire with Annotations, 8o. 89.
Seneca's answer to Lucilius his Quaere, why good men suffer misfortunes, seeing
there is a Divine providence, Englished by Mr. Edward Sherburn, Esquire 8o. 90.
Madagascar with other Poems, by Sr. W. Davenant. 91. Poems with a Masque by
Thomas Carew Esquire. Gentleman of the Privy Chamber to his late Majesty, revived
and enlarged with Aditions, 8o. 92. Poems of Mr. John Milton, with a Masque
presented at Ludlow Castle before the Earl of Bridgewater, then President of
Wales, 8o. 93. Poems, etc. with a Masque called The Triumph of Beauty, by James
Shirley, Gent. 8o. 94. The Mistress, or several Copies of love-verses, written
by Mr. Abraham Cowley. 80. 95. Stepps to the Temple, sacred Poems with the
delights of the Muses upon several occasions by Richard Crashaw of Cambridge.
12o. 96. Divine Poems written by Francis Quarles 8o. 97. Clarastella, with
other occasional Poems, Elegies, Epigrams, Satyrs, written by R. Heath. Esquire:
98. Poems written by Mr. William Shakspeare. 99. Arnalte and Lucenda, or the
melancholy Knight, a Poem translated by L. Laurence. 4o. 100. The Odes of
Casimire, translated, by Mr. George Hills of Newark. 12o. 101. Alarm to Poets
by I. L. 4o. 102. Fragmenta Poetica or Miscellanies of Poetical Musings, by
Nich. Murford Gent. 12o. 103. Hymnus Tabaci, Authore Raphaele Thorio. 8o. 104.
Hymnus Tabaci, a Poem in Honor of Tobacco Heroically composed by Raphael
Thorius, made English by Peter Hausted Mr. of Arts, Camb. 8o. 105. Olor
Iscanus, a Collection of some select Poems, and Translations, written by Mr.
Henry Vaughan 106. Argalus and Parthenia by Francis Quarles. 107. The Academy
of Complements wherein Ladies, Gentlewomen, Scholars and strangers may
accommodate their Courtly practice with gentile Ceremonies, complementall,
amorous, high expressions and forms of speaking, or writing of Letters, most in
fashion, with Additions of many witty Poems and pleasant New songs. 12o.
Poems lately Printed.
107. POems and Translations, the complete works of Thomas Stanley Esquire 8o. 105.
Choice Poems with Comedies and Trage dies, by Mr. William Cartwright late
student of Chapter Chapter in Oxford, and Proctor of the University. The Aires and
songs set by Mr. Henry Laws, servant to his late Majesty in his public and
private Music. 108. Herodian of Alexandria, his Imperial History of twenty
Roman Caesar's, and Emperors of his time, first written in Greek, and now
converted into an Heroic Poem by C. Stapleton. 4o. 109. The Card of Courtship
or the Language of love fitted to the humors of all degrees, sexes and
Conditions.
Incomparable Comedies and Tragedies written by several Ingenious Authors.
110. COmedies and Tragedies written by Francis Beaumont, and John Fletcher,
never printed before, and now published by the Authors Originals Copies,
containing 34 plays, and a Masque, Fol. 111. The Elder Brother by Francis
Beaumont. and John Fletcher. 112. The Scornful Lady by Francis Beaumont. and
John Fletcher. 113. The Woman Hater by Francis Beaumont. and John Fletcher.
114. Thierry and Theodoret by Francis Beaumont. and John Fletcher. 115. Cupids
Revenge by Francis Beaumont. and John Fletcher. 116. Monsieur Thomas by Francis
Beaumont. and John Fletcher. 117. The two Noble kinsmen by Francis Beaumont.
and John Fletcher. 118. The Country Captain and the Variety, two Comedies
written by a person of Honor. 12o. 119. The Sophy, a Tragedy written by Mr.
John Denham Esquire Fol. 120. Brennoralt, or the discontented Colonel, a Tragedy
written by Sir John Suckling Knight. 4o. 121. The deserving Favorite by Mr.
Lod. Car^el. 122. Albovine King of Lombardy by Sir William Davenant. 123. The
Just Italian by Sir William Davenant. 124. The Cruel Brother by Sir William
Davenant. 125. The Unfortunate Lovers by Sir William Davenant. 126. Love and
Honor by Sir William Davenant. 127. The Sophister by Dr. Z. 128. Revenge of
Bussy D Ambois George Chapman 129. Byrons Conspiracy George Chapman 130. Byrons
Tragedy. George Chapman 131. Contention for Honor and riches J. Shirley 132.
Triumph of Peace in 4o J. Shirley 133. The Duchess of Malfy by John Webster.
134. The Northern lass by Richard Broom. 135. The Cid, a Tragicomedy
translated out of French by Joseph Rutter Gent. 12o. 136. The Wild Goose Chase
a Comedy written by Fr. Beaumont and John Fletcher. Fol. 137. The Widow, a
Comedy by Ben: Johnson, John Fletcher, and T: Middleton. 138. The Changling by
T Middleton and Rowley. 4o. 239. Six new plays. 1. The Brothers. 2. The
Sisters. 3. The Doubtful Heir. 4. The Imposture. 5. The Cardinal. 6. The
Court-Secret, by I. Shirley. 140. Five new plays. 1. A mad couple well matched.
2 The Novella. 3. The Court Beggar. 4. The City Wit. 5. The Damoiselle, by
Richard Broom 141. The Tragedy of Alphonsus Emperor of Germany, by George
Chapman 4o. 142. Two Tragedies. viz. Cleopatra Queen of Egypt, and Agrippina
Empress of Rome, by Thomas May Esquire.
Plays lately Printed.
143. THe Gentleman of Venice, A Tragi-Comedy by James Shirley. 144. The
Politician, a Tragedy by James Shirley. 145. The Pa^ssionate Lovers in two
parts, by Mr. Lodowick Carlel. 146. Mirza, A Tragedy, really acted in Persia
with Annotations by Robert Barren Esquire. 147. Three new plays, viz. 1 The
Bashful Lover. 2 The Guardian. 3 The very woman, by Phillip Massonger, Gent.
New and Excellent Romances.
148. CAssandra the Famed Romance, the whole work in five parts, written in
French, and now Elegantly rendered into English by a person of quality, Fol.
149. Ibrahim or the Illustrious Bassa, an excellent new Romance, the whole
work in four parts, written in French by Monsieur de Scudery, and now
Englished by Henry Cogan Gent. Fol. 150. Artamenes, or the Grand Cyrus, an
excellent new Romance, written by that famous wit of France, Monsieur de
Scudery Governor of Nostre-dame, and now Englished by F. G. Esquire. Fol. 151. The
continuation of Artamenes, or the Grand Cyrus, that excellent new Romance,
being the third and fourth parts, written by that Famous wit of France,
Monsieur de Scudery Governor of Nostre-dame, and now Englished by F. G. Esquire.
Fol. 152. The third Volume of Artamenes or the Grand Cyrus, that excellent new
Romance, being the fifth and fixed parts, written by that famous wit of France,
Monsieur de Scudery Governor of Nostre-dame, and now Englished by F. G. Esquire.
Fol. 153. The fourth Volume of Artamenes, or the Grand Cyrus, that Excellent
new Romance, being the seventh and eighth parts, written by that famous Wit of
France, Monsieur de Scudery Governor of Nostre-dame, and now englished by F.
G. Esquire. Fol. 154. The History of Polexander, a Romance, Englished by William
Brown Gent. Fol. 155. The History of the Banished Virgin, a Romance translated
by I. H. Esquire. Fol. 156. Casandra the famed Romance, the three first books,
Elegantly rendered into English by the Right Honorable the Lord George Digby.
8o. 157. The History of Philoxipes and Policrite, a Romance, made English by an
honorable person. 8o. 158. The History of Don Fenise, a new Romance, written in
Spanish by Francisco de las Coveras, Englished by a Person of Honor. 8o. 159.
Aurora Ismenia, and the Prince, with Oronta the Cyprian Virgin, translated by
Thomas Stanley Esquire. 160. Cleopatra, a new Romance, Englished by a Gent. of the
Inner Temple, in 8o. 161. La Stratonica or the unfortunate Qeene, a new
Romance, translated into English. 162. Choice Novels, and Amorous Tales written
by the most refined wits of Italy, newly translated into English by a person of
quality. in 8o. 163. Nissena, a new Romance, Englished by an Honorable person,
in 8o. 164. Dianea, a new Romance, written in Italian by ^io Francisco
Loredano, a Noble Venetian, Englished by Sir Aston Cockaine, in 8o.
Books lately printed for Humphrey Moseley.
165. A German Diet, or the Balance of Europe, wherein the power and
weakness, glory, and reproach, Virtues and Vices, Plenty and Wants, Advantages
and Defects, Antiquity and Modernes of all the Kingdoms and states of
Christendom are Impartially poised by James Howel Esquire. Fol. 166. Renatus des
Cartes', excellent compendium of Music with necessary and juditious
Animadversions thereupon, by a person of Honor, Illustrated with diverse
figures in 4o. 167. The Scarlet Gown, or the History of the lives of all the
present Cardinals of Rome, written in Italian and Englished by Henry Cogan,
Gent. 8o. 168. A discourse of constancy, by Justus Lipsius, faithfully
Englished by R. G. sometimes of Chapter Ch-Oxon. containing many sweet consolations
for all that are afflicted in body, or in mind. 12o. 169. Le Chemin abrege, or
a compendious Method for the attaining of Sciences in a short time, with the
Statures of the Academy of Cardinal Richelieu, Englished by R. G. Gent. 170.
The Academy of Eloquence, containing a complete English Rhethorick, with common
places and forms to speak and write fluently according to the present mode,
together with letters amorous and moral, by Thomas Blunt. Gent. 12o. 171. The
Secretary in fashion, or a compendious and refined way of expression in all
manner of letters, with instructions how to write letters of all sorts,
composed in French by P. St de la Serre, in 8o. 172. Curia Politiae, or the
Apologies of several Princes justifying to the World their most eminent
actions by the strength of Reason, and the most exact rules of Policy, by the
acurate pen of Monsieur de Scudery, Governer of Nostre-dame, and now Englished
with the figures of many Emperors and Kings. 173. (...), or observations on the
present manners of the English, briefly anatomizing the living by the dead,
with an useful detection of the Mountebanks of both sexes by Richard Whitlock
M. D. late fellow of all Souls College in Oxon 8o. 174 174. Scholae
Wintoniensis Phrases Latinae The Latin Phrases of Winchester School, corrected
and much augmented with Poeticalls added, and four Tracts. 1. Of words not to
be used by elegant Latinists. 2. The difference of words like one another in
sound or signification. 3. Some words governing a subjunctive mood not
mentioned in Lillies Grammar. 4. Concerning (...) and (...) for entering
children upon making of Themes, by H. Robinson D. D. sometimes schoolmaster of
Winchester College, published for the common use and benefit of Grammar
schools. 175. Atheismus Vapulans, or a Treatise against Atheism rationally
confuting the Atheists of these times by William Towers, late student of Chapter
Chapter Oxon. 176. De Juramenti Obligatione promissorij Praelectiones Septem. Of
the Obligation of Promissory Oaths, seven Lectures read in the Divinity
Schools at Oxford by Robert Sanderson D. D. and englished by his late Majesty's
appointment. 8o. 177. Politic Maxims and observations written by the most
learned Hugo Grotius, translated for the ease and benefit of the English
statesmen by H. C. S. T. B. 178. The perfect Horseman or the experienced
secrets of Mr. Markhams fifty years practice, showing how a man may come to be
a General Horse -- man by the knowledge of these seven Offices, Viz. The
Breeder Feeder Ambler Rider Keeper Buyer Farrier. Published with some Additions
by Lancelot Thetford Practitioner in the same Art. 40. years. 179. Divine
Poems written by Tho. Washborn. B. D. 180. Buxtorf's Epitome of his Hebrew
Grammar, Englished by John Davis Mr. of Arts. 181. Fasciculus Poematum and
Epigrammatum Miscelaneorum Authore Iohanne Done. D. D. 182. Poemata Graeca and
Latina, a Gulielmo Cartwright, C. C. Oxon. 183. The Marrow of Complements,
containing Amorous Epistles, complementall entertainments, Dialogues, songs,
and Sonnets, presentations of gifts, instructions for Woers, with other
pleasant passages.
Books newly Printed for Humphrey Moseley.
184 THe fifth Volume of Artamenes, or the Gran^ Cyrus, that excellent new
Romance; being the nint and tenth Parts: Written by that famous wit of France,
Monsieur de Scudery, Governor of Nostre-dame, and now englished by F. G. Esquire.
185 Elise, or, Innocence guilty; a new Romance, translated into English by John
Jennings Gent. 186 Clelia, an excellent new Romance, written in French, by the
exquisite pen of Monsieur de Scudery, Governor of Nostredame de la Guard. 187
Coralbo, a new Romance in three Books; written in Italian by Cavalier Gio
Francesco Biondi, and now faithfully rendered into English. 188 The Lusiad, or,
Portugalls Historical Poem; translated into English by Richard Fanshaew, Esquire.
189 The History of Philosophy, the first Part; by Tho. Stanley, Esquire. 190 The
History of the Kingdom of Naples, with the lives of all their Kings; written
by that famous Antiquary, Scipio Mazzella, with an Addition of what happened
during the Rebellion of Massaniello, and continued to this present year, by I.
H. Esquire. 191 Mr. Howel's fourth Volume of familiar Letters, never published
before. 192 Manziny, his most exquisite Academicall Discourses upon several
choice Subjects; turned into French by that famous Wit, Monsieur de Scudery,
and into English by an Honorable Lady. 193 The English Treasury of Wit and
Language, digested into common places, by IohnCotgrave, Gent. 194 Lusus Serius,
a Philosophical Discourse, of the superiority of the Creatures, by Michael
Mayerus. 195 The Aphorisms of Hippocrates, with a short Comment on them; taken
out of Galen, Heurnius, Fuchsius, etc. 196 Euphrates, or, the waters of the
East, by Eugenius Philalethes. 197. Hermeticall Physic, or the way to preserve
and restore health, by Henry Nellius Chemist, and Englished by Henry Vaughan,
Gent. (...)

