Sionis Reductio, and Exultatio.

OR, Sions RETVRN out of CAPTIVITY: WITH Sions REJOICING for Her RETURN.

A DISCOURSE, Intended for the Solemn Festivity of the English Nation, at
Livorno in Italy, upon the happy news of King Charles the Second his Return
into England, which was there celebrated with Munificent Feasting, and
Magnificent Shows, Fireworks, and other signs of Triumph, three days together,
in the Month of July, Anno Dom. 1660. Since occasionally preached in part, at
St. Margarets in Westminster, the Sunday after the Solemnization of the Kings
Birthday, and Entry into London; and now presented to public view, as to
correct the mis-apprehension, and mis-interpretation of some that were present;
so to prevent the misinformation, and depravation of others that were absent.

By To. le Gross, Cleric. An Orthodox Priest of the Church of England; and D.
Ecumenical, then residing in Livorno, at his return from Grand Cairo in Egypt.

Fructus liberationis est laetitia; laetitiae autem fructus gratiarum actio.
Laetari est multis; gaudere non nisi bonis. LONDON, Printed by Tho: Leach, in
the Year MDCLXII.

Imprimatur.

Ex Aed. Sabaud. 24. Aug. 1662. G. Stradling Reverend. in Chr. Patr. Gilb.
Episc. Land. Sacel. Domesticus.

TO His most Illustrious Highness, RUPERT, Prince Palatine of the Rhene; Duke
of Cumberland; Knight of the most noble Order of the Garter; and one of His
Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council.
(...)
SIR, May it please your Highness.
HAving had the Honor to wait upon Your Highness at Tolon, in France, and from
thence to be remanded by Your Highness into Italy, about some affairs
concerning his Majesty's Service in those parts, whiles I was abroad: I should
be most grossly incivil, if I should not tender those due respects of Service,
which I am able to express to Your Highness, now I am come home. Not that I do,
or can imagine Your Highness, any ways, to stand in need of my Service; But
that by my Service to Your Highness, I may the better serve my self and have
better esteem in the eyes of others. Multa ideo habentur sancta, (says Pliny,
in his Epistle to Trajane the Emperor) quia Templis sunt dicata* And I see it
verified by experience, that many men are accounted great, and in reputation,
because they have relation to, and are in the Service of great men. But alas!
What service can I perform to Your Highness? I can do nothing, now, but pray;
and that I shall; (...), as Nazianzen sometimes, in another case; first to God
for Your Highness, that he would bless and protect You; then to Your Highness
for my Self, and this poor mis-reported Sermon; that You would please,
according to Your wonted goodness, to cast an eye of favor upon me, and
protect it. The occasion of its composure was, the happy news of His Majesty's
happy return into his Kingdoms, whiles I was abroad: and the occasion of its
dedication to Your Highness, is, the unhappy entertainment it has received
from the Pulpit, since I came home. There I conceived it, here I preached it:
So that, though it was a Forraigner in its conception; yet it is a Denizon in
its production. The Subject of it, is, Our Sions Return out of Captivity, by
reason of His MAJESTY'S Return unto his Throne. And the duty it does enforce to
my self and others, redeemed out of our former Captivity, is our thankful
joyfulness, and joyful thankfulness to God for both. It has met with much
mis-apprehension, and sinister interpretation, by some, that are not
well-wishers to Sions prosperity: but would rather She should remain in
Captivity and in misery, than be blessed with the present liberty and felicity,
which, through Gods blessing she does enjoy (and long may she continue in the
enjoyment of it!) by the prosperous Reign of his SaCRed Majesty; And so, by
reason of their malign aspect to, and dis-respect of the Church, they do as
much as Malice and the Devil can suggest unto them, asperse, traduce, and
calumniate, all such as are Conformable, and Orthodox Churchmen. For
vindication therefore of my Self, and this Sermon, honestly intended, but
maliciously traduced, I have been necessitated to make it public, which I
thought should still continue private; and to present it to open view, as to
correct the mis-apprehension of some that were present when it was delivered,
so to prevent the depravation of others that were absent, and so misinformed.
And thus, coming from the Pulpit to the Press, in the plain dress of Loyalty
and Christianity, I do, with all submission, address my self, with it, to Your
Illustrious Highness; And do humbly beseech Your Highness, that as You have
been a Peerlesse Champion of both, against the Enemies of GOD, and the KING; so
You will vouchsafe it, now fleeing in these robes for refuge to Your Quarters,
a favorable acceptance, and a gracious Protection. And thus shelterd under
Your Highness tuition, it will go abroad secure from all black-mouthd
aspersion. In confidence of which Princely Favor, according to Your innate
godnesse, I do further address my self to the Throne of Grace, and shall
continually solicit the Prince of Princes, with my Prayers, that he will
still grace Your Highness, with increase of Honor here; and for ever honor
Your Highness, with the perfection of happiness hereafter. So prays,

SIR, Your Highnesses most humbly devoted, and Religiously addicted, Orator
and Servant, To: le Gross.

To his Honored Friends, Mr. James and George Man, sometimes the Prime
Merchants, but always the Royal Entertainers of the KINGS real Friends, at
Livorno in ITALY.
(...).
Honored Friends,
THis Sermon, though it be primarily Dedicated to a Prince, whom you did always
honor; yet of right it does most properly belong to you, who have been like
Princes in the Entertainment of the Kings Friends (for which I can say, you too
much suffered then, if not still, by reason of the then prevailing times)
whiles they were in exilement abroad, and being in Italy. Amongst which, I
cannot but ingenuously confess, though I was one of the most unworthy, yet I
was, without any Relation, or Letters of Credit and Commendation to you (the
only supporters of Gentlemen in their Travels) most worthily entertained, and
for many years, when I was in Italy; still fostered by you. In my last being
with you, at my return from Grand Cairo (when after our Conflict with three
Spanish men of War, being set upon by them, in the good Ship Recoverie, having
discomfited the other two, we brought in the third, the great Alexander, their
Admiral, with triumph into Liverno) upon the happy news of His Majesty's Return
into His Kingdoms, this Treatise was conceived in your House: In your House it
was framed and composed; and in your House, if occasion had served, it should
have been delivered. But that which opportunity then would not permit me to
Preach, having been, (as you very well know,) delated into the Inquisition, by
some ill-confiding Brethren, for Preaching once before, (though not in your
House,) there, necessity does enforce me now, having preached it, for
vindication of my self against some Phanaticks, to Print it here. So that,
though I could not preach it before you, where it was conceived; yet, being now
in Print, I could not but, by way of gratitude, present it unto you, by whom
(though you knew not of it) it was fostered. I know, if it were longer, it
would come far short of acceptance, in point of requital for those favors
which I have received; and yet I know your ingenuity to be such, that being as
it is, you will accept it, as a testimony of my gratitude. I should, I confess,
long e're this, have otherwise expressed my thankfulness, if either I had been
restored to my own, (which, though it was given me by my Princes favor, His
SaCRed Majesty of happy memory, is still unjustly kept from me by some of His
verSHute, and versatile Subjects) or settled in some other Living. But the late
Parliament, An. 1660. (as is suggested,) not permitting the one; and my hard
fortune, (because I came home alone, and not accompanied with yellow Pages to
assist me) not indulging the other; I cannot make those Returns of gratitude,
which I then intended, and would still, if ability were answerable to my will,
yet see performed: But here Ovids Apology must intercede, and make excuse for
me: -- In magnis est voluissefatis: or if you please, Sit voluisse, sat
valuisse. However, that I might not show my self to be Ingratus Hospes, (as
sometimes Philip, King of Macedon, did inure a Soldier of his with that
stigmatical censure,) I had rather, coming lately from exilement, in this exile
and low condition, in which I am, expose my self, in the eyes of the now
fastigious, and fastidious world, to be disgraceful, than any ways be thought
to be unthankful. Upon this account, Gentlemem, (my worthy, and never to be
forgotten friends,) I make this my address to you now, with my first fruits
from the Press, since I came into England; and till such time as it shall
please God to meliorate my fortunes, whereby I may endeavor to requite you
with deeds, I do desire you to accept of this Paper-Return of words. Yet think
not, Gentlemen, that I do intend to (...) you only with windy words for your
good deeds; or to fopp you off with verbal expressions for your real actions:
But assure your selves (and I do enter into Bond before the world for the
performance) if ever ability on my part will permit; and occasion on your part
shall require it; I shall, with a grateful Metamorphosis, transform these words
into deeds; and turning letters into factures, (which yet are both required in
your Factory) I shall invest these vocal and sounding words, into substantial
and sound works. In the mean time, I shall dispatch my wishes, which are (...),
(if I may so express that Phrase of Homer) as so many winged mesengers to the
White Hall of Heaven, thereto importune the King of Kings, who is the Author
and Disposer of all good things; (who can make Job, and all others, of rich men
to become poor; and of poor men to become rich again, as he did him, at his
good pleasure,) that he will repair your great losses with a reduplication of
your former fortunes, and temporal blessings, here in this life; and repay your
curiesies to me, and to others, which we can never do, with eternal blessedness
in the life that is to come. Gentlemen, these are the darlings of his wishes
for you, who acknowledges himself to have been, and still professes himself
to be,

SIRS, Your most obliged Friend, to serve you, To: le Gross.

The Preface to the READER!
CAndid Reader, so I call thee, for so I would have thee: whoever thou be,
that shall read this mangled, and mis-reported Sermon; I desire thee to read
it, Non limis, sed imis oculis: not with an oblique, crooked, or squint eye: As
some did hear it, Auribus incultis, and non recte dispositis: with ears not
well picked, but impostumated, and not well disposed: but read it rightly, read
it thoroughly, and read it impartially. And so, being unbyassed in thy
affections, and without prejudice in thy judgment, thou shall find in it, no
unchristian, and unsavory expressions, as is reported, contrary to the Analogy
of faith, and good manners; but words and phrases tending only to the
furtherance of Loyalty and Christianity, Yet such is the ill fate which does
attend Sermons of this nature, in these squeamish, crazy, and brainsick Times,
that, what through inadvertency, or malignancy, they always meet with an ill
construction. And such ill fortune has this poor loyal Sermon unhappily met
with; and such hard entertainment has it received. For some chattering
Martens, (...), ill Birds, of an ill brood, (who can swallow up Clay, Dirt, and
Dung; viz. Blasphemy, Haeresy, Perjury, and all kind of Impiety, to build up
their own Nests; but will not away with any thing of Humanity, Loyalty, and
Honesty, which may tend to the aedification of others) have garrulously noised
abroad, that this Sermon was full of untruths, profaneness, and unchristian
expressions, tending rather to the destruction, than the instruction of the
hearers; and that, the Preacher of it, was full of irreverence in his Prayer,
and like a mad man in his Preaching. To wipe away which malevolent and
uncharitable Aspersions (not to give them any harsher language) I have been
importuned by some more judicious and honest Christians, (though dissuaded by
others) to commit this Sermon to the Press, and to commend it to public view,
leaving my self, in point of irreverence in the Pulpit, to the judgment of
others that were then present, as well as they, and better acquainted with
Devotion, and behavior in it, than themselves. And therefore, good Reader,
before thou do swallow up such injurious and scandalous reports, at the
second hand, with too much credulity, let me entreat thee, to peruse this
Sermon seriously, and to weigh the Contents, with the Circumstances of it,
considerately; and then, I am confident, upon such mature deliberation, (except
thou be infected with the Leaven of Phanaticism,) thou will neither judge
the Author to be mad, nor the Sermon to be unchristian, or unlawful.

We find it recorded in the Acts of the Apostles, that when St. Paul, before
Agrippa, and others, did discourse of his Conversion, and the hope of the
Resurrection, (things contrary to the current of the times then, as loyalty and
honesty amongst most men are now) Festus the Governor (rightly surnamed
Porcius, from his hoggish disposition) stood up, and said, with a loud voice,
that Paul was besides himself, and that too much Learning had made him mad,
Act. 26.24. I will not say I was beside my self, or the Text, when, before a
Reverend Prelate, and some Persons of Honor, as well as those pragmatical
Mechanics, I discoursed of our Sions Reversion out of Captivity, by the Kings
happy Return into his Kingdoms; and of his Majesty's Resurrection, in the day
of his Nativity. But, as St. Paul answered Festus, I am not mad, O noble
Festus, but speak the words of truth and soberness, Act. 26.25. So shall I
reply upon those grunting Cavillers, not Cavaliers, that I was not mad, through
too much Learning, (though I may safely say, there was more Learning in the
Sermon, than they that spoke against it, did understand) but I did speak the
words of truth and soberness: Yet, I must confess, not without some zeal to the
Cause I had in hand, and fervency in the delivery of it. But if I were mad, or
besides my self, (as St. Paul speaks in another case to the Corinthians: (...).
Whether we be besides our selves, it is to God: Or whether we be sober, it is
for your Cause, 2 Cor. 5.13. It was for God, and the King; to inculcate
Thankfulness to God, and to enforce Loyalty to the King, for the happy return
of our unhappy Captivity.

As for untruths, I know none in it: if thou, good Reader, or any other, can
detect, or discover any, which as yet are hidden to me, I shall readily undergo
the penalty to be inflicted upon false Prophets, or Preachers; and thank thee,
or them, for better information,

But, it may be thou will say, (as is reported) I wished them all hanged; and
that is to curse; a thing unfitting for a Minister; and both unchristian, and
unlawful.

Fair and softly, good Reader, not too much of that: I said then, and so thou
shall find in the Catastrophe, and close of the Sermon, that I would conclude
all, for that time, with a Votive Acclamation for the King, King Charles the
2d. by whose return into his Kingdoms, God was pleased to turn our Captivity:
And it was the same, with some alteration, and addition, which was sometimes
ascribed, by the Germans, to Charles the 5th. then the Emperor of Germany,
and, in brief, is this: I wished to the King, His Majesty, A long Life, a happy
Reign, and continual Victory over all his Enemies. And I hoped then, and so do
still, that all good Subjects would say Amen. But for those that were Rebels,
and would not say Amen, I wished they were hanged, and for Verse sake, I said,
Again, Again: which then I repeated for the greater emphasis and confirmation of
what I had said.

Now, good Reader, understand me aright: I wished the wish, and said Amen to
it. But to whom did I wish it? It was not to all in general, as is falsely
reported; but it was to Rebels, that would not say Amen to my good wish for
the King; and not to good Subjects, that will concur with me in my wish, and
Amen it. And I think, till I shall be better informed, I might, and yet may
safely use this wish.

It is not unknown to those that have been conversant in the Histories of
former times, (that we may not rely upon the judgment, or fancy, of those that
are experienced only in the sullen and self-willed manners of latter days)
that this, and the like phrases, have been, and still are Proverbial
Imprecations, which, in all Countries, upon sudden occasions, have been
frequenntly used, to express men's abhorrency, and dislike, to those that have
spoken, or done, any thing, contrary to the Law of Nature, and good manners. So
you may read in Aristophanes, that when the Greeks of old, would wish ill to
any man, they used this Proverbial Imprecation, (...) Away with him to the
Crows! Which was a place of punishment among the Thessalians, where men being
put to death, were left as meat for the Crows to devour. And from hence arose
that adagious saying of Antisthenes, (...) It Is better to fall into the hands
of Crows (if it be not a bull to say so) than the hands of Rooks: He meant
Flatterers, and I agree with him: for the Crows devour those only that are
dead: but Flatterers and Rooks consume even those that are alive. Among the
Romans, when they would express their hatred, or anger, unto any, they were
wont to use these and the like phrases: Ad Furcam; Or, in Crucem; Or, in rem
malam abeat! Which in plain English, have no other signification, than, Let him
be hanged! And the Italians, still to this day, (not to mention the usance of
the Grave Spaniard, Se^ Ahorcado; Or the custom of the Light French, whom yet
we imitate in all other fashions, Que y soit Pandue; because I will not stand
long in enumerating the several expressions of other Nations, upon the like
occasions) are wont to say, Via all furche; a Capestro; a malo^a; Or, a
malviaggio, to whatsoever, or whomsoever does cross their humors.

But not to be such Humorists, altogether, to follow the Eccentrick manners of
the Heathen, (who yet may rise up in judgment, and condemn the manners of some
Christians) or imitate the Exotic customs of other Nations, that are
Forraigners and Strangers to us, as well as to our Religion, for the
Vindication of this imprecation; let us make our address to, and search the
holy Scriptures, as our Savior commands us, Joh. 5.39. And see, if we cannot
warrant, and justify, from those sacred Records, which are the Fountain of
Life, this our wish to all Rebels, and Imprecation of death: And so, in
turning over those holy pages, we shall find, without much difficulty of
search, expressions tending to the same sense, though not in the same terms.
Does not St. Paul, (and I believe you will say (if not, he says it himself, 1.
Cor. 7.40.) he had the Spirit of God) in a manner use the like Imprecation?
(...). If any man love not the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be Anathema
Maranatha: that is, let him be accursed, 1 Cor. 16.22. Which Imprecation of the
Apostle, is a great deal more, and of a higher nature, than I did wish to all
Rebels, that love not the King, and will not say Amen to his safety. For I
wished them only to be hanged, a corporal punishment; that so, upon their
repentance (if God shall be pleased to give them the grace, for very few of the
Rebels who have been Executed, (as it has been observed, with Christian
sorrow, and hearty grief) have had so much remorse and sense of that horrid
sin, but have died impenitent) Their Souls may be saved, (to make use of St.
Paul's phrase) in the day of the Lord Jesus. But St. Paul's Imprecation goes
further, even to the destruction both of body and soul: which I wished not. And
this Imprecation of the Apostle, you shall find, that he does not only use it
once, but he does iterate it again, and again, as I did mine, in his Epistle to
the Galatians, against the false Prophets that troubled the Church, and
endeavored to overthrow the Gospel of Christ: If an Angel from Heaven (says
he) preach otherwise unto you, than that which we have preached unto you, let
him be accursed. As we said before, so say I now again: if any man preach unto
you otherwise than ye have received, let him be accursed, Gal. 1.8.9. The word
in the Original, in both places, is the same with that in the former to the
Corinthians: (...): Let him be accursed, let him be excommunicated, let him be
excluded and debarred the society of men, as not belonging to the Kingdom of
God, but a Son of Belial, or Confusion, appertaining to the Dominion of Satan.

And yet to come nearer to our present purpose, to our wish in hand, which is
now in dispute, and so much controverted, Let them be hanged! Do not we read
the same wish in the Old Testament? In the History of Samuel, concerning
Absaloms Rebellion, you may observe, when Cushi brought tidings to King David
of Absaloms death, who had been the Ringleader of that great Rebellion which
forced King David from Jerusalem, (as the late Rebellion forced King Charles,
of happy memory, to fly from London) for the safeguard of his life; in which
Rebellion, by the just judgment of God, he was hanged by the hair of his head,
in stead of a Halter, (God disposing, or designing his hair to perform that
office,) between Heaven and Earth, as not worthy to go to Heaven, nor yet fit
to live longer upon Earth, for that unnatural Rebellion against the King his
Father; When David enquired concerning him, saying, Is the young man Absalom
safe? His answer was, in effect the same, that I did wish to all Rebels, that
will not say Amen to the Kings safety, as he was: The Enemies of my Lord the
King (says he) and all that rise against thee, to do thee hurt, be as that
young man is, 2 Samuel 18.32. Be as that young man is, how is that? it is, as if
he had said, which I did wish to such Rebels, Let them be hanged! For Absalom,
as you may read before in that story, was hanged in an Oak, 2 Samuel 18.9. Yea,
Ahimaaz, of whom King David gives the character, that he was a good man (if any
should except against the others wish) and comes with good tidings: Although
he did not wish all the Rebels hanged, as Cushi had done; yet, when he told
the King the news, he said, All is well: So that he approved it to be well,
that Absalom was hanged. And he fell down (says the Text) to the Earth upon
his face, before the King, and said, Blessed be the Lord thy God, which has
delivered up the men that lift up their hand against my Lord the King, 2 Samuel
18.28. So that, though he did not wish all the Rebels hanged, as Cushi did; yet
he blessed God for delivering them up, that had risen against him, some to the
Sword, and others to the Gallows. And therefore, it is a kind of wonder to me,
that either good Christians, or loyal Subjects, should so much speak against
that Imprecation, which I then wished to all such Rebels, as would not say
Amen, to God save the King.

Yet, if notwithstanding what I have alleged in defense of that wish, it should
still stick in the stomachs of some, that would be now accounted as good
Christians, as formerly they were, in their own account, the greatest Saints;
give me leave, to leave a Pill or two for them, to purge away that choler
which they bear to such an Imprecation. For, let me ask of thee, good Reader,
is it not lawful, to wish that to them, which they, who were the only Saints,
themselves then being Judges, did practice toward others? Is it not lawful to
wish them hanged, to rid them out of the way, that we be no longer troubled
with them, as they did both wish to, and deal with us, when time was, and they
had the power in their hands? May we not give them a Rowland, for their Oliver?
I shall not need to tell you, it is too sensibly known, by sad experience, (as
one sometimes said, aerumnabilis experientia me docuit; so may we say, sad
experience has taught us) that those kind of men, that will not say Amen to
the Kings safety and prosperity, did both wish, and speak, and do all that they
could, to hang us that wished well to the King; and to rid us out of the way,
that they might not be troubled with us. And therefore, (...), even by their
own Laws, I see no reason, but we may wish, and do the like to them.

But you will say, it is not Christian-like, to wish, or do evil for evil. What
then will you make of them that did so much evil to us? Will you deny them to
be Christians? They will take it in dudgeon if you do, and say they are better
Christians than you. Now I will grant you they were Christians: but it was
(...) in name only, but not in deed. And I shall make it good, that we, who are
the Kings friends, though dispretiated by them, may be Christians, both in name
and in deed, although we wish the like to them. What think you of St. Paul
after his Conversion (for before, according to his own confession, he was a
Persecutor of the Church of God, Philip. 3.6. and did breath forth slaughter
and threatenings against the Disciples, as those Saints did against us, Act.
9.1.) was he not a Christian? Yet, if you look into his Epistle to the
Galatians, you shall find, that he used the same Imprecation that I did, or one
to the same effect. Does not he wish an Utinam abscindantur to the like sort of
men? I would to God, says he, they were even cut off that trouble you, Gal.
5.12. And he that troubles you, shall bear his judgment, whosoever he be, V.
10. Is not this the same, in effect, with what I wished? Would they were
hanged; Or, Let them be hanged! And do not we say of those that are hanged,
they are cut off? It is true, I would they were cut off, and Let them be
hanged, are not reciprocal: they are not termini convertibiles, as the
Logicians term is, convertible terms: Because every one that is cut off, is not
hanged: though every one that is hanged, may be said to be cut off. To such
therefore, as are implacable Enemies of God, and his Church, and of civil
society, yea, and of all mankind, as abdurate and obstinate Rebels are, who
will not be reclaimed, or reduced, to due obedience, though the King show them
never so much grace and clemency, I think we may safely wish, without breach of
Charity or Christianity, that they may be hanged, and cut off, that they
trouble us no further, as formerly they have done, and would again, if they
could, as is too apparent by their practices, involve us in another Civil War.

Secondly, I demand again, whether it be lawful for a Christian, Vim, vi
repellere, to repel, or drive away force by force, to withstand one power with
another? Where yet mistake me not, as too many of latter days have been
mistaken; I do not demand, whether it be lawful for Children to rise up against
their Parents, when they do chastise them; or for Inferiors to rise up against
their Superiors, when they do correct them; or for Subjects to rise up against
their Princes, when they draw forth the sword of justice for to punish them: in
all which cases it is utterly unlawful, and (...), without all contradiction,
beyond dispute. But I do mean, in respect of Christians in general, where there
is no such relation, as between Parents and Children; between Superiors and
Inferiors; between Princes and Subjects; when Christians shall assault and
offer violence to one another; Whether is it lawful to take up Arms against
Arms, and to repel one force with another to save ones self? Shall men unjustly
take up Arms to cut our throats, and shall not we do the like to preserve our
selves? It was a question ^pounded by Horace, to condemn the supinity and
negligenc^ come in his time.

Ut jugulent homines, surgunt de nocte latrones:
Ut teipsum serves, non expergisceris?
And shall not we make the same Interrogation in this case? Shall Thieves rise
up in the night to kill us, and shall not we awake to save our selves?
Self-preservation, as it is a principle innate in every Creature, (for every
Creature does seek to preserve it self by nature;) so it was the chief Maxim
in request, amongst those Saints in their Modern Policy, when they had took up
Arms to drive away the King, and keep him out. And now the King (God bless him,
and blessed be God for him) is come home, and through Gods special Providence,
come in again into his Kingdoms; is it not lawful to wish that such Saints in
their own esteem, but in deed Rebels, as have taken up Arms so unjustly
against him; or would take up Arms again as unjustly against him, may be
punished with the sword of justice, and cut off? Well then, if we may repel
force by force, when we are assaulted (otherwise, when men come to cut our
throats, we must stand still, and not save our selves) then it is as lawful to
wish them hanged, and cut off, that would, if they could, hang us, or any other
way cut us off, and make away with us. They want no will, (as we daily hear by
their expressions, and see by their designs and endeavors,) they want only
power or opportunity to effect it.

And yet for further satisfaction in this case, I will tell you, that there
ought to be a distinction, and a difference made in such our Wishes, and
Imprecations. For we must not, nor did I, wish all hanged in general, though I
be traduced and calumniated for so doing. Therefore, when at any time we make
such an Imprecation, and use such a Wish, Let them be hanged, we must take
heed, that we make it, and direct it aright: We must make a distinction, both
of the Causes, for which; the Persons, against whom; and the Affections, with
which we do wish such an Imprecation, that any one be cut off, or hanged. For
St. Paul, when, in the forenamed places, he accursed the false Apostles, and
wished them cut off, because they troubled the Church of God, did not wish
those Imprecations in respect of his own cause, and as they were his own
private enemies; but in respect of the cause of God, and as they were the
public enemies of his truth. And to speak truly, when I wished those Rebels
hanged, that would not say Amen to the Kings safety and prosperity: I did not
use that Imprecation, in respect of mine own cause, or, as they were mine own
enemies; but, in respect of the cause of God, and the King, his Vicegerent, as
they were the public enemies of both. Then again, we must distinguish in such
wishes, between the persons against whom such Wishes and Imprecations are made.
For some enemies are placable and curable; as we see many of the late Rebels,
having seen their errors, and been convinced of their folly, have repented,
and become good Subjects: And such as these, the King, our Father of the
Country, has indulged, and given them a gracious pardon; and the Church, our
Mother, has restored them, and received them into her bosom. And others again
are implacable, and incurable, of whose conversion, and reformation, and so
salvation, there is no hope, or as yet, but very little. As St. Paul then did
direct his Imprecations against those enemies of God, and his Church, which
were implacable and incurable; So did I my wish, to such Rebels as are
implacable and incurable; to such as are rigidly obsti^ate in their Rebellious
courses, and will not be reclaimed and reformed. And because they will not turn
from their Rebellion to their due allegiance, and become good Subjects;
therefore I wished they might be turned for their disobedience, and being
Rebels. In the last place, we must distinguish likewise between the
affections, with which such Imprecations are made. For some are carnal, and, to
use St. James his phrases, are earthly, and sensual, yea devilish, which are
not from above, Ja. 3.15. As rash anger, hatred, desire of revenge, and the
like. Other affections are more spiritual and divine, which descend from above,
and are heavenly; as a zeal of Gods glory, and of the safety of his Curch. Now,
as St. Paul, when he wished the false Apostles were cut off, was not carried
with a carnal affection, but with a zeal of Gods glory, and the good of his
Church: So, I assure you, when I wished all such Rebels hanged as would not
say Amen to the Kings safety and prosperity, I did it not with a mere carnal
affection to have them hanged; but with a zeal to Gods glory, the good of his
Church, and the peace and welfare of our King and his Kingdoms which have been
so long distracted, and disquieted, and yet are disturbed with them.

As for those places, which may be alleged to the contrary; 1. from St. Paul:
Bless them which persecute you: bless, I say, and curse not, To. 12.14. And
recompense to no man evil for evil, To. 12.17. And see that none render evil
for evil unto any man, 1 These. 5.15. Then 2. from St. Peter: Love as brethren;
be courteous, not rendering evil for evil, 1 Pet. 3.9. And 3. from our Savior
himself: Love your enemies: bless them that curse you: do good to them that
hate you: and pray for them that despitefully use you, and persecute you, Mat.
5.44. They, and all such like places, must be understood of our own private and
particular enemies, and not of the public enemies of God, his Church, and
truth, as all Rebels are. And therefore to such, if there be any such, as I
fear there are too many, that are obdurate and implacable Rebels, seeing they
are the public enemies of God, his Church, and of all mankind, we may safely
wish a Suspendantur, as well as King David, and other of Gods Servants, have
wished a Confundantur to the like sort of men. So let all thine enemies perish
O Lord! So sang Deborah and Barak, of the enemies of God, in their song of
thanksgiving, after their victory over Sisera, and his Host, Jud. 5.31.
Confundantur! Let them be confounded, and turned back, as many have evil will
unto Sion! So prays David against the enemies of Gods Church, Psalm. 129.5.
(...). Let them be ashamed, or confounded, that transgress without a cause! So
wishes the same Prophet again against Rebels, that are the enemies of both,
Psalm. 25.3.

And for us that are Ministers, because some are so nice, and make it such a
heinous crime, for us to make, or use such Imprecations, I say, being seconded
with the Authority of as able Divines as shall contradict it, that it is more
lawful for us; yea, we ought rather than others, to use such an Imprecation,
and to wish such a Wish. For we that are Priests, who are, in St. Paul's
language, (...), set apart, and separated unto the Gospel of God, To. 1.1. And
to minister about holy things: See the general Absolution in the Book of Common
Prayer.
Whose Office it is, (as is suggested) to pray for the people, and to bless
them, and not to curse: I say, we must not only pronounce the blessing of
Absolution to the people, upon their true repentance, as is enjoined us in our
Office; but we must also, it is our duty to denounce the sentence of
Excommunication against all such as are obstinate and impenitent Offenders. And
those, whom our Mother the Church will not receive into her bosom here, God
our Father, we may assure our selves, will not receive into his Kingdom
hereafter. Whose sins soever ye remit, says our Savior to his Apostles, they
are remitted: and whose sins soever ye retain, they are retained, Joh. 20.23.
So that, what Gods Ministers, in their sacred Office, do upon Earth, God
himself, according to his promise, will ratify in Heaven. And we that are
Priests, his Ministers, must not only give the Benediction, or Blessing, to the
people; but we must also, sometimes, go into the Pulpit, See the Commination
against Sinners.
as you may see in the Rubric, and there read the Commination. We must not
only go into Mount Gerizzim, to pronounce the blessing: but we must sometimes
go into Mount Ebal, to denounce a curse to such as deserve it, Deuteronomy. 27.12. Now
St. Peter tells us, that there are some who are (...), Cursed Children, 2 Pet.
2.14. Children to whom the curse does of right belong, as well as the blessing
does to others: and from these we are not to withhold, but we must denounce the
curse unto them. There is an Esau to be hated, as well as a Jacob to be loved,
To. 9.13. And there are some, ex semine Serpentis, as well as others, ex semine
Mulieris: some that are of the Serpents brood, as well as of the Woman's seed:
the one to be accursed; the other to be blessed. And therefore, to such as are
Esaus, we may show our hatred, as well as our love, to those that are Jacobs.
And to those of the Serpents brood, as all Rebels are, we may not only, after
Gods own example, Genesis 3.15. Our Saviors pattern, Mat. 23.13.14. And the
Apostels doctrine and practice, Act. 8.20. and 13.10. Pronounce a Malediction;
but we must also, we are bound to it; it is part of our Office, to denounce a
Curse to such sort of men: and I see no reason, but we may, as others, so the
curse of hanging on the Tree, Gal. 3.13.

And therefore (good Reader) to draw to a conclusion, that the Gates, like
those of Myndas, be not bigger than the City; and the Preface, longer than the
Sermon; I must tell thee, he that will not say, God save the King! or Amen to
it, be he what he will and pretend never so much, is a Rebel in his heart,
though he dares not express so much in words, and does tacitly wish the Kings
confusion. He that will not pray for him, prays against him: and that is
Treason adjudged by our Laws. He that denies to say Amen to the Kings safety
and preservation, brings himself into a Premunirie of wishing the Kings ruin
and destruction. It was the case of Bigthan and Teresh, the 2. Chamberlains of
King Ahasuerus: they did not lay hands on the King: but, as St. Hierom renders
it, Voluerunt insurgere; they had a mind, or a will to kill the King; and for
it they were both hanged on a Tree, as you may read, Est. 2.21.22. And
whosoever they be, that shall make themselves guilty of Treason, by gainsaying
God save the King; or denying an Amen to the Kings safety and prosperity, if
they be once brought to the Bar, and arraigned, and convicted of Treason, for
being Rebels, and denying an Amen to His Majesty's safety and prosperity, the
Judge (as they will find, by sad experience, as their brethren have done before
them) will pronounce from the Bench, that which I did then denounce from the
Pulpit, Suspendantur! Let them be hanged! And so I shall leave them there, to
go with their doom, from thence to the place from whence they came, and from
thence to the place of Execution, to receive the reward of their Rebellion and
Treason: and the Lord have mercy upon their Souls.

Yet, Candid Reader, For my Brethren and Companions sake, next to the King, the
Queen, the Queen Mother, the Royal Progeny, and those that have been true, and
loyal Subjects, and Sufferers in, and for, the Royal Cause, I wish thee
prosperity: Yea, because of the House of the Lord our God, I will seek to do
thee good, Psalm. 122.8.9. And so, good Reader, farewell: and take this
Epiphonema along with thee,

-- Si quid novisti rectius istis,
Candidus imperti: Si non, his utere mecum.

Thine in Christ Jesus, R. G.

PSALM. 14.7. (...), etc.
When the Lord turns the Captivity of his People, then shall Jacob rejoice,
and Israel shall be right glad.
ALthough the title of this Psalm be various, according to the various
interpretations of Expositors: yet the Argument is the same, according to the
judgment of the best Commentators. And if you please to advance your eye, and
look further to the 53 d. Psalm, Psalm. 53.
you shall there perceive the Contents of this, to be the same with the
Argument of that Psalm; and both of them to insinuate, and confirm this truth
unto us, That though the Children of God be afflicted and persecuted, (not only
by the Heathen and Infidels, which have no knowledge of God, Psalm. 79.6.
and call not upon his Name, Psalm. 79.6. being the wild Boars of the Wood and
in the Forest without, Psalm. 80.13.
Psalm. 80.13. but also by the wicked and ungodly, who profess to know God,
though they deny him in their works, being the crafty Foxes within, and in the
Pale of the Church, Cant. 2.15.
Cant. 2.15.) yet their Salvation will undoubtedly come from God, who is they
Savior and Redeemer, Psalm. 19.14.
Psalm. 19.14. And this our Prophet does make good unto us, as in these two, so
in others of his Psalms; where he both does comfort the godly in their
afflictions, and also does encourage them in all their trials and temptations,
still to depend upon God the rock of their strength: For as he assures them by
his own experience, though many, and grievous be the troubles of the righteous;
yet, when they cry unto God in their affliction, the Lord hears them, and
delivers them out of all, Psalm. 34.16.17.
Psalm. 34.16.17.

They both begin and end alike, this fourteenth, and the three and fiftieth
Psalm; though there be something inserted in the middle of the one, which is
omitted in the navel of the other.

Yet though the Argument, beginning, and ending of both Psalms, be one and the
same; the titles of both are various, and differ according to the several
Expositions of Authors, and the several Editions we find them in. I shall, with
your leave, descant a while upon the title of that Psalm first, which in order
we meet with last. To the Master of the Music on Machalath, an Instructing
Psalm of David. So, according to the original, runs the title of the 53 d.
Psalm. (...). So the Septuagint renders it. In finem pro Maeleth
inintelligentiae David: the vulgar translate it. To him that excels on
Mahalath, a Psalm of David to give instruction: So our English Bibles have it.
But the most exact and best Translation, commanded and furthered by King James,
of happy memory, the most learned of Kings, and the King of learned men in his
time, translated out of the Originals, and compared diligently with former
Translations, sets it forth in this wise, as you may read in its Inscription:
To the chief Musician upon Mahaleth, Maschil, a Psalm of David.

Now, according to the difference of the Translations and Editions, the Authors
that expound and comment upon it, do differ likewise. For some read it, Ad
haereditatem Eruditivum David; Where, by David's eruditive, they would have us
to comply with them in our judgments, that this Psalm was an Erudition, or
Revelation of that great, signal, and famous calamity, which the Jews suffered
by the Greeks, under Antiochus Epiphanes: at whom, as one most impiously
imperious, proud, and insolent, the beginning of this, and that other Psalm
which begins with (...), does point and indigit; and of whom, and his mon
outrageous, cruel, and sacrilegious acts, you may satisfy your selves, if you
dare look into the Apocryphal Books, without any prejudice, in the History of
the Maccabees.

Others imagine that Psalm to be written Prophetically of the people of the
Jews, who were the Assassines and Murderers of Christ, in putting him to
death, who was the Lord of life, Acts 3.15. Acts 3.15.
and crucifying him that came to bring Salvation to them.

Others disagree in the letter, or matter of the title: and for the word Ad
haereditatem, or inheritance, some interpret it, Ad congregationem, to the
Congregation. Where yet you must not understand, by Congregation, such
Congregations or Meeting Houses, as our Phanaticks do now a days frequent, and
haunt: for they love no Music; they will have no Organs; no Singing and
Melody, but what their natural Organs and Pipes can make; all other Music is
Popish and superstitious with them, because they do not understand it. Hieron.
in loc.
But this Psalm (as St. Hierom does interpret it) is directed ad Chorum, to a
Quire, or company of Singers, where, and with whom, these Brethren will in no
wise keep tune.

The Chaldee Translation, which to some does seem most apposite, reads it thus;
Ad laudandum super ultionem impiorum, qui perturbant haereditatem Domini. To
praise God for his vengeance on the wicked, who disturb and persecute the Lords
inheritance. Which interpretation does best agree with St. Hieroms Translation:
and in effect is, as if he should have said, Ad Laudandum, sive ad Chorum, sive
ad Choream ducendam, obvent^rum impiorum exitium, quod in hoc Psalmo
praedicitur, eruditio. An instructing Psalm, to praise God, either by Singing,
or by Dancing, or by both, for the destruction that was to come upon the
enemies of God, which is here foretold (and which, Blessed be God, by
experience we have of late found true) for afflicting and persecuting the
people of God. But however interpreters vary in the title, yet as I formerly
hinted unto you, all do concur and agree, even in their dis^greeing, that the
Argument is the same with that of our Psalm, and almost the very same words.

And for the title of our Psalm, it is as vatious as the title of that: for
according to the Hebrew it runs thus, To the Master of the Music, a Psalm
of David. In the Greek Copies, translated by the seventy Interpreters, who were
employed by Ptolomeus Philadelphus, for the rendering of the Scriptures out of
Hebrew into Greek, about the year of the World, according to the computation of
some Chronologers, 3700. (The several places designed them for that purpose, I
my self not long since have seen by St. Georges Church, beyond grand Cairo, not
far from St. Katherines, where the Cophti, or old Christians in Egypt, do still
meet to worship God: and where, if we may give credit to tradition (for being
under the Turks, they have no Authors that do declare it, but only as it is
related among them from one generation to another) they do report, that the
blessed Virgin Mary did lie hid in the time of Herod's persecution, when her
husband Joseph, admonished by an Angel, Mat. 2.
was forced to fly into Egypt with her, and her blessed Babe, to preserve him
from Herod's cruelty) I say in the Greek Copies we read it inscribed, (...):
which the vulgar translation following, does exhibit it thus, In finem Psalmus
David. In our more ancient Bibles, Printed in Q. Elizabeth's time, Anno Domini
1589. it is inscribed, To him that excels, a Psalm of David: but King James
his Version gives it in this manner, To the chief Mufician, a Psalm of David.

It will not be amiss to consider them both together: and so we shall the
better learn, The Master of the Music, who?
what instruction will accrue unto us from this instructing Psalm of David. To
the Master of the Music, on Machalath, an instructing Psalm of David.

Mr. Ainsworth, Ainsworth Annot. in 4 Psalm.
in his Annotations upon the 4th. Psalm, gives us to understand who this Master
of Music was. To the Master of the Music (says he) is to the Overseer, or to
him that excels. The Chaldee translateth it to sing: so that we must
apprehend it in this wise or manner: To him, that is, to the Overseer: or, To
him that excels in singing, a Psalm of David. The word Menatseach, in the
Original, signifies properly one that urges and promoteth the continuance of
a thing to the end; or the going forward with a work till it be overcome, or is
finished: as you may read 2 Chronicles. 34.12, 13. And Ezra 3.8, 9. 2 Chronicles. 34.12,
13. Ezia 3.8, 9.
And such men, as in the forecited place are called Menatschim, Masters; in
another place are called Rodim, Rulers, 1 Kings 5.16. 1 Kings 5.16.


Now you must know, that in Music there were Levites appointed for several
duties, as you may see 1 Chronicles. 15.12. Of which some were, Kvatseach, to ply, 1 Chronicles. 15.12.
or set forward, and be over the rest: and these were such as excelled in the
art of singing, and playing on Instruments, to whom such Psalms are entitled,
that, by their care and direction, they might be sung excellently to the end.

Which Title of Master, thus explained, give us as Scholars to learn this
lesson; That in the Worship, In the Worship of God we must continue to the end.
and Service of God, we ought to continue to the end. It is not sufficient to
come and present our selves to a piece of Gods Service, and to a piece of a
Sermon, and then go away: as the custom of many men (too many now a days) is,
to come and peep into a Church, with their Hats on their Heads (an unmannerly
custom) as into a Playhouse; and then having heard a piece of the Service, or a
piece of the Sermon, go away, and so go to another Church, and do the like;
which yet they will not do at a Playhouse: for there they will stay till the
Catastrophe, or last Act be finished, and the Epilogue pronounced. No, it is no
acceptable service with God, either to hear a piece of the Service, or to hear
a piece of the Sermon, and perform the rest of his Ordinances by piece-meals;
but as we must come to the beginning of Gods Service, so we are bound to
continue till the end of it. And if we look back into Antiquity, we shall find,
that the Christians in former times, as they were ashamed, if they did not come
to the beginning of Service; so they were blamed, if they did not stay to the
end of it. Instit. 3. C. 7.
Cassian tells us ( Instit. 3. C. 7.) that in the ancient times of the Church,
he that did not come to Prayers, Priusquam Psalmus coeptus finiretur, before
the first Psalm was ended, he did not dare to enter into the House of Prayer;
but standing at the door until the rest came out, Submissa in terram
poenitentia, negligentiae suae, vel tarditatis, impetrabat veniam, by a
submissive repentance, down to the earth, he obtained pardon for his
carelessness and negligence. And for those that were too forward to go from
Gods House, before Service was ended, diverse of the ancient Councils have set
down Censures, Council. Agathen: Can. 47.
as may be seen in the Council of Agatha in France. So that we see, we must not
come to Gods House, and celebrate his Ordinances in a careless and perfunctory
manner; but we must come with the first, and stay with the last; we must
religiously give ear, and hear the whole Service out; and we must Christianly
attend, and hear the whole Sermon our; and we must piously wait upon all other
holy Administrations, (...), even to the end of them; until the Bishop, or
Priest, shall give his dismission with a Benediction. Which among the Greeks
was called (...) the licentiating, or giving leave for the people to be gone.
And among the Latins it was termed Missa est (not as the Romanists now term
their Service, Missa, the Mass, as fondly, as they perform their Service
superstitiously; but Missa est) ite, ilicet, i. e. ire licet ex templo; There
is leave to depart, you may be gone out of the Temple, there is a dismission:
And this was wont to be proclaimed by the Deacon to the Catechumenists,
Energumenists, and Penitentiaries, who were not admitted to be present when the
Priest was celebrating the holy Mystery. For the Christians in the Primitive
times were so zealous of the Priests, or Bishops blessing, as that they would
not depart without it; they thought themselves, as it were, accursed, if they
had it not. So contrary was the opinion and practice of the Christians, in the
infancy of the Church, to that of the new il-luminated Professors of
Christianity, in these exulcerated times, who are so far from being zealous and
desirous of the blessing of the Bishop, or Priest, as that they care neither
for the Priest, nor his Benediction; but abominate both, as they do the name of
a Bishop.

But here I could relate a story, not impertinent to the purpose, of a reverend
Divine of this Kingdom; one, whom in my younger years, I had the honor to have
more than ordinary acquaintance with; and I was the more ambitious of his
acquaintance, because he had the honor to be esteemed the greatest Scholar,
and most famous Preacher, at that time, in, and about those places where he
lived in Norfolk. This Gentleman being desired to Preach at St. Nicholas Church
in Great-Yermouth, did condescend to gratify the request of those Friends that
did invite him; where having finished his Sermon, and going to his after
Prayer, for a blessing upon what he had delivered, he observed the people to go
out of the Church, especially Servants, who went home before to prepare their
Masters and Mistresses Dinners against they came home, a thing accustomary in
that place; whereupon he called them back again, and desired them to take a
short story along with them: who coming into the Church again, as fast as they
were going our, after a small pause he thus bespeaks them. Friends, I have
lived your Neighbor these 39. years, within very few miles of this place, and
never before this time yet preached among you; and, except you amend your
manners, I shall never desire to preach here again. But the occasion why I
called you back again, is, to let you understand, that our Savior Christ, as
you may read in the Evangelists, had Twelve Apostles; and, at the institution
of the holy Supper, one of them went away before our Savior gave the blessing,
and, Satan having entered into him, he went and hanged himself; I pray God send
you better fortune! and that you may so have, I pray stay and take the blessing
along with you. The story was short, but it was a sharp reprehension of their
supine neglect, or willful refusal to stay, and take the Priests benediction
with them; which though it be slighted by some Fanatics, yet it is of great
consequence, and every good Christian will stay for it, as their farewell out of
Gods House, and a means of their better progress to their own.

The Instrument Machalath, what?
But proceed we from the Master of the Music to the Instrument, Machalath, to
see what music it will make, it being inscribed in the Title; for of it we
shall have occasion to speak more hereafter, when we come to Sions Exulation.
And for our better satisfaction in this, we must take notice, that Machalath
(as our Anthours do inform us) was a kind of Instrument with which they were
wont to play when they sung this Psalm, not much unlike to Nechiloth, which by
the name seemed to be a kind of wind Instruments, as Fluits, Trumpets, Cornets,
and the like; As Neginoth were stringed Instruments of Music, played on with
the hand, as the Harp, and the Lute, and the Instrument of Ten Strings, of
which we read, and with which the righteous are excited, and exhorted to praise
the Lord, Psalm. 33.2, 3.
Psalm. 33.2, 3.

So that, according to all Editions, the Inscriptions, or Titles of these two
Psalms, do teach us to make music, in rejoicing, and being glad, for the
vengeance of God showed upon the wicked, who have troubled Gods people, and
vexed his inheritance. And that we ought to celebrate such our joy with all
kinds of Music, both Vocal and Instrumen^al, with still and loud Music, in
singing and sounding forth our praises to God, with joyful and thankful hearts
and voices, for the destruction of the Enemies of his people and truth. Which,
as it is the purport of both our Psalms we are now treating of; so it was the
occasion of our late Solemnity, the Lord having turned the Captivity of us his
people in England, by returning our dread Sovereign, King Charles the Second,
to the native right and inheritance of his three Crowns of Great Britain, and
Ireland, without the further effusion of his Subjects blood, so much feared,
and deserved, in these three Kingdoms.

In the next place, we are to enquire why it is called an Instructing Psalm of
David, or Maschil. Now the reason why it is thus styled, An Instructing Psalm,
why?
is from the use of it: because this, and other Psalms, that are entitled
Instructing Psalms, are so called, because they give Instruction. Even as the
Proverbs of his Son King Solomon are said to give Wisdom, and Instruction, and
Understanding; because they make men Prudent, and Wise, and give Understanding,
Pro. 1.2. And this our Prophet does confirm unto us in the 32 d. Psalm, Pro.
1.2.
which is also entitled, an Instructing Psalm of David, a Psalm that makes
Prudent, that causes Understanding: as he explains himself in the 8 th. verse
of that Psalm, (...). So the Septuagint do render the words, Psalm. 32.8.
I will wake thee prudent, and instruct thee; I will teach thee in the way
which thou shall go.

Where we may observe, that the good man David (practizing that counsel, which
his Son, according to the flesh, and our Savior, Luk, 22.32.
gives to St. Peter in the Gospel, Et tu conversus confirma fratres, Thou being
converted strenghen thy brethren, Luke 22.32.) promises to make the rest of
Gods Children partakers of the benefits which he felt, and that (which every
Christian ought to do, especially Ministers, Fathers, and Masters of Families)
he will diligently look, and take care to direct them in the way of salvation.

Now a Psalm (that we may not leave any thing unexplained, since we have begun
to unfold the Title) is called in the Hebrew, Mizmor, which has the
signification of pruning, or cutting off superfluous Twiggs and Branches; and
is applied to Songs, which are composed of short Sentences, or Verses, where
many superfluous words are cut off, and taken away. And here, for better
information, that you may the more distinctly apprehend what a Psalm is, it
will not be amiss, to give you to understand, that there be three kinds of
Songs, which are mentioned in the Psalmographie of the sweet Singer of Israel.
2 Samuel 23.1.


In Hebrew
Mizmor, Tehillah, Shir.
In Greek
(...), (...), (...).
In English
Psalm, Hymn, Song.
All which three kinds of Songs, St. Paul, the great Doctor of the Gentiles, as
well as the Prophet David, the great Poet of the Jews, does mention in his
Epistle to the Ephesians, where he exhorts them, and in them all Christians, to
be filled with the Spirit, rather than with excess of Wine; and to speak to
themselves in Psalms, Ephesians. 3.18, 19.
and Hymns, and spiritual Songs, making melody in their hearts to the Lord,
Ephesians. 5.18, 19.

This Song here you see it is a Psalm, the first of the three kinds of Songs;
and the Septuagint read it, as I told you before, (...). The vulgar Translation
among the Latins, In finem Psalmus David, or, In finem pro Maeleth,
intelligentiae David: A Psalm of David to the end; or for Maeleth, an
Instructing Psalm of David to the end. Which, as I insinuated above, does
lesson to us, to persevere and continue in Gods Service to the end; not only
whiles we are in the Temple, or Gods House, to continue there till the end of
all those holy Mysteries, and Dispensations be performed, that so we may have
Gods blessing, by the Bishop, or Priest, pronounced upon us; but also when we
are out of the Temple, in our own houses, or else where; we being, as St. Paul
styles us, 1 Cor. 3.16.
Temples of the Holy Ghost, 1 Cor. 3.16. We ought to continue in Gods service
the whole course of our life; serving him as good old Zachary does prescribe
unto us in his Benedictus, in holiness and righteousness all the days of our
life: As the end for which he did redeem us, Luke 1.74.75. Luke 1.74.75.
And as we our selves did promise, to perform faithfully, by our Sureties that
did undertake for us, at our Baptism, when we were initiated into Christ's
Church, to become Christians, that we might be sanctified. For then, Rubric in
the Ministrat. of Baptism.
if we do well remember, as we ought, and as our Catechism does rightly inform
us, they did promise for us, that we would forsake the Devil, and all his
works, and constantly believe Gods holy Word, and obediently keep his
Commandments. And then did we receive the sign of the Cross (if we did receive
it at all, and the more to be blamed they that do omit it in Baptism, because
it is so significant to put us in mind of our duty) in token, that hereafter we
would not be ashamed to confess the Faith of Christ crucified, but manfully
fight under his Banner, against Sin, the World, and the Devil, and to continue
Christ's faithful Soldiers and Servants to our lives end.

But leaving the Title (which yet, Aug.
to use St. Augustines saying, is clavis Psalmi, the Key to unlock the meaning
of the Psalm) let us address our selves to the Argument of it; which, according
to the Dictates of Expositors, in brief is this. The holy man David, by the
Spirit of Prophesy, contemplating the constitution of the visible Church; and
seeing the greater part of the people to lie in their natural estate of
corruption, working iniquity and impiety with greediness, and hating the
Children of God, which are got out of that estate by Regeneration, Philip. 3.6.
with a perfect hatred, and persecuting them with a fiery zeal, even to the
death, because they will not continue in the same excess of licentiousness and
wickedness with them; He both comforts the people of God, that are renewed in
the spirit of their minds, by minding them, that God does take care of them,
and plead their cause against the Ungodly for them, in the beginning of the
Psalm; and encourages them still to persevere in the ways of piety and
uprightness, notwithstanding their great affliction, and persecution, by giving
them hopes of better days, in the latter end of the Psalm; when as by grievous
plagues and judgments inflicted on their Enemies, Christ, the Captain of our
salvation, the Son of righteousness like the Sun coming out of a Cloud, should
appear, and manifest himself unto them, with healing in his wings, Malach. 4.2.
Mal. 4.2.


So that in short, these 2. things, 1. The Deliverance of Gods Church and
People. And 2. The Confusion and Overthrow of their Enemies, are the Sum and
Argument, as of this, so of the 53. Psalm following.

And indeed, if we seriously peruse the holy Scriptures, with an imperfunctory
eye, with an eye not negligently disposed, we shall observe, that these two
things.

1. The final Deliverance of Gods people from the hands of their Enemies
(though they be for a while in distress and captivity under them) which in the
beginning of my Text is prayed for. And 2. The final Destruction and Confusion
of Gods and his Peoples Enemies (though they be for a while exalted, and in
power over them) which is here fore prophesied in the latter end of my Text;
are the sum and substance, as of these two, so of many others in the Book of
the Psalms: Yea the whole story of the Scriptures, if you will take the pains
to revolve them your selves, or believe the judgment of Divines, who have read
them over, and commented upon them, is, as you shall find, nothing else but a
Calender of them.
In these you shall read, 1. That the Lord of Hosts, Isa. 1.9.24.
the God of Israel, is El-Nekamoth, a God of Vengeance against his Enemies,
Deuteronomy. 32.35. And 2. Deuteronomy. 32.35.
That the same God, the God of Peace, Heb. 13.20. Heb. 13.20.

A Letter but changed, is El-Nechamoth, a God of Comfort to his People, 2 Cor.
1.3.
2 Cor. 1.3. And as he is served and pleased by men; so his Creatures also,
they are ready to serve and please him, both for the defense of his people, and
the offense of those that hate them. So you shall find in Genesis, that the
Cherubims hold a flaming Sword in their hand to repress Gods Enemies, Genesis 3.24.
Genesis 3.24. And yet they have their wings spread abroad to relieve, shadow, and
succor his Friends, Ezekiel. 1.11.
Ezekiel. 1.11. In Exodus you may read likewise, that the Cloud was a mist of
darkness to confound the Egyptians, Exodus 13.21.
Exodus 13.21. And the same Cloud was a pillar of fire to give light and conduct
to the Israelites, V. 22.
V. 22. And in the same Book, at their departure out of Egypt, the water from
beneath, was a gulf to swallow up, and drown Pharaoh, and his Host, that did
pursue them, Exodus 14.28.
Exodus 14.28. And yet the same water was a wall of defense to Gods people, on
their right hand, and on their left, to give them safe passage toward the Land
of Canaan, V. 29.
Exodus 14.29. So during their Captivity in Babylon (to omit many other
instances, which might be induced for confirmation, both before their going in,
and whilst they were in possession of the promised Land) you may observe, that
the fiery Furnace which was heated seven times more than ordinary, it was a
Paradise, as it were, to the 3. Children, the servants of God, that were cast
bound into it, because they would not obey Nebuchadnezzers Decree, against Gods
Command, Dan. 3.22. Dan. 3.22.
And the same Furnace became a Gehenna, or place of Torment to their Enemies,
that threw them into it, V. 25.
V. 25. Observe it where you will, and you shall find still, that these two,
the Deliverance of Gods People, and the Destruction of their Enemies, go still
together, for the most part, not only in most of the Psalms, but, to speak
truth, in most part of the Scripture. And as they still go together, so you may
take notice likewise, that though sometimes they be intercepted, yet they
always end in the safeguard of the Church: which is here both prayed for, and
fore-prophecied also, in my Text. This is the Conclusion of all Prophecies, of
all Judgments, of all Miracles, past or present, new or old: this is the Sum,
and the Catastrophe of them.

And so I pass from the outward Court, as it were, of the Title and Argument of
the Psalm, in general, to enter into the inner Temple, and treat of the words
of my Text in particular. Quis dabit? Or, Oh si quis det! Who will give
Salvation? Or, Oh that Salvation were given unto Israel out of Sion! Oh that
the Lord would turn the Captivity of his people! When the Lord turns the
Captivity of his People, then shall Jacob rejoice, and Israel shall be right
glad.

The words may be read, apprehended, and treated of three several ways,
according to the judgment of Expositors.

Either 1. Historically, and according to the Letter, 2. Mystically, and
according to the Figure, 3. Analogically, and according to the use we may make
of them.


First, If we read them Historically, and according to the Letter, It is true,
1. Historically.
that the Deliverance of Gods people, in the time of King Saul, by bringing
David (that was appointed by God to be King over Israel, 1 Samuel 13.14.
1 Samuel 13.14. And anointed by Samuel, according to Gods Commandment, King
over Israel, 1 Samuel 16.13.
1 Samuel 16.13.) to the Kingdom, was worthy to be wished for, and that with
ardency and zeal of affection: because good Princes, after the reign of
Tyrants, is like the Sun in a comfortable shine, after the tedious darkness,
and dark irksomeness of a great storm. But this is not all which the Text does
aim at, and imply: and therefore in the next place, Secondly, We must read the
words Mystically, 2 Mystically.
and according to the Figure, looking to the substance, of which this History
was but a Type; which is in Christ, the Son of David, according to the flesh,
as St. Paul does style him, To. 1.3. In whom this wish, To. 1.3.
or prayer has its accomplishment. Which, in effect, is this: Oh that Christ,
the Savior of Israel, were come out of Sion! And it is the same with the
ardent desires of the people of God, in the 53. Psalm, which concludes in the
same tenou^, Psalm. 5.36. Se^gi^ in loc.
and with the very same words. (...): for so the Septuagint render the original
in that form. Who will give Salvation to Israel out of Sion? or, Oh that
Salvation were given unto Israel out of Sion! Where in the Original, as the
learned in that language observe; the expression is set down Salvations, in the
Plural Number, to intimate unto us full Salvation, Health, or Deliverance; even
the perfection of Salvation, which comes only by Christ, who was to come out
of Sion, (according to the praediction of the Prophet Isaiah, Isa. 59.20.
c. 59.20. The Redeemer shall come out of Sion, and shall turn away iniquity
from Jacob.) and at whom, the form of the Hebrews wishing here does look, as to
the person which should then, and shall still give perfect Salvation, and
Deliverance to all Israel, Gal. 6.16.
even the Israel of God, Gal. 6.16. Thirdly, 3. Analogically.
we may read the words Analogically, and relatively, according to the use we
may make of them, in respect of the Churches of God which now are, larely have
been, and hereafter may be in Persecution and Captivity, by the enemies of God
and his Truth. In which relation this option or wish, here in my Text, has its
place: and there is no good Christian but, in such a case, will with the
Prophet David, and the Church of God here in my Text, wish, sigh, breath out,
and ingeminate an Oh si quis det! Oh that Salvation were given to Israel out of
Sion! Oh that the Lord would turn the captivity of his people! When the Lord
turns the Captivity of his people, then shall Jacob rejoice, and Israel shall
be right glad.
I shall not insist on the words literally: the History was fulfilled, when
after Saul's death, David, that had been appointed and anointed by God, was now
constituted and anointed by all the Elders of Israel in Hebron, King over
Israel, 2 Samuel 5.3.
2 Samuel 5.3. and did deliver the Children of Israel from the hands of all their
enemies that did vex and afflict them.

Nor shall I presume to treat of them Mystically, whether this bringing back
the captivity of Gods people the Jews, here prophesied to be under the Gospel,
shall be by loosing their captivity corporally, as well as spiritually: or
whether the Jews shall return again to their own Land, or no: These are too
deep mysteries for my shallow capacity to diue into: although, since our late
distracted times, many more curious than wise, and more wise than sobriety
would permit them, Mar^al. Ep.
(according to that Proverbial quippe of the Epigrammatist, Et qui plus justo
non sapit, ille sapit,) have gone so far in their speculations, as to foresee
and determine, the time when, and the persons by whom, (and yet I must tell you
they have grossly erred in their calculation and expectation, because we have
visibly seen the contrary by experience) the Jews, which are now so rife
amongst us, shall be restored to their pristine estate, and to the Land of
their Nativity; from whence, for putting to death the Messiah and Redeemer of
Israel, they have been justly scattered and dispersed.

Therefore I shall more modestly and safely speak of them in the third
acception of the words, Analogically, as they may be understood in relation to
the Churches of God, which have been, now are, or hereafter may be under
persecution, and in captivity by the enemies of God and his Truth. And in this
consideration, if we apprehend the words, we shall find in the Verse two
generals, The Churches 1. Hosannah. 2. Hallelujah.
Or, The Churches 1. Prayer. 2. Praise.



First, There is the Churches Hosannah, 1. Hosannah.
or Prayer to God for her deliverance, being in captivity. And here we cannot
but take notice of Sions humiliation. Secondly, There is the Churches
Hallelujah, 2. Hallelujah.
or Praise to God for being delivered out of captivity. And here we must take
notice likewise of Sions exaltation.
The Church begins with Hosannah, and she ends with Hallelujah: and so must we,
if we will approve our selves to be (...), the true and genuine Sons of the
Church. We must begin with Hosannah, and we must end with Hallelujah: as in
this, so in all other actions and undertakings. We must pray unto God for
deliverance when we are in trouble, and for other blessings to be obtained; and
we must give praise unto God for deliverance out of trouble, and for other
blessings when obtained, or but promised. So the Church does here: She prays
unto God, being in persecution and in captivity, to turn her captivity, and to
give deliverance to his people out of captivity: And she gives praise unto God
being delivered out of persecution, and for turning the captivity of his
people, although but promised.

The Churches Hosannah, or Prayer to God for deliverance out of captivity, we
have in these words, Quis dabit? or, Oh si quis det! Who will give? or, Oh that
Salvation were given to Israel out of Sion! Oh that the Lord would turn the
captivity of his people!

The Churches Hallelujah, or praise unto God for her deliverance out of
captivity, we have in the words following, Cum averterit Dominus captivitatem
plebis suae; When the Lord turns the captivity of his people, then shall
Jacob rejoice, and Israel shall be right glad.

But if you please that we should descend into a more particular Analysis, or
resolution of the words, we may observe in them, Quadriga copicorum.
Quadrigam Topicorum; A four-wheeled Chariot of Topics, by which we shall
drive on our future exercitation, for the better performance of our ensuing
solemnity. There is, 1. Curiosa interrogatio, Quis dabit? who will give? 2.
Pathetica postulatio, Oh si quis det! Oh that Salvation were given! 3. Certa
determinatio, Reducente Jehovah; etc. When the Lord turns the captivity of
his people. 4. Grata exultatio, Exultabit Jacob; etc. Then shall Jacob rejoice,
and Israel shall be right glad.


1. Curiosa Interrogatio.
First, There is a curious interrogation; Quis dabit? Who will give? or, who
shall give Salvation unto Israel out of Sion? Qui curiose interrogat perplexus
nimis est, He that is curious in his interrogations, is very dubious, and so
the more desirous of satisfaction. Interrogatio est quasi iterogatio, (says
the Etymologist) quasi iterum rogatio; as it were, an asking the second time,
again and again. And so it teaches us, when we are in captivity, or any other
Affliction or trouble, iterare preces, to iterate our prayers, and to
ingeminate our requests; not only ingemiscere, to groan, and sigh forth our
desires and petitions; but also ingeminare, to double our prayers; to iterate
our desires, again and again, till we be delivered. 2. Pathetica postulatio.
Secondly, There is a Pathetical postulation; or, a most affectionate wish, or
ardent desire: Oh si quis det! Oh that Salvation were given to Israel out of
Sion! Oh that it were! Would to God it were! Quis tribuat? Oh that some good
body would give it! Such like pathetical expressions of the Prophet we meet
with also in other places: as, Oh si quis efficiat ut fruamur bono! Who will
show us any good? Psalm. 4.7.
Psalm. 4.7. And, Oh si quis daret mihi aquam! Oh that one would give me to
drink of the water of the Well of Bethlehem, which is by the gate! 2 Samuel
23.15. Qui pathetice rogat, 2 Samuel 23.15.
ardenter postulat; He that asks pathetically, and with affection to a thing,
desires ardently. 3. Certa determinatio.
Thirdly, There is a certain determination, or a most assured and infallible
conclusion; Reducente Jehovah reducem populi sui turmam; When the Lord turns
the captivity of his people; that is, assuredly the Lord will turn the
captivity of his people. Which is a gracious answer to the Quis dabit? or, Oh
si quis det! Who will give? or, Tremellius.
Oh that Salvation were given! For, as sure as Gods people are in captivity; so
sure the Lord will turn their captivity, and deliver them out of captivity. Yet
if you will not believe this exposition, because you may think it to be mine
own, take Gods own Word for it, who is truth it self, Joh. 14.6.
and cannot lie, or deny his own Word which he has spoken, 2 Timothy 2.13. 2 Timothy
2.13.
And this you shall find in the Prophecy of Jeremiah. Thus says the Lord,
Behold I will bring again the captivity of Jacobs Tents, and have mercy on his
dwelling places. Jer. 30.18. and so forward, as you may see in that, Jer.
30.18. and 31.
and in the following Chapter, where God promises the restoration of Israel.
Now you must know, that Dei dicere, est Dei facere; Gods Word is his Deed. What
God speaks, if it be not yet, it is, as if it were done. Ipse dixit, and facta
sunt omnia, Genesis 1. He spoke the word, Genesis 1.
and all things were created: and what he speaks now, cannot likewise but be
performed. 4. Grata Exultatio.
Lastly, There is a grateful exultation, or a joyful congratulation for so great
a mercy, as the turning the captivity of Gods people. Exultabit Jacob, and
laetabitur Israel; Then shall Jacob rejoice, and Israel shall be right glad. It
is but prophesied in my Text; but we have heard it to be fulfilled in all
places; yea, and we see it verified every where by experience; Soluta
captivitate, laeti sunt captivi. When men are in Prison, they are heavy and sad:
But when they are free, they are merry and glad.

So then, as from Eden, (of which you may read in the Book of Genesis, Genesis
2.10.
) there went a River to water the Garden, which God had planted; and from
thence it was parted and became into four heads, Gen, 2.10. In like manner,
from this Text, 4 Conclusions.
thus as you see I have Analyzed it, there flow four Rivolets of Corollaries,
or Doctrinal conclusions, to water the Gardens of our hearts, that, like Eden,
they may be fruitful both in instruction and action, according to godliness:
that the man of God, which is content to be governed by the Word of God, may be
fruitful, and made perfect unto all good works; 1 Timothy 3.16.
as the Apostle speaks, to the same purpose, in his Epistle to his adopted Son
Timothy, nay his own Son in the faith: 1 Timothy 1.2.
for so he styles him, 1 Timothy 1.2.

The first Corollary, 1. Conclusion.
or Doctrinal conclusion, which presents it self from the words of the Text, is
this: That God does sometimes suffer his Israel, his own people, to go into
captivity. God does suffer his Israel to go into captivity.
For here, by Israel, is meant the people of God: which is made manifest by the
words next following, or understood: Oh that the Lord would deliver his people
out of captivity! and, when the Lord turns the captivity of his people. Now
if Israel, Gods people, were not in captivity, why do they so ardently wish and
pray to be delivered out of it? Their desire to be delivered out, does imply
that they were in captivity. That's the first conclusion, God does suffer his
Israel sometimes to go into captivity.

Secondly, 2. Conclusion.
another Corollary, that arises from the Text, exhibits it self thus: That it
is the duty of Israel, of Gods people, when they are in captivity, Israel in
captivity must pray for deliverance.
to pray for deliverance out of captivity. Oh si reducat Dominus! Oh that the
Lord would deliver his people out of captivity! And for my part, they that are
in Prison, and in Captivity, and will not pray, or desire to come out of it,
let them stay there still. We have an old Proverb frequent amongst us; He that
is in a Ditch, and will not use the means to come out, let him lie there still.
And I make this application of it: If a man be in Prison, Captivity, or any
other affliction or sorrow, and does not desire to come out of it; if he will
not pray to God for deliverance, let him still continue in it. Volenti non fit
injuria; God send them sorrow that love it.

3. Conclusion. Upon Isreal's Prayer God does turn their captivity.
Thirdly, The Corollary or Conclusion, which arises from the determination, is
an irrefragable position, which is, (...), without all controversy, seconded by
the testimonies, and made good by the examples of Scripture, and so beyond all
contradiction. That upon the prayers of Israel, of Gods People, when they are
in affliction and in captivity, the Lord will undoubtedly deliver his people,
and turn their captivity. The Participle is of the Present Tense, Reducente
Jehovah, reducem populi sui turmam; The Lord turning the captivity of his
people: which presents unto us the certainity of it; as if it were already
present.

4. Conclusion. Israel delivered out of captivity, ought to rejoice and be glad
for it.
Then, in the last place, the fourth Corollary does conclude the necessity of
Praise, as the second did infer the necessity of Prayer: That, when God, upon
the Prayers of Israel, his People, shall have turned their captivity and
delivered them from the hands of their enemies, under whom they were captives,
they ought, by way of gratitude, to return their thankfulness for such a mercy,
and to congratulate their deliverance, by being joyful and glad.

These are, as it were, the four Wheels of our Topical Chariot, by which, as
formerly I hinted unto you, Biga in Hosannch.
we shall drive on our future discourse. Two whereof belong to the Hosannah (in
Sions Humiliation;) the other two, Biga in Hallelujah.
to the Hallelujah, (in Sions Exaltation.) The two former set forth unto us
Sions Humiliation; Her being in Captivity, Sions Humiliation.
which enforce Her to pray unto God for her Deliverance. The two latter do
shadow out her Exaltation; Sions Exaltation.
her being delivered out of captivity: which obliges her to praise God for
being delivered. But they do all concenter together, and meet in one, like the
mystical Wheels in Ezekiels vision, Exek. 1.16.
at the River Chebar, Ezekiel. 1.16. For there is Rota in Rota; A Wheel in a
Wheel; and so they wheel round, like the Wheel of Fortune: If I may, without
offense, resemble the Wheel of Divine Providence to that, which they call the
Wheel of Fortune.

But then the question may be moved by some, What the Wheel of Fortune is, to
which I resemble the Wheel of Divine Providence.

For satisfaction therefore of those that are ignorant; and better remembrance
of those that have forgot it; Rota Fortunae.
and Wheel of Fortune, as it is called, runs in this manner; Religion, peace;
Peace, plenty; Plenty, pride; Pride, war; War, poverty; Poverty, religion;
Religion, peace; and so it runs round in a circular motion, the one still
producing the other. In like manner run the Wheels of my Text.

First God (for Sin, which is the cause of all punishment; and Captivity, Rota
Providentiae.
is the greatest of punishments to a People or Nation) does suffer his Israel,
his People, to go into captivity. Secondly, When Israel, Gods People, are in
captivity, they pray, or ought to pray, unto God for deliverance out of
captivity. Thirdly, Upon the Prayers of Israel, Gods People, when they are in
captivity, the Lord will, and does turn the captivity of his People. Lastly,
When upon the Prayers of Israel, the People of God, God has been pleased at
length to turn the captivity of his People, it is the duty of Israel, and all
Gods People, by way of thankfulness, to rejoice and be glad in God their
Savior; and (with the blessed Virgin) to sing their Magnificats unto him, Luke
1.47.
Luke 1.47. for turning their captivity, and giving deliverance to them.
The neglect of which duty of thankfulness, by way of return, to celebrate Gods
power, and to magnify his goodness, in being joyful and glad, for turning
their captivity, does turn into sin; and sin does turn away Gods presence and
favor from his People; and so God, by withdrawing his presence and favor
from his people, does suffer them to go into captivity; and when they are in
captivity, they pray for deliverance; and upon their prayers God does turn
their captivity; and when they are delivered out of captivity, they ought to
rejoice and be glad for it.

Thus you see how the Wheels run round, and follow one another. Unthankfulness,
in not being joyful and glad for deliverance out of captivity, causes God to
suffer Israel, his People, to go into captivity; Captivity then begets Prayer;
Prayer breeds Deliverance; and Deliverance produces Thankfulness.

These are the mystical Wheels in our Topical Chariot of of the Text; of which
there is a Biga in the Hosannah, and a Biga in the Hallelujah; two in the one,
and two in the other. The two former are turned from us; but yet not so turned
away from us, but that, by our unthankfulness, in not rejoicing and being glad
as we ought, they may turn again to us. The two latter turn to us, and we are
to turn to them; and so to turn to them, that the other turn not again to us.

The Churches Hallelujah:
My Province is to speak of the Spokes of the two last Wheels in the Churches
Hallelujah, which are delineated to us in these words, (...). When the Lord
turns the Captivity of his People, then shall Jacob rejoice, and Israel shall
be right glad.

And here our two Wheels do run upon two Tracts, upon two Lines, upon two Terms.

1. (...) Cum, When, 2. (...) Tum. Then.
When the Lord turns the Captivity of his People,
Then shall Jacob rejoice, and Israel shall be right glad.
In the Former, There is (...), A Supposition. In the Later, There is (...), A
Imposition.
The one is Hypothetical, 1. Benefium.
and supposes Beneficium, a Mercy, or Deliverance on Gods part: That God will
turn the Captivity of his People.

The other is Categorical, 2. Officium.
and imposes Officium, a Duty, or a Service to be performed on his Peoples
part: When God has turned the Captivity of his People.

The First, is Presumed. The One, is Positive. The Second, is Assumed. The
Other, is Illative.
The Cum tells us, that Deliverance of Gods people out of Captivity will come.

The Tum tells us, that when Deliverance of Gods people out of Captivity is
come, then their thankfulness for such a deliverance must come likewise: then
they must rejoice, and be glad for it.

They both run, in the Future Tense, according to St. Hierom, Hieron. in loc.
from the Seventy Interpreters: Cum converterit: or, Cum averterit: When God
shall have turned, or turned away the Captivity of his people, then they shall
rejoice, and be glad. And may they never have their Captivity turned away from
them, who, when their Captivity is turned away, will not return their
thankfulness to God, by being joyful, and glad, for its returning!

But the former is in the Present Tense (according to the Translation of
Tremellius: Tremell.
Reducente Jehovah reducem Populi sui turmam) as if God were at the present
returning their Captivity, which being turned away, Jacob shall rejoice, and
Israel shall be right glad.(...). In plain English, Jacob shall dance a
Galliard for joy; and Israel shall be glad at the heart.

Applicatio Prophetiae.
Now to bring this Prophecy (which was foretold to the Jews, and afterward,
although a long while after, fullfilled for them) from Palaestine to England,
and from Jerusalem to London; and to apply it to our selves here present, who
have been lately delivered from a more grievous than Babylonian Captivity: (for
in Babel, or Babylon, there was only a Confusion of Tongues and Languages; but
here, in Great Britain, there was a Confusion of Hearts and Affections: we did
agree in nothing but in disagreeing) Shall nor we, since God has been pleased
to fulfill this Prophecy for us also, and has turned our Captivity, turn the
Tense, as God has turned the Times? Since God has turned our Condition, and
from an Imperative Mood, in which we were commanded, has brought us to the
Optative Mood, which we long desired; And from Utinam veniat al quando tempus!
Would to God the time would come! he has reduced us to the time, we then did
wish, and do now enjoy, and wish that it may long continue; And since from a
Subjunctive Mood (in which we were brought under, and subjected to our
Fellow Subjects, who then did tyrannize and Lord it over us, and in that
condition and state we could not be Potentialls, to free us from that misery
and slavery we were in) God has, out of his infinite goodness, brought us to
an Infinitve Mood of prosperity and happiness, which (Blessed be God) we now
are in: though contrary to the nature of the Infinitive Mood, which has
neither Number, nor Person, nor Nominative Case: We have now both distinction
of Numbers, and difference of Persons, and can nominate, and lay open our Cases
in the Courts of Justice; which then, (although we were not Supines, but
Gerunds, both in Di, Do, Dum; for some were forced to dye; others to give money
to save themselves, and all were dumb, and durst not open their mouths, to
speak against their proceedings;) we were necessitated to bear without any
redress; Shall not we, I say, now, in the Indicative Mood, show our selves
thankful for so great a mercy, which is infinite, and beyond expression?
Surely, we are not worthy to have had so great a deliverance vouchsafed to us,
if, with the turning of our Captivity, with the Times, we do not also alter,
and turn the Tense. And therefore, seeing God has turned that Tense, which was
in the Future with the Jews, into the Preterperfect Tense with us; and that,
which he did then but promise, for the present, to the Jews, he has now
perfectly fullfilled for us, in turning our Captivity; which, though he did
promise to them, he did not a long while after perform for them: Oh let us,
considering what great things God has done for us, and recollecting with our
selves, that God (to use the Apostles phrase, Heb. 11.40.
Heb. 11.40.) has provided better things for us, than he did for the Jews, to
whom this promise was made. For, as the Apostle testifies, Heb. 11.39. Many of
them died, Heb. 11.39.
not receiving the promise; which, Blessed be God, we have enjoyed. Upon the
meditation of so great a mercy, let us take up that speech of Iphicrates, a
valiant Captain of the Athenians; which, though it were modestly spoken by him,
yet let us piously apply it to our selves; and, in a grateful manner, let us
confess (...), from how great baseness and misery, to what great glory and
felicity, God has advanced us; and so, in the name of God, the great (...),
and Turner of Captivities, as we are bound in duty, by way of thankfulness, for
such an extraordinary, and undeserved favor, let us, I say, turn the Tense, as
God has turned the Times, and change the Future into the Present Tense with
him, in being, now for the present, and still hereafter, for the future (as
Jacob and Israel are enjoined in my Text) joyful, and right glad, for it.

So that, without further Ambages of Words, or Circumlocutions of Phrases, In
this Biga 2. Topics.
in the Biga of the Churches Hallelujah, there are 2. Spokes only to be spoken
of, 2. Tropical Topics to be illustrated.

1. (...).
1. The (...). The Quid factum What is done. 2. (...).
2. The (...). The Quid faciendum What is to be done.
1. Quid factum.
First, I shall relate unto you the Quid factum, What is done. 2. Quid faciendum.
Secondly, I shall declare the Quid faciendum, What is, or ought to be done.
The Former is Ex part Dei; and so I shall inform you, 1. Ex part Dei.
what God has done, on his part, for his People.

2. Ex. part Populi.
The Latter is Ex part Populi; and so I shall enforce unto you, what Gods
People ought, to do, on their part, in requital to him.

1. What sdone.
The First shows, what God has done for his people: He has turned their
Captivity: Revertente Domino Captivitatem Populi sui: When the Lord turns the
Captivity of his People.

2. What is to be done.
The Second sets forth, what Gods people ought to do for him, in turning their
Captivity: They ought to return thanks to God, in being joyful and glad, for
turning their Captivity: Exultabit Jacob, laetabitur Israel: Then shall Jacob
rejoice, and Israel shall be right glad.

Sionis Reductio.
In the Former, there is Sionis Reductio, Sions Reduction, or bringing back;
Sions Restoration; or, the turning of Sions Captivity.

Sionis Exultatio:
In the Latter, there is Sionis Exultatio, Sions Exultation, or Acclamation;
Sions Rejoicing for the returning of her Captivity.

The first Wheel in the Churches Hallelujah.
I begin with the first Tropical Topic, which is the (...), the Quid factum; Ex
part Dei: What God has done for his part, in the behalf, and for the behoof
of his people. Reduxit Captivitatem plebis suae: He has turned the Captivity
of his people. Sionis Reductio: or, The turning of Sions Captivity.
Which is the first Wheel in the Churches Hallelujah; and is Sionis Reductio;
Sions Reduction and Restoration; or, the turning of Sions Captivity.

In the turning of which Wheel, I shall keep my self close to the Records of
sacred Scripture, both for the Confirmation and Illustration of it. For, though
the testimonies of humane Writers might furnish us with variety of evidence, to
demonstrate, I. Quid factum: Ex part D.i.
and make good the truth of it, in matter of Fact; that God has turned the
Captivity of his people: Yet, because the Writings of the Heathen, which were
their Enemies, are Eccentrical, and have no relation to the people of God,
otherwise than as they help to fill and make up their stories; I shall wave
their attestation to confirm our declaration, and rest only in the proof, I
meet with, in the Chronicles of holy Writ, which set forth both the acts and
passages of Gods people since the Creation, and are, without any other
supplement, of sufficient Authority, both to restifie the truth of them, and to
gain credit and belief to them.

And here, not to speak of the Antediluvian times, when, in the days of Seth,
God restored Religion, which a long time had been suppressed by the Enemies of
God, the wicked Sons of men, Genesis 4.26.
Genesis 4.26. Nor yet to mention, how God did deliver his Church and People by
Noah, from the hands of those that did usurp Authority over them; and preserve
it by his obedience, in the Ark, when he destroyed all flesh upon the earth
with a Deluge of water, Genesis 7.23. Genesis 7.23.
Nor yet to relate, how God, after the Flood, delivered his Church and People
from the tyranny of Nimrod, and his Accomplices, by the Confusion of Tongues at
Babel, Genesis 11.2.
Genesis 11.9. Nor yet to tell you, how God preserved and delivered his Church in
the time of Abraham, and the Patriarchs, before their going into Egypt; of
which you may read in the Book of Genesis. I shall begin the Province, which I
have undertaken, with the Captivity of the Israelites, and the hard usage, and
slavery which they suffered in the house of bondage, Exodus 20.2.
Exodus 20.2. Under Pharaoh, and his Taskmasters, while they were in Egypt; and
how God turned cheir Captivity, and delivered them out of it.

And so, if you look into the Book of Exodus, which has its name from the
Israelites going out of Egypt, you shall find, that, according to Gods promise
made to Abraham, Genesis 15.13.
Genesis 15.13. After the Children of Israel had been in affliction four hundred
years in Egypt, in the house of slavery, the term which God himself does give
it, Domus Servitutis, the House of Bondage, as you heard before Exodus 20.2.
Exodus 20.2.
It came to pass, when they never thought of it, nor could believe it, at the
end of four hundred and thirty years, even the self same day that God had
appointed, it came to pass, that all the Hosts of the Lord went out from the
Land of Egypt: as you may further inform your selves, both of their departure,
and the manner of it, Exodus 12.41.
Exodus 12.41. And after God had so miraculously turned their Captivity, by the
hands of Moses and Aaron, you may read likewise, how joyful and glad they were
for it. For, as it is there recorded, Moses, with the Children of Israel, sang
a Song of Thanksgiving unto the Lord, Exodus 15.1.
Exodus 15.1. Nor were the Women wanting to celebrate with joy that great
Solemnity: For, as Moses does certify us, Miriam the Prophetess, the Sister of
Aaron, took a Timbrel in her hand; and all the Women went out after her, with
Timbrells, and with Dances, Singing unto the Lord, Exodus 15.20.21. So that,
Exodus 15.20.21.
from their president and example, not men only, but women also, must rejoice
at the deliverance of Gods people out of Captivity; and must celebrate it with
singing, and dancing, and all signs of joy.

And that the remembrance of so great a benefit of their deliverance might not
slip out of their memories, but be continued to all Posterity, God enjoins the
Israelites yearly, at the same time, to celebrate the Passover, Exodus 13.6.
Exodus 13.6. (Which was a sign, not only of the destroying Angels passing over
the Houses of the Children of Israel, when he slew all the first born of the
Egyptians, Exodus 12.27.
Exodus 12.27. But also of their passing over the Red Sea, out of the Land of
Egypt.) And at that Passover, God commands them to teach their Children the
meaning of it; Exodus 14.22.
that they also might tell their Children, and their Childrens Children; and so
the Generations yet unborn, Exodus 13.8.
by this means, might both know what the Lord had done for them, in turning
their Captivity; and also be joyful and glad in praising the Lord for such
their deliverance, Psalm. 78.5.6.
Psalm. 78.5.6. Yea, that they might not forget his turning of their Captivity
out of Egypt, but that it might take a deeper impression in them; Jos. 4.21.22.
God himself again becomes their Monitour; and, at the giving or the Law,
contained in the Decalogue, upon Mount Sinai, in the Preface to it, he uses
this, as the sole Argument to press them to obedience, Evod. 20.2.
in observing of it, because he was the Lord their God, and he had chosen them
to be his People, Deuteronomy. 5.6.
whom he had brought out of Egypt, and from the house of bondage, Exodus 20.2.

I will not stand to tell you, how God delivered them from the hands of their
Enemies, that would have Captived them in their passage through the Wilderness,
under the Conduct of Moses their Prince, and Joshuah their Captain General;
Jos. 14.1.
and how God brought them into the Land of Canaan, which he had promised to
their Forefathers, and which was divided unto them by Joshuah, according to
their several inheritances. The other Books of Moses his Pentateuch, and the
History of Joshuah, after Moses his death, will sufficiently acquaint you, Jos.
14.1.

But in the Calender of the Judges, you shall find it registered and enrolled,
how many times God did suffer them, by reason of their sins, to go into
Captivity; and how often he sold them into the hands of their Enemies, Judge.
2.14.
to be Lords over them; and yet again, upon their prayers and cries unto God,
Psalm. 44.12.
when they were oppressed, and in Captivity, you may read likewise, how God
turned again their Captivity, and freed them from the hands of their Enemies.
For which several deliverances, if they did not express their thankfulness, by
being joyful and glad (as Jacob and Israel are here enjoined in my Text) they
were most unworthy of so great mercies, because they had great cause to rejoice
and be glad for them.

Thus you may read in those sacred Archiues, how God turned their Captivity
from Chushan-Rishathaim, King of Aram, Judge. 3.8.
or Syria, by the hand of Othniel, Jud. 3.8. How he turned their Captivity from
Eglon, King of Moab, by the hand of Ehud, Judge. 3.14.
Jud. 3.14. How he turned their Captivity from the Philistines, with an
Oxe-Goad, by Shamgar, Judge. 7.31.
Jud. 3.31. Thus you may read, how he turned their Captivity, when he had sold
them into the hand of Jabin, King of Canaan; and delivered them from Sisera his
chief Captain, which dwelt in Harosheth of the Gentiles, by the hand of Deborah
and Barak, Judge. 4.23.
Jud. 4.23. How he turned their Captivity from the Midianites (into whose hands
he had sold them 7. years, because they had committed wickedness in the sight
of the Lord) by the hand of Gedeon, Jud. 7.25.
who was called Jerubbaal, Jud. 7.25, How he turned their Captivity from the
Children of Ammon, by the hand of Jephtah, Jud. 11.32.
Jud. 11.32. And, to be brief, thus you may read, how God delivered them from
the Philistines, and turned their Captivity from them, Judge. 14.14. and 15.15.
and 16.3.
first by Sampson, Jud. 14.14.15.15.16.3. And afterward by Samuel, 1 Samuel
7.10. For which several deliverances out of Captivity and Slavery, which they
sustained under their Enemies hands, 1 Samuel 7.10.
there is no question, but they did all rejoice, and were exceedingly glad;
because, when they were oppressed, and vexed by their Enemies, they cried
exceedingly to be delivered: although we find none of their Hymns of rejoicing,
and Psalms of joy, to be registered in those holy Records; excepting that Song
of Thankfulness of Deborah and Barak, Judge. 5.1.
which they did exultantly sing, after their renowned Victory over Sisera; as
you may read, Jud. 5.1.

Nor will I insist to relate unto you, how God delivered the Israelites from
the hands of their enemies in the time of the Kings: you may spare me that
trouble, if you please, at your leisure, to revolve and peruse those holy
Chronicles, which are there set down concerning the Kings of Israel, and Judah.

But that signal and famous Deliverance from the captivity of Babylon, after
threescore and ten years, which they suffered by reason of their sins; and from
which they were miraculously delivered by Gods mercy, challenges a more than
ordinary attention and observation.

Which captivity of theirs, as it was foretold by the Prophet Jeremiah, Jer.
25.9.10, 11.
and other of the Lords Servants the Prophets; so was their return
fore-prophecied likewise; Isaiah. 5.26.
although they would not believe or give credit to either. Yet had they not
been so stupid in judgment, 2 Kings 20.17.18. and 23.27. and 24.1.2.
and excoecated and blinded in their understanding; having eyes to see, 2 Chronicles.
36.6.
but (as the Prophet speaks of them) would not see; and ears to hear, but would
not hear; and hearts to understand, but would not understand, Isa. 6.9.10. They
might as well have believed their return from captivity, Isa. 6.9.10.
as being under the yoke in Babylon, they were sensible of it; both being alike
foretold by the Prophets.

However, that the Word of the Lord, spoken by the mouth of Jeremiah the
Prophet, might be accomplished, 2 Chronicles. 36.22.
the Lord stirred up the spirit of Cyrus, King of Persia, Ezra 1.1. and 4.4.5:
and 5.3.
to make a Proclamation throughout all his Kingdom; and caused it to be put in
writing for their return out of Babylon to Jerusalem: which accordingly came to
pass, notwithstanding all the opposition of their enemies: For as you may read
in the Books of Ezra and Nehemiah, they came again to Jerusalem and Judah,
every one to his own City, Ezra 4.4. and 5.3.

I shall not need to tell you how joyful these people were, when God had turned
their captivity from them. If, you please to turn to that Psalm, which, from
their return is entitled In Convertendo, Psalm. 126.1.2.
you may sufficiently satisfy your selves in it: for the Kingly Prophet begins
that Psalm with In Convertendo Dominus Captivitatem Sion; When the Lord turned
the captivity of Sion, we were like unto them that dream: Then was our mouth
filled with laughter, and our tongue with joy, Psalm. 126.1.2. That is, they
were like men in a dream, that felt ineffable joy, and incredible comfort; and
yet they doubted whether it were true or but a dream: Acts 12.4.5, 6.
Even as we read of St. Peter in the Acts of the Apostles, when he was
imprisoned by Herod, and destined to be brought forth to the people, and to be
put to death: upon the prayers of the Church interceding with God for him, the
Angel of the Lord came into the Prison to him, whiles he was fast asleep, and
dreamed not of it: and smiteing him on the side, he raised him up, causing his
Chains to fall from his hands; and being awaked the Angel bid him arise, and to
gird himself, and to bind on his Sandales, and to cast his Garment about him,
and to follow him. Now when Peter had thus done, and followed the Angel out of
Prison, and was come abroad, the Text faith, that he wist not that it was true
which was done by the Angel that delivered him, Acts 12.7.8, 9.
but thought he had seen a Vision, Acts 12.7.8.9. In like manner was it with
the Jews, that were captived in Babylon: after their captivity was turned, and
they returned to Jerusalem, they felt such joy and rejoicing; such gladness and
comfort, as was as much incredible as inutterable.

But leaving the captivity of Sion, and the People of God, in former times, and
in foreign parts, with the returning of it, let us return to our selves, and
take notice of the captivity and slavery, which God of his unspeakable mercy,
of later days, has freed us from, and turned away from us, here at home, in
our own Country. And here, not to tarry, or make a Mansion on; but only to
touch, and make mention of, those two remarkable and famous deliverances from
captivity, both Corporal and Spiritual, which God was pleased, of his mere
grace and goodness, to vouchsafe to us his People of England. How can we forget
those two memorable years, of One thousand, five hundred, Anno 1588.
eighty and eight; and, of One thousand, six hundred, and five: the one in the
last Century, the other in this Century? Anno 1605.
In the former of which, God did mightily deliver us his People, from an open
Invasion by the Spaniards from abroad; and in the latter, did most miraculously
free us from a secret undermining at home: Both plotted by Jesuits, and acted
by Papists. The one by Strand, the other by Land: The one by Strangers and
Foraigners at Sea; the other by home-born Subjects ashore; The one upon our
Coasts; the other near, and under our Courts: The one by Shipping, with Swords,
Powder, Match, and Bullets; the other in a Vault or Cellar, with Croues of
Iron, Barrels of Powder, and Matchless Billets: Both which egregious, and
famous deliverances, from the enemies of our English Sion, are not to be buried
in oblivion, (as they have been too much forgotten by some that would have
seemed to be the greatest professors of Religion amongst us) but ought to be
remembered by all true Englishmen; and to be perpetuated by them, with red
letters in Fames Calendar, to all generations.

Yet because these two great deliverances are past the memory of most men now
living; and most of us here present know nothing of them, save only by reading,
tradition, and common hearsay, I shall pass them over with the bare
remembrance and naming of them. And so, leaving them to be solemnized in their
proper times, I shall address my self to speak of that latest deliverance out
of captivity and thraldom, which, not above two years since, God was pleased to
vouchsafe unto us, and is still fresh in every man's, and almost in every child's
memory, and is most proper to be treated of at this time.

Know then, that we may come to be more sensible of it, when, by reason of our
sins, and high ingratitude toward God for our long continued peace and
prosperity, above all the Nations and Kingdoms round about us, God had most
justly suffered us to be infested with intestine Arms, and a civil War, (which
of all others is most dangerous and pernicious) our Fellow Subjects rising up
in rebellion against their Prince; and had permitted those Rebels to be
succesful in Arms against their Liege Lord and Sovereign, His late Majesty, of
ever blessed memory; by reason whereof, we came to lose, not only our Religion,
Laws, Liberties, and Proprieties, (the only things which the Rebels pretended
they took up Arms to defend and preserve from violation) but also our most
gracious King, King Charles the first, (...), ( Infandum and immane nefas! A
crime not to be spoken, or thought of, without horror and amazement!) whose
Honor and Person they had taken so many Oaths of Allegiance, Protestations,
Covenants and Vows, and these in a Sacramental manner, to defend and maintain,
save and keep secure from all violence; all which notwithstanding they did,
(under a color of justice, to justify their proceedings, which were no ways
justifiable, but unparalleld by all former presidents since the Creation) most
inhumanely, unchristianly, and butcherly murder him, because he would not, in
the least, give way to violate, either our Religion, Laws, Liberties, and
Proprieties; but did most Christianly, Manly, and Kingly maintain them, even
with the loss of his life; dying both the Churches and Kingdoms Martyr, that
they should not be revelled and ravished by them. And, when God had as justly
suffered us to be made Vassals and Slaves to our Fellow Subjects, (a just
reward for our disobedience, formality, and neutrality, in that we would not
submit to, stand by, and adhere, as we ought, to our natural and lawful Prince)
and had let us continue for many years in that Slavery, a slavery worse than
that of Gods people, either in Egypt, or in Babylon: (for they were in bondage
under Strangers and Forraigners abroad, which was somewhat more tolerable,
because it could not be any ways remedied; but our slavery was under our own
Brethren, Kindred, and Fellow Subjects at home; under such fellows, some of
them, as were not our Fellows, but formerly our Servants; and which servile
condition, had it not been for our pusillanimity, hypocrisy, and
false-heartedness, might have been prevented by us, and not incumbent on us.)
At length the same good God, who is righteous in all his ways, and holy in all
his works, Psalm. 45.17.
(...), the only Averruncator, and and turner away of all evil from his people,
out of his incomprehensible mercy, which endures for ever, and never fails
them that put their trust in it, was pleased to take notice of the sighs, and
hear the groans, and hearken to the prayers of his unworthy people, and did
unexpectedly turn this captivity away from us.

It would not be a Parergon, or a relation from the purpose, if I should
recount unto you, how his SaCRed Majesty, now surviving, (and long may he live
for the glory of God, and the honor of these Nations, to be a comfort to his
Friends, and a terror to his Enemies!) to recover his own Rights, and to
restore his peoples Liberties, had, both by Himself and his Ministers, mediated
with his Allies and Friends, using all means possible and imaginable abroad; As
also, that his Loyal Subjects had left nothing unattempted, but did omnem
movere lapidem, (to make use of the Latin Proverb) use the utmost of their
endeavors, which the Wit, or Art of man could suggest, and their industry put
in practice, for to redeem and recover themselves, and their relations out of
that unparalleld slavery they were in at home. And yet, notwithstanding his
Majesty's negotiations abroad, and his Subjects assiduous machinations at home,
either through perfidious treachery, or too credulous inadvertency, all their
projects, designs, and plots, not unlike those (...), Plin. Not. Hist. 10.58.
which the natural Philosophers and Historians speak of, those addle eggs which
bring forth nothing but wind, came to be frustate and of no effect.

Nor may we wonder at Gods most wise, though secret dispensation of affairs in
this kind: for he does suffer his people (as we may observe in the holy
Scripture) to be in affliction, and in captivity, and to continue in them,
notwithstanding their prayers and endeavors to get out of them: to make them,
by humility and meekness; by patience and long-suffering; by faith and
invocation, meet, and fitted to entertain, with more thankfulness and
joyfulnes, the mercy of their deliverance, when he shall remove their
affliction, and turn their captivity. And though the time of captivity may seem
long to us, in regard of the irksomness and tediousness of it; Psalm. 90.4.
yet in Gods account it is not so: for a thousand years, as the Psalmist and
Saint Peter have it, are but as a day in respect of him, 2 Pet. 3.8.
Psalm. 90.4. And as our ways are not as his ways, Ezekiel. 18.29. so neither are
our times, as his times. Though we be ready, Ezekiel. 18.29.
as we think, to come out of thraldom and slavery, so soon as we are come into
it; yet we are not ready in Gods account, Isa. 55.^.
and therefore we must reckon again. Gods time is not yet come, in which he
has determined to bring us out of slavety, and to turn our captivity, when we
think it high time to be delivered and extricated out of it: and therefore God
having suffered us, through our own fault, to come into captivity and slavery,
did let us remain so long time in it, that so our restoration and return out
of it, might be more acceptable to us, and we more fit to embrace it with
thankfulness, when he should turn it.

And give me leave to tell you likewise, that when we were in that deplorable
condition, in that remediless estate, in the lowest of our fortunes; when we
were utterly despised, as the Prophet David speaks, and exceedingly filled with
contempt, Psalm. 123.3.
Psalm. 123.3. When our souls were filled with the scornful reproof of those
that were grown wealthy; and with the despitefulness of them that were so
proud, V. 4.
V. 4. When our Bodies were captived and under Hatches, (a punishment never
excogitated by the worst of Tyrants, nor practiced in the fiercest of
Persecutions) and they did suffer men to ride over our heads, Psalm. 66.11.
Psalm, 66.11. When we were vincti, Prisoners indeed; but yet not vincti spei,
Zach. 9.12.
(as the Prophets expression is,) Prisoners of hope, Zach. 9.12. for we were
without all hope, and apprehension of freeing our selves out of that Labyrinth
of misery; when those Matchiviallians, or matchless Villains of the times, in
their modern policy, like Nimrod and his Accomplices, had said, Go to, let us
build a City and Tower of Government that may reach to Heaven, and get us a
name ove^ all the Earth, Genesis 11.4.
Genesis 11.4. when they were in the height of their tyranny, and we in the depth
of our slavery* then did the Proverb, not more old than true, (according to St.
Augustines sentence) verify it self to our misbelieving souls: Aug. de. Temp.
Ser. 89.
Ubi desinit humanuns, ibi incipit Divinum auxilium.

Where man's means of help do fail;
There Gods means do most avail.
For now God Almighty, (who, as the Psalmist styles him, is Adjutor in
opportunitatibus, and in tribulatione, Psalm. 9.9.
Psalm 9.9. A defense for the oppressed, even a refuge in due time of trouble)
making our great extremity, his gracious opportunity, did take the King, his
Vicegerents, and the Churches, his Spouses cause into his own hands, which he
had seen to be so ill managed by others; and seeing the enemies of both to be
implacable, by reason of their many prosperous successes; insomuch that some of
them had said, (if Fame has not given a mis-report) concerning the one, they
would never be reconciled to that cursed Family, ( Vox faucibus haeret, The
words stick in my throat at the pronunciation of them!) And of the other, they
would not leave a Priest to piss against the Wall, (so great friends were they,
as they pretended, to Religion) but they would Pave the Highways, from York to
London, with the Churches stones; At length, when those enemies of Sion, and of
David, thought all was Cock-sure, (as we use to say) and that they had settled
themselves so fast, as they could never be removed; then did God come down, (to
speak in the Scripture phrase) to see the Babel of their Government; and seeing
they could not be stopped by men, from doing whatsoever they imagined to do,
Genesis 11.6. God himself, Genesis 11.6.
to abate their pride, and assuage their malice, did over-turn the Model, and
overthrow the Fabric of their intended Babel. And, as at the confusion of
Babel, God, to relieve his Church and People under tyranny, did divide Nimrod
and his Accomplices, and scatter them over the face of the earth, by the
confusion of their tongues and languages; So here likewise, God, to redeem us
his people, out of the slavery and captivity we were in, did divide the hearts
and affections of our Nimrods, and their Accomplices, by distracting their
consultations, and confounding their devices. For when every ones ambition did
spur him on to be the chiefest, and to get the rains of Government into his
own hands, and to pull down that platform of Government which they had begun
to build; then did God destroy the Counsels of those Achitophels, which were
accounted as Oracles in those days, 2 Samuel 16 23.
2 Samuel 16.23. and caused some of them, though not to hang themselves, as
Achitophel did, 2 Samuel 17.23. yet to be hanged by others; 2 Samuel 17.23.
and scattered the others over the face of the earth.

Now this God did bring to pass, by means unthought of by us, and by such means
as we did never dream of. And whiles our captivity was thus in turning, we were
like the Jews, in the return of their captivity: For as they could do nothing
of themselves, but were helpless; no more could we, 2 Chronicles. 36.22.
but were altogether hopeless; no more stirred up the heart of Cyrus King of
Persia, (which was the Procatarctical cause of their returning) to make a
Proclamation throughout his Kingdom, for the Jews to return into their own
Country, 2 Chronicles. 36.22. So did God (the same yesterday, Heb. 13.8.
to day, and the same for ever, Heb. 13.8.) stir up the spirit of our Cyrus,
King Charles the Second, to send a Declaration of his good will and affection
to all his people; with a promise of an Act of Indemnity and Oblivion, to all
that would accept of it, if he should return with honor and security into his
Kingdoms. And so by this means, God, the great (...), moving the hearts of the
people to accept of what the King had proposed, (an expedient which we did
never dream would take effect;) and the effect ensuing, which we did never
dream would come to pass; yea, and do still dream that it should so come to
pass; (for here we cannot but confess with the Jews in their return out of
captivity; and make use of the Prophets expression, concerning their return out
of captivity, Psalm. 126.3.
(...), we were like to men in a dream, in the manner, and mannaging of the
great revolution and change of the times) the All-wise, and All-wonder-working
God, who is, (...), the only turner of captivities, and redeemet of Captives,
did over-turn the devices of our enemies, who kept us Captives; and by
captivating them, did turn away our captivity from us.

It is storied by Livie, that great Historian among the Romans, that when the
Romans might have given a Law to the Graecians at Corinth, Livie in Dec.
in the solemn time of their Isthmian Games, which were celebrated in
Peloponesus every five years, their General, unexpectedly by an Herald,
proclaimed freedom to all the Cities of Greece: Which Proclamation at first did
so amaze the Graecians, that they did not believe it to be true. But when it
was proclaimed the second time, the Graecians gave such a shout, that the very
Birds flying in the Ait were astonished therewith, and fell dead to the ground.

To apply this story to our present purpose: I cannot, say, I was in London
when his Majesty sent (and blessed be God for moving his Majesty so to send)
his gracious Letters from Breda, bearing date the 14 th. of April, Anno Domini
1660. to the Houses of the Lords and Commons then assembled in Parliament; with
his Letters and Declarations to the then Lord General, and Officers of the
Army; as also his Letters and Declaration to the Lord Mayor, the Aldermen, and
Common Council of his native City of London (for so his Majesty was graciously
pleased to grace the City with that Title, which then it did not deserve, in
that his gracious Letter so directed to them:) But being in Italy, at my return
from Grand Cairo in Egypt, I heard how joyfully those gracious Letters and
Declarations were generally received, though by some they would not be
believed. But on the 8 th. of May, that happy day, when the King was proclaimed
by Heralds throughout the City, such joy and rejoicing, such feasting and
drinking of Healths, such Bonfires and fireworks, such Music and ringing of
Bells, such shouting and shooting, such ovation and triumphant acclamations
were made throughout the City then, and the Country afterward, that not only
the Birds in the Air might be astonished, but the Devils in Hell might be
amazed to see, contrary to their expectation, such a sudden change, and so
strange an alteration. And indeed, a strange change it was; and we cannot but
cry out with St. Chrysostom, Chrysostom.
by way of admiration, (...)! Vere stupendae vices! A very stupendous change it
was, and to be much admired, and wondered at! Yea, so strange a change it was,
that they who were the chief Instruments, and Actors of it, were the chiefest
wonderers at it; and were, as it were, in a dream, that it should be so
contrived, carried on, and so happily effected.

Abdolominus, as Q. Curtius relates, Q. Cu^ius.
being constituted King of Sidonia, by Alexander the Great, when he was ^ent
for from manuring and tilling the Earth, to possess his Kingdom; and to manage
a Scepter instead of a Spade; it was so strange, and beyond his thoughts, that
he would not believe it. Richardson: in Annot,
And Isaacus Angelus, (if the story be true of him) when he was upon the sudden
advanced to the Empire, though he was Inaugurated into the Throne, and settled
in the Chair of State, he could not believe that he was Emperor. Whence it is
observed by wise men, that it is ever a sign of a strange event, when men at
the sight of ought, though they be awake, yet they think they are in a dream.
And truly this was our case; in this condition were we at the return of our
Captivity. For, if we might credit, either Persons or Letters which came from
London, (give me leave to speak, as being in Italy) which both did write and
speak of the wonderful change and turn of our Captivity, whiles it was in the
returning; we cannot but say again, as we have already, with the Jews in their
Convertendo, or Psalm of Return, Facti sumus ficut somniantes, Psalm. 126.1.
we were like to men in a dream. It was their own expression; we could not
believe it; we could not give credit to it; we could not think it would e're
come to pass, although we daily saw the ways to it, and the working of it; it
was a happiness so much unlooked, unexpected, and unhoped for, in those unhappy
days, and times of distraction.

I will not here, Infandum renovare dolorem (to make use of that Pathetical
phrase, of him in the Poet, which a Westminster Scholar sometimes usurped,
Virg. Aeneid.
in another case, to Q. Elizabeth, when she asked him, how often he had been
whipped: Infandum Regina jubes renovare dolorem) renew your grief, or repeat
your sorrows, in this time of joy, by recording, and mentioning, what hardship
and slavery, what servitude and vassalage, by oppression, taxes, and all kind
of servile offices (worse than which the Israelites imposed on the Gibeonites,
when they made them Tributaries; Jol. 9.23.
of which you may read, Jos. 9.23.) we suffered, and tamely underwent, like so
many Issachars, (of whom Jacob, Genesis 49.14.15,
in his Prophetical Blessing, did give this Character: Issachar is a strong
Ass, couching down between two burdens: And he saw that rest was good, and
the Land that it was pleasant: Genesis 49.14.15.
and he bowed his shoulders to bear, and became a Servant unto tribute; as you
may see it, Genesis 49.14.15. I will no further apply that Prophecy to our selves,
than to say, that we saw rest was good, and our Land was pleasant; and
therefore we bowed our shoulders to bear, and became Servants to tribute) not
only under the height of tyranny, in the time of Oliver, the Projectour, rather
than Protector; but also, under the lash of the Stinking Ramp (which (Blessed
be God) is since roasted, if not some part of it burned) whiles we were in that
our Captivity: Although I cannot but tell you withal, what sometimes Aeneas
said to his Companions, and Fellow Sufferers, -- Et haec olim meminisse
juvabit. Virgil.
It will be a kind of joy hereafter, to think of our former sorrows; and we
shall take a kind of pleasure, when we shall look back into former times, and
compare them with the present, to remember, and recount to our Posterity, what
hardship and sufferings we have undergone, in an honest, and a just cause; that
so, if occasion should serve, they may not with Ephraim start aside like a
deceitful bow; but be encouraged to the like virtuous actions.

But I shall endeavor to make you sensible, and let you understand, how
undiscernably and insensibly, how strangly and wonderfully, Ad miraculum usque,
even to a miracle, God has turned that our Captivity. For here I must have
recourse again to the Prophets expression, which he there sets down, by way of
thankfulness, in the Old Testament. A Domino factum est istud: and fit mirabile
in oculis nostris, Psalm. 118.23.
Psalm. 118.23. And which the Evangelist does take up with a grateful
recordation in the new. (...). Mat. 21.42.
This was the Lords doing, and it is wonderful in our eyes, Mat. 21.42.
Wonderful it was indeed, as I said before; no man but stood in a maze at the
sight of it. Even as St. John the Divine, when, being carried away in the
Spirit into the Wilderness, he saw the Woman drunken with the blood of the
Saints, and with the blood of the Martyrs of Jesus: when he saw her (the Text
faith) (...), he wondered with great admiration, Revel. 17.6.
Revel. 17.6. So here, after the Enemies of Gods truth had been drunk with the
blood of the Saints, and with the blood of the Martyrs of Jesus, who died
witnesses to the truth of Christ, and of Loyalty to their King, the Vicegerent
of Christ; when God turned so unexpectedly, and so suddenly, the slavery and
captivity we were in, every one wondered with great admiration; every one stood
in amazement at the sight of it; every one was stupefied, and astonished, and
besides his senses at the apprehension of it; as if he knew not well, whether
he saw it awaking, or dreamed of it sleeping, it was so strange. And therefore,
as our Savior sometimes said in another case, to the Jews, when he came to
Nazareth: Hodie impleta est haec Scriptura in oculis vestris; This day is this
Scripture fullfilled in your eyes, Luke 4.21.
Luke 4.21. So, I cannot but make use of the same expression, and say unto you:
(...), This day, if ever, this Scripture of Gods turning the Captivity of his
People, here fore-prophecied in my Text, is fullfilled both in your eyes and
ears.

Now, as the Jews, after their return from Babylon, did celebrate the memorial
of it with several Songs, and Psalms of Degrees, which from thence are
entitled, (...), Cantica graduum, Songs of Degrees, being fifteen in number
that are so styled, as you may see in the Book of the Psalms, from the 120 th.
to the 135 th. So the return of our Captivity, being no less miraculous, than
that of theirs, I should commemorate the Solemnity of it, by observing the
several steps and degrees of our, return (by which, as by so many steps of
Jacobs Ladder, we did ascend from the Nadar and Depth of our slavery and
misery, to the Zenith of our present liberty and prosperity) and so, by way of
thankfulness, affix and annex a Song of rejoicing to every Degree.

But because the time, like a Stepmother to my intention, has prevented me
so, that I cannot show you for the present, those several steps (which are
seven in number, as I have observed them) by which, as by so many Degrees, we
did return out of our Captivity; Nor yet make that Music which I did desire,
in setting those Hymns of rejoicing, and Paeans of joy, by way of thankfulness,
to every Degree; I shall, instead of those Hallelujah's, which I had conceived
for every Degree, make use of that Anthem, or Natalitial Ode, which was set in
the highest Key, and was sung in the Superlative Degree, by the Quire of
Heavenly Angels, at the Birth of Christ; who is Christus Dominus, Christ the
Lord. And this you shall find to be set and sung, Luke 2.14.
Luke 2.14. (...) Gloria Deo in Excelsis: Or, Gloria in Altissimis Deo; and in
Terra pax; in homines benevolentia: Glory be to God on high; Or, in the
highest; and in Earth peace; good will toward men.

And so, in imitation of that Angelical Quire, on the 29 th. day of May
(Anniversarily, it being King Charles the 2d. who is Christus Domini, the Lords
Christ, his birthday: Said I his birthday? I might have added, his rising day
too; for it was both: Not only the day of his Nativity; but also the day of his
Resurrection: It was his (...), his second birthday; the day, wherein King
Charles the Second, was both born into the world, and reborn, or restored to
his Kingdoms: The day wherein he rose from the Clouds of Infamy, to the
Sunshine of Glory; the day wherein he returned from the Pavilions of exilement,
to the Palaces of his inthronement) I say, on the 29 th. day of May, may we
ever (said I may? I should have said we must, and so I say, in the revolution
of each year, we must ever, as the year comes about, sing on that happy day,
every English Subject must, and I cannot believe, but every true-hearted
English Subject will,) with the multitude of the Heavenly Host, sing that
Genethliacal Anthem, which the Angels did begin in Heaven: Gloria in
Altissimis Deo: Glory be to God in the highest Heavens; and on Earth peace;
good will toward men. A Song, which I may not improperly call (and I hope
without offense to the King of Kings) Ode Carolina, King Charles his Carole; or
a Carole to be sung on King Charles his birthday; the day of his double
Nativity, both to the World, and to his Throne: By which we ought to give glory
to God on high; who then, on that day, did send our King from Heaven; and with
him, that day, did send Peace upon Earth; when we were in Hostility and War one
with another, by reason of his absence from us; and good will toward men; to
English men especially, in bringing home our King from foreign parts, to be
present with us; and making a good understanding between King and People, who
so long time had been mis-understood, and so unhappily, by that means, so long
kept asunder; and by both, turning our Captivity from us.

Nor must we only, in imitation of the multitude of Angels in Heaven, sing, as
an Hallelujah, that Natalitial Anthem, which, at the Nativity of Christ, when
he was born, they did sing for joy in the fields; but we must also, in
imitation of the multitudes of men upon Earth; sing the Hosannah, which, at
Christ his riding in triumph into Jerusalem, before his death, they did
exultantly sing within the City. For, Mat. 21.
as the Evangelists unanimously consent in the relation of that History, Mark.
11.
six days before the Passover, Luke 19.
when Christ was come near to Bethphage and Bethany, John 12.
by the Mount of Olives, the Disciples having, according to his order, brought
him a Colt, and spreading their garments, set him upon it; and having strewed
their garments, and branches of Palm Trees in the way; the multitudes that went
before him, and the multitudes that followed after him, cried, saying, Hosannah
to the Son of David, (...). Blessed is he that comes in the name of the Lord,
(...). Hosannah in the highest.

In like manner, all of us, that profess to be Christ's Disciples, and
Christians, as we do; and all that profess to be King Charles his Subjects, as
all English men are; upon every 29 th. day of May, anniversarily, we ought to
sing our Hosannah likewise. For, on that day, that happy day, as I said before
(a day, e meliore nota, (to make use of the Poets phrase) and niveo signanda
lapillo: Horat.
Of more than ordinary account; a chief day, to be noted with a white stone,
and a golden letter, and to be observed as a high Festival,) King Charles the
Second ( Nulli pietate secundus, that has not his second for piety and
goodness) riding in triumph to his Palace at White Hall, (which before had been
Black-well-Hall,) through the Streets of London, (then his Jerusalem, or
Vision of Peace, after his return from Mars his Camp, the Aceldama, or bloody
field of War,) accompanied with his Nobility and Gentry in the habit of
Soldiers; (what said I, in the habit of Soldiers? said I not amiss? spoke I
not improperly? No, for it is not unknown, though there was Species
Praeliantium, yet there were Voces Cantantium; though they had the habit of
Soldiers, yet they had the voices of Singers; and) the multitudes that went
before, and the multitudes that followed after him, cried, saying, Hosannah to
King Charles the Second, the happy Son of King Charles the First, of most happy
memory: Blessed is he that comes in the Name of the Lord: Mat. 21.9.
Hosanna in Altissimis: Hosannah in the highest.

Thus, as you have seen, I have turned over the first Topical Wheel, in the
Biga of the Churches Hallelujah; which is Sionis Reductio, the Reduction, or
Returning of Sions Captivity: wherein I have showed you the (...), the Quid
factum, Ex part Dei; What God has done on his part, for, and in the behalf of
his People: The Second Wheel in the Churches Hallelujah.
Convertit Captivitatem Populi sui; He has turned the Captivity of his People.

I should now; according to method, proceed to move the Second Wheel in the
Biga of the Churches Hallelujah; which is Sionis Exultatio, Sions Rejoicing,
Sionis Exultatio. or, Sions Rejoicing for her Return.
for the Return of her Captivity; or, for her Return out of Captivity: which is
the next thing to be considered, the (...) the Quid faciendum, Ex part Populi;
What Gods People ought to do on their part, and return to God, by way of
thankfulness, for returning their Captivity: which is expressed in the last
words of my Text: Exultabit Jacob, 2. Quid faciendum; Ex part Populi.
Laetabitur Israel: Then shall Jacob rejoice, and Israel shall be right glad.

In which Topical Wheel* if time would permit me to turn it round, there are
two Spokes to be spoken of likew^se.

1. (...).
1. (...). 2. (...).
2. (...).
1. The Duty enjoined. 2. The Persons to perform it.
1. The Duty.
First, We should consider the duty enjoined; and that is twofold: 1.
Exultation: 2. Laetation.
Both which are set forth in the two Verbs. 1. (...). Shall Rejoice. 2. (...).
Shall be Glad.
Secondly, We should describe the persons that are enjoined to perform this
duty; and they are employed in the two names, 2. The Persons.
(...). Jacob. (...). Israel.

Then shall Jacob rejoice, and Israel shall be right glad.

There is a duplicity in both, though there ought to be simplicity in both.

The duty is twofold; and the persons have two names: Sincerity is required in
the duty enjoined: and Integrity in the persons that are to perform it.

And so, as we have two words to enforce the duty, 1. Exultabit. 2. Laetabitur.


So we have two names to express the persons, Jacob. Israel.


I should begin with the duty, which is twofold; 1. The duty twofold.
To Rejoice. 2. To Be glad.
And for the better understanding of both, I should have recourse to the
Etymology of the two words, (...). Shall Rejoice. (...). Shall be glad.


For if we will credit the judgment of Isidorus, he does tell us, Omnis rei
inspectio Etymologia cognita planior est; Isidorus:
The inspection of every thing is best known by the Etymology of the word. And
Plato before him gives this Rule, (...). Plato in Crat.
He that shall perfectly understand the meaning of the words, will the better
come to the knowledge of the things. And the reason is given by Cicero;
because, as he says, Cicer. in Top.
Verba sunt notae rerum; Words are the significant cognizances of things; And
so, from the original of the two Verbs; with the Adverbs accompanying them, in
the progress of our discussion, I should make you acquainted with three things,
which we are to observe in the duty enjoined.

1. The Nature of Rejoicing. and Being glad. 2. The Degree of Rejoicing. and
Being glad. 3. The Manner of Rejoicing. and Being glad.
But I am afraid I should break good manners, if I should enter into a degree
beyond the time, which is contrary to my nature: and therefore I shall here
break off for this time, and conclude all with a votive acclamation for the
King, by whose returning into his Kingdoms, and to his Throne, God has been
pleased to turn our late captivity. Now the Acclamation which I shall dedicate
to the King, was first given to Charles the fifth, sometimes Emperor of
Germany, and it is this: Carolo Augusto, a Deo Coronato, Magno and Pacifico
Germanorum Imperatori, Vita and Victoria. Which Acclamation, so ascribed to
Charles the fifth, then Emperor of Germany, I may with some alteration and
addition, not unaptly apply, but most appositely attribute, to our most
Magnificent and Puissant Prince, King Charles the Second: who, if you will not
allow him to be Emperor, yet he has an unquestionable Title to be Monarch of
Great Britain: and it shall be this; CAROLO SECUNDO, AUGUSTO, PIO, ET PACIFICO
BRITANNORUM IMPERATORI, A DEO DATO, A DEO CONSERVATO, A DEO CORONATO; LONGA
VITA, FELIX REGNUM, PERENNIS VICTORIA.

TO King Charles the Second, the most August, Pious, and Pacifick Emperor of
Great Britain, Given by God to us, Preserved by God for us, and at length,
Crowned by God amongst us; A long Life, a happy Reign; and continual Victory
over all his Enemies. And I hope all good Subjects will say, Amen.

Amen.

As for those Rebels, will not say Amen,
Let them be hanged, I say, again, again.
God Save the KING.
Jehovae Liberatori Gloria.
Glory to God, who had compassion on us;
And our Captivity so turned from us.
AMEN.
FINIS.

