The Triumphs of the Reformed Religion, in AMERICA.

The LIFE of the Renowned JOHN ELIOT; A Person justly Famous in the CHURCH of
GOD, Not only as an Eminent CHRISTIAN, and an Excellent MINISTER, among the
ENGLISH, But also, As a Memorable EVANGELIST among the INDIANS, of NEW ENGLAND;
With some Account concerning the late and strange Success of the Gospel, in
those parts of the World, which for many Ages have lain Buried in PAGAN
IGNORANCE.

Written by COTTON MATHER.

Blessed is that Servant, whom his Lord, when He comes, shall find SO Doing.

Boston, Printed by Benjamin Harris, and John Allen, for Joseph Brunning at the
corner of the Prison-Lane. 1691.

To the Right Honorable PHILIP Lord WHARTON. A no less Noble than Aged PATRON
of LEARNING and VIRTUE; And a Favorite of that Great KING Whos^ Throne is in
the Heavens, and whose Kingdom Rules over all.
May it please Your Lordship;
IF it be considered, that some Evangelical and Apostolical Histories of the
New Testament, were by the Direction of the Holy Spirit Himself, Dedicated unto
a Person of Quality, and tha^ the Noble Person Addressed with One such
Dedica^i^n, entertained it with Resentments that encouraged his dear Lucillius
to make a Second, the world Will be satisfied that I do a thing but Reas^nable
and Agreeable, when, unto a Narrative of many Evangelical and Apostolical
Affa^rs, I presume to prefix the Name of one so Excellent for Love to God, as
Your Lordship is known to be: and One upon this account only, an Unmeet subject
for the praises of the obscure pen which now writes, tha^ Quis Vituperat? I do
not, I dare not, so far Intrude upon Your Honor, as to ask Your Patronage unto
all the New-English Principles and Practices, which are found in the Character
of our Celebrated ELIOT; for; as the Distance of a Thousand Leagues, ha^ made
it impossible for me to attend the (usual) Orders and Manners of asking first
Your Allowance for what I have openly Entitled you unto; so, the Renowned ELIOT
is gone beyond any occasions for the greatest Humane Pa^ronage.

But that which has procured unto Your Lordship, the Trouble of this
Dedication, is, My Desire to Give You the Picture of One Aged Saint, Lately
gone to that General Assembly, which the Eternal King of Heaven, by the
Advances of Your Own Age in the way of Righteousness does quickly Summon Your
Self unto The Profound Respect which Our ELIOT had for Your Honor, will
doub^less be answered and requited with Your own Value for the Memory of such a
memorable Christian, Ministe^ and Evangelist; inasmuch as, Your Affections like
his, take not their Measures from these or those matters of Doub f^l
Dispu^atum, but from such an universal Pie^^, and Charity, and Holiness, as he
was an Instance of.

No man ever complained of it that in the works of Chrysostom, we find seven
Orations no^ for asunder, in Commendation of Paul: (...) it any fault that I
have now written One, in Commendation of a man whom a Pauline Spirit, had made
Illustrious. In describing him, I have made but little Touches upon his
Parentage, and Family, because as the truly Great Basil excuses his Omission of
those things, in his Oration upon Gordius the Martyr, Ecclesia haec tanquam
supervacaa dimittit. But I have related those things of him, which cannot but
create a good Esteem for him, in the Breast of your Lordship, who are a
Faithful and Ancient Witness against those Distempers of the world, whereby (as
the blessed Sal^ian Lamented it) Cogimur esse Viles ut Nobiles habeamur; and
Raise the sweetness of Your Thoughts upon Your Approaches, which may our God
make both slow and sure, unto that State, wherein, The Least is Greater than
this JOHN. But if I may more ingenuously Confess the whole Ground and Cause of
this Dedication, I must own, It Is to pay (...) part of a Debt; a Debt under
which You have laid my Country, when You did with Your Own Honorable Hand,
Present unto His Majesty the same Account, which I have here again Published,
Concerning the Success of the Gospel among the I^dians in New England.

My Lord, In one ELIOT, You see what a People it is, that You have counted
worthy of Your Notice; and what a People it is, that with a^dent Prayers bespeak
the Mercies of Heaven for Your Noble Family. Indeed, It is Impo^sible that a
country So full as New England is, of what is truly Primitive, should not be
exposed unto the bitterest Enmity and Calumny of those, that will strive to
entangle the Church in a Sardian Unreformedness, until our Jesus do shortly
Make them know, that He has loved, what they have hated, maligned, persecuted.
But if the God of New England have inclined any Great Personage, to Intercede
or Interpose for the prevention of the Ruins which ill men have designed for
such Country; or to procure for a a People of an Eliot's Complexion in
Religion, the Undisturbed Enjoyment and Exercise of that Religion: it is a
thing that calls for our most sensible Acknowledgments.

It is an odd Superstition which the Indians of this country have among them,
that they count it (on the penalty of otherwise never prospering more)
necessary for them, never to pass by the Graves of certain famous persons among
them, without laying and leaving some Token of Regard thereupon. But we hope
that all true Protestants, will count it no more (...) what is equal and
proper, that the Land which has in it, the Grave of such a Remarkable Preacher
to the Indians as our ELIOT, should be treated with such a Love, as a
Jerusalem, uses to find from them that are to prosper.

Upon that Score then, Let My Lord Accep^ a Present from and for a Remote
corner in the New World, where God is Praised on Your behalf; a small Present
made by the Hand of a Rude American, who has nothing to recommend him unto Your
Lordship, except this, That he is the SON of ONE whom You have admitted unto
Your Favors; and, That he is Ambitious to Wear the Title of,

MY LORD, Your Lordships Most Humble and most Obedient Servant, COTTON MATHER.

The LIFE of the Renowned JOHN ELIOT
Sic mihi contingat vivere, sicque mori*

The Introduction.
'TWas a very surprising as well as an undoubted Accident which happened within
the memory of Millions yet alive, when certain Shepherds upon Mount N^bo,
following part of their straggling Flock, at length came to a Valley, the
prodigious Depths and Rocks whereof rendered it almost inaccessible; in which
there was a Cave of inexpressible sweetness, and in that Cave was a Sepul^h^e
that had very difficult Char^cters upon it. The Patriarchs of the Maronites
thereabouts inhab ting, procured some learned Persons to take Notice, and make
Report of this Cu^iosity, who ^^und the Inscription of the Gravestone to be ^n
the Hebrew Language and Letter, Moses, the Servant of the Lo^d, The Jews, the
Greeks, and ^he Roman Catholics, thereabouts, were all together by the ears
for the possessi^n of this Ra^ity, but the Lu^k^ as quickly said Claim unto ^t,
and strongly guarded it. Nevertheless, the Jesuits found a way b^ Pricks and
Bribes to engage the Turkish Guards into a Conspiracy with them for the
Transporting of the enclosed and renouned Ashes into Europe; but when they
opened the grave, there was no Body, nor so much as a Relic there. While they
were under the confusion of this Disappointment, a Turkish General came upon
them and cut them all to pieces; therewithal taking a course never to have that
place visited any more. But the Scholars of the Orient presently made this a
Theme which they talked and wrote much upon; and, whether this were the true
Sepulcher of Moses, was a question upon which many Books were pub^^shed. The
world would now count Me very absurd, if after this I should say that I had
found the Sepulch^e of Moses, in Amer^ca but I have certainly here found Moses
himself; we have had among us, One appearing in the Spirit and Power of a
Moses; and it is not the Grave, but the Life of such a Moses, that we value our
selves upon being the owners of

Having implored the Assistence and Acceptance of that God whose Blessed Word
has told us, The Righteous shall be had in everlasting Remembrance; I am
attempting to write the Life of a Righteous Person concerning whom all things,
but the meanness of the Writer, invite the Reader to expect nothing save what
is truly Extraordinary. It Is the Life of One who has better and greater things
to be affirmed of him, than could ever be reported concerning any of those
famous men, which have been celebrated by the Pens of a Plutarch, a Pliny, a
L^^eritus, an Eunapius, or in any pagan Histories. It Is the Life of One whose
Character might ^ery agreeably be looked for among the Collections of a
Dorotheus, or the Orations of a Nazianzen; or is worthy at least of nothing
less than the exquisite Style of a Melchior Adam to E^ernize it. If it be, as
it is, a true Ass^rtion, That ^^e least Exercise of true Faith or Love toward
God in Christ, is a more glorious thing than all the ^riumphs of a Caesar,
there must be something very considerable, in the Life of One, who spent
several scores of years in such Exercises, and of One in the mention of whose
A^chievements we may also recount, that he fought the Devil in (once) his
American Territories, till he had recovered no small party of his old Subjects
and Vassals out of his cruel Hands; it would be as unreasonable, as
unprofitable, for posterity to bury the Memory of such a Person in the Dust of
that Obscurity and Oblivion, which has covered the Names of the Hero's, who
died before the Days of Ag^memnoi^.

PRAELIMINARY I. The Birth, Age, and Family of Mr. ELIOT.
It Is the Life of the Renowned John Eliot, which is to be now put into our
Pages; a Life which Commenced about the Year 1604. And Expired, in the Year
1690.

THe Inspired Moses relating the Lives of those Ante-diluvian Patriarchs, in
whom the Church of God and Li^e of Christ was continued, through the first
sixteen hundred years of Time recites little but their Birth, and their Age,
and their Death, and their Sons and Daughters. ^f those Articles would satisfy
the Appetites and Enquiries of such as come to B^ead the Life of our Eliot, we
shall soon have dispatc 'd the work now upon our Hands. The Age with the Death
of this worthy man, has ^een already terminated, in the Ninetieth year ^f the
present Century, and the Eighty sixth Year of his own Pilgrimage. And for his
Birth it was at a Town, in England; the Nam^ whereof I cannot presently
Recover; nor is (...) necessary for me to look back so far as the pla^^ of his
Nativity; any more than it is for me t^ recite the Virtues of his Parentage, of
which h^ said, vix ea nostra voco. The Atlantic Ocea^ like a River of Lethe,
may easily cause us t^ forget many of the things that happened o^ the other
side. Indeed the Nativity of such a man, were an Honor worthy the Contention
of as many places as laid their Claims unto the famous Homer's; but whatever
places may challenge a share in the Reputation of having Enjoyed the first
Breath of our Eliot, it is New England that with most Right can call him Hers;
his best Breath, and afterward, his last Breath was here; and here 'twas, that
God bestowed upon him Sons and Daughters.

He came to New England, in the Month of November. A. D. 1631. among those
Blessed old Planters, which laid the Foundations of a remarkable Country,
devoted unto the Exercise of the Protestant Religion, in its purest and highest
Reformation: He left behind him in England; a virtuous young Gentlewoman, whom
he had pursued and purposed a Marriage unto (...) and she coming hi^her the
year following, that Marriage was Consummated, in the Month of October, A. D.
1632.

This Wise of his youth lived with him until she became to him also the staff
of his Age; and (...) left him not until about three or four years before his
own Departure to those Heavenly ^egions, where they now together see Light. ^he
was a Woman very Eminent, both for Ho^^ness and Usefulness, and she excelled
most of ^he Daughters that have done virtuously. Her Name was Ann, and Gracious
was her Nature. ^od made her a Rich Blessing, not only to her ^amily, but also
to her Neighborhood; and when ^t last she dyed, I heard and saw her aged
Hus^and, who else very rarely wept, yet now with ^ears over the Coffin, before
the good people, (...) vast confluence of which were come to her ^uneral, say,
Here l^es my dear, faithful, pious, ^rudent, prayerful Wife; I shall go to her,
and she ^ot return to me! My Reader will of his own ac^ord excuse me, from
bestowing any further E^^taphs upon that gracious Woman.

By her, did God give him six worthy Chil^ren; Children of a character which
may for^ver stop the mouths of those Antichristian Blas^hemers, who have set a
false brand of Disaster and Infamy, on the Offspring of a Married Clergy. His
Firstborn, was a Daughter; born S^p. 17. A. C. 1633 This Gentlewoman is yet
alive, and one well-approved for her Piety and Gravity. His next was a Son;
born Aug. (...) A. C. 1636 He bore his Fathers Name, ^^d had his Fathers Gr^c^.
He was a person of ^otable Accompl^shments, and a lively, zealous, acute
Preacher, not only to the English, (...) New-Camb^idge, b^t also to the Indians
thereabout. He grew so fast, that he was found ^^p^ for Heaven, many years ago;
and upon hi^ Deathbed uttered such penetrating things a^ co^ld proceed from
none, but One upon the Borders and Confines of E^ernal Glory. It Is pity that so
many of them are forgotten; but one of them, I think, we have cause to
Remember; Well, (said he) my dear Friends; ^here is a dark day coming upon p^or
New England; and in so dark a day, I p^ay how will you p^ovide for your own
security! My Counsel to you is, get an Interest in the Blessed Lord Jesus
Christ; and that will carry you to the worlds end. His Third was also a Son,
born D^cemb 20 A. C. 1038. H^^ he called Joseph, and made a Joseph of him. This
person is at this time a Pa^tor to the Church at G^^ford, and One of great
Note, as well through the whole Country, as in the particular Colony of
Connecticus, which God has made him considerable to. His Fourth was a Samuel,
born, June 22 A. C. 164 who died, a most lovely young man eminent for Learning
and Goodness, a Fellow of the College, and a Candid^te of the Ministry. His
Fif^h was an Aaron, born Feb. 15. A. C. 1643 who tho he died very young yet
first manifested many good things towa^ds the Lord God of Israel. His Last, was
a Benjamin born Jan. 29. A. C. 1646. Of all these three it may be said, as it
was of Haran, They did before their Father; but it may also be written over
their Graves, All these died in Faith. By the pious Design of their Father,
they were all Consecrated unto the Service of God, in the Ministry of the
Gospel; but God saw meet rather to fetch them away, by a Death, which
(therefore) I dare not call, Praemature; to glorify him in another and a better
world. They, all gave such Demonstrations of their Conversion to God, that the
good old man would sometimes comfortably say, I h^ve had six Child en, and I
bless God, for His Fre^-grace, they are all either with Christ, or in Christ;
and my mind is now at rest concerning them. And when some asked him, how he
could bear the Death of such excellent Children, his humble Reply thereto wa^
^his, My desire was that they should have serv^d God on Earth; but if God will
choose to have the^ ^ather serve Him in Heaven, I have nothing to ob^ect
against it, but His Will be done! His Benjamin was made the Son of his
Righ^-hand; for the in^itation of the good people at R^xbury, placed ^im in the
same Pulpit with his Father, where ^e was his Assi^tent for many years; there
they ^ad a Proof of him, that as a Son wi^h his Father, ^e served with him in
the Gospel. But his Fate ^as like that which the great Gregory Nazian^^n
describes in his Discourse upon the Death ^f his honorable Brother, his aged
Father be^^g now alive and present; My Father, having ^id up in a better worl^,
a rich Inheritance for his Children, sent a Son of his before, to take
possession of it.

Praeliminary II.
Mr. Eliots, early Conversion, sacred Employment, and just Removal into America.

But all that I have hitherto said, is no more than an entrance into the
History of our Eliot. Such an Enoch as he, must have something more than these
things recorded of him; his Walk with God, must be more largely laid before the
world, as a thing that would bespeak us all to be Followers no less than we
shall be Admirers of it.

He had not passed many Turns in the world, before he knew the meaning of a
saving Turn from the Vanities of an Unregenerate State, unto God in Christ, by
a true Repentance; he had the singular happiness and privilege of an early
Conversion from the Ways, which Original Si^ disposes all men unto. One of the
princip^l instruments which the God of Heaven used in tingeing, and filling the
mind of this chose^ V^ss^l, with good principles, was that Venerable Thomas
H^ok^r, whose Name in the Churches o^ the Lord Jesus, is, As an Ointment poured
forth even that H^oker, of whom worthy Master Fuller could write, As Latymer
would not stick (...) say, Saint Bilney, so neither I to say, Saint Hooke^ that
Hooker, who having Angled many scores (...) Souls into the Kingdom of Heaven,
at last a^ his ^ones in our New England; it was an acquaintance with him, that
contributed more than a little to the Accomplishment of our Elisha, for that
work unto which the most High designed him. His liberal Education, having now
the Addition of Religion, to direct it, and improve it, it gave such a Biass to
his young Soul, as quickly discovered it self in very signal instances. His
first Appearance in the world after his Education in the University, was in the
too difficult and unthankful but very necessary Employment of a Schoolmaster,
which Employment he discharged with a good fidelity. And as this first Essay of
his Improvement was no more Disgrace unto him, than it was unto the famous
Hieron, Whitaker, Vines, and others, that they thus began to be serviceable; so
it rather prepared him, for the further service, which his mind was now set
upon. He was of worthy Mr. Thomas Wilson's mind, that the calling of a Minister
was the only one wherein a man might be more serviceable to the Church of God,
than in that of a Schoolmaster. Wherefore having Dedicated himself unto God
betimes, he could not Reconcile himself to any lesser way of Serving his
Creator and Redeemer, than the Sacred Ministry of the Gospel; but, alas, where
should he have Opportunities for the Exercising of it? The Laudian, Grotian,
and Arminian Faction in the Church-of- England, in the prosecution of their
Grand-plot, for the reducing of England unto a moderate sort of Popery, had
pitched u^ on this as one of their cursed methods for it namely, to creeple as
fast as they could, all the Learned, Godly, Painful Ministers of the Nation;
and invent certain Sinboleths for the detecting and the destroying of such men
as were cordial Friends to the Reformation. 'Twas now (...) time when there
were every day multiplied and imposed those unwarrantable Ceremonies in the
Worship of God, by which the Conscience of our considerate Eliot counted the
second Commandment notoriously violated; it was a time, when such memorable
Bishops as Wren, and Pierce, with others of ^h^t Co^spiracy, silenced,
censured, and ruined such Ministers as would not Read a B^ok for Sports on the
Lords Days, or did but use a Prayer of their own conceiving before or after
Sermon, or did but Preach on an^ Af^ernoon as well as in a morning, or on a
Lecture, or on a Market, or did but explain the Church-Catechism, or in any
wise discountenance the old Pagan Superstitions. or new beastly Debaucheries
among their miserable Neighbors. Moreover, it was now a time, when some hundreds
of those amiable people which had the Nickname of Puritans pu^ upon them,
transported themselves, with their whole Familie^ and Interests, into the
Deserts of America, tha^ they might here peaceably Erect Congregation Churches,
and therein a^tend and maintain al^ the pure Institutions of the Lord Jesus
Christ having the encouragement of Royal Charters, that they should never have
any interruption in the Enjoyment of those precious and pleasant things. Here
was a prospect which quickly determined the devout Soul of our young Eliot,
unto a Remove into New England, while it was yet a Land not sown; he quickly
Listed himself among those valiant Soldiers of the Lord Jesus, who cheerfully
encountered first the Perils of the Atlantic Ocean, and then the Fatigues of
the New-English Wilderness, that they might have an undisturbed Communion with
Him in His Appointments here. And thus did he betimes procure himself the
consolation of having afterward and for-ever a room in that Remembrance of
God, I remember thee, the kindness of thy youth, and the Love of thine
espousals, when thou wentest after me into the Wilderness.

On his first Arrival to ^ew-England, he soon joined himself unto the Church at
Boston; 'twas Church-work that was his Errand hither. Mr. Wilson, the Pastor of
that Church, was gone back into England, that he might perfect the Settlement
of his Affairs; and in his Absence, ^^^ng Mr. Eliot was he that supplied his
place. Upon the Return of Mr. Wilson, that Church was intending to have made
Mr. Eliot his Col^egue, and their Teacher; but it was thus di^erted. Mr. Eliot
had engaged unto a sel^ct ^umber of his pious and christian Friends in England,
that if they should come into these Parts before he should be in the pastoral
Car^ of any other people, he would give himself to Them, and be for Their
Service. It happened that these Friends transported themselves hither, the year
after him; and chose their Habitation at the Town which they called Roxbury. A
Church being now gathered at this place he was in a little while Ordained unto
the Teaching and Ruling of that holy Society. So 'twas in the Orb of that
Church that we ha^ him as a Star fixed for very near Threescor^ Years; it only
remains that we now observ^ what was his Magnitude all this while, and ho^ he
performed his Revolution.

Part I. Or, Eliot as a CHRISTIAN.
Article I. His Eminent PIETY.
SUch was the Piety of our Eliot, that like another M^ses, he had upon his Face
a continual shine, arising from his uninterrupted comunion with the Father of
Spirits He was ind^ a Man of Prayer, and might say after the P^^^mist, I
prayer, as being in a manner made up of it. Could the walls of his old Study
speak, they would even Ravish us with a Relation of the many hundred and
thousand servent Prayers which he there poured out before the Lord. He not only
made it his daily practice to enter into that closet, and shut his Door, and
pray to his Father in Secret, but he would not rarely set apart whole days for
prayer with Fasting, in secret places before the God of Heaven. Prayer
solemnized with Fasting was indeed so agreeable unto him, that I have sometimes
thought he might justly inherit the Name of, Johannes Jejunator, or, John the
Faster, which for the like reason was put upon one of the Renowned Ancients.
Especially, when there was any remarkable difficulty before him, he took this
way to encounter and overcome it; being of Dr. Prestons mind, That when we
would have an^ great things to be accomplished, the best policy is to work by
an Engine which the world sees nothing of. He could say as the pious Robertson
did upon his Deathbed, I thank God, I have loved Fasting and Prayer, with all
my heart! If one would have known what that sacred thing, The spirit of Prayer,
intends, in him there might have been seen a most luculent and practical
Exposition of it. He kept his heart in a frame for prayer, with a mavelous
constancy; and was continually provoking all that were about him thereunto.
When he heard any considerable News, his usual and speedy Reflection thereupon
would be^ Brethren, let us Turn all this into prayer! and he was perpetually
jogging the wheel of Prayer, both more privately in the Meetings, and more
publicly in the Churches of his Neighborhood. When he came to an House that
he was intimately acquainted with, he could often say, Come, let us not have a
visit without a prayer; let us pray down the Blessing of Heaven on your Family
before we go. Especially when he came into a Society of Ministers, before he
had sat long with them, they would look to hear him urging, Brethren, the Lord
Jesus takes much notice of what is done and said among his Ministers when they
are together; come, let us pray before we part! And hence also, his whole
Breath seemed in a sort made up of ejaculatory prayers, many scores of which
winged Messengers he dispatched away to Heaven, upon pious Errands every day.
By them he bespoke B^essings upon almost every person or affair that he was
concerned with; and he carried every thing to God with some pertinent
H^sannah's or Hallelujah's over it. He was a mighty and an happy man, that had
his Quiver full of these Heavenly Arrows! and when he was never so straightly
besieged by Humane Occurrences, yet he fastened the wishes of his devout Soul
unto them, and very dexterously shot them up to Heaven over the head of all.

As he took thus delight in speaking to the Almighty God, no less did he in
speaking of him, but in serious and savoury Discourses, he still had his
Tongue, like the Pen of a ready Writer. The Jesuits once at Nola made a no less
profane than severe Order, That no man should speak of God at all; but this
excellent person almost made it an Order wherever he came, to speak of nothing
but God. He was indeed sufficiently pleasant and witty in Company, and he was
affable and facetious rather than morose in Conversation; but he had a
Remarkable Gravity mixed with it, and a singular skill of Raising some holy
Observation out of whatever matter of Discourse lay before him; nor would he
o^dinarily dismiss any Theme without some gracious, divine, pithy Sentence
thereupon. Doubtless, he imposed it as a Law upon himself, tha^ he would leave
something of God, and Heaven and Religion, with all that should come a (...)
him; so that in all places, his company was a^tended with Majesty and
Reverence; and it wa^ no sooner proper for him to speak but, li^^ Mary's opened
Box of Ointment, he styled (...) whole Room with the perfumes of the Grace in
his Lips, and the Ch^^stian Hearers taste^ a gr^ater sweetness in his
^ell-seasoned Speeces, than the illu^^^^ous ^^^er ascribed (...) the Orations
of hi^ ^est*

Whole Lip dropped Lang^age tha^ (...) it (...) or abundance. His Conferences
were like those which Tertullian affirms to have been common among the Saints
in his Days, Vt qui sciret Dominum audire, as knowing that the Ear of God was
open to them all; and he managed his Rudder so as to manifest that he was bound
Heavenward, in ^is whole Communication. He had a particu^^^ ^art, at
Spiritualizing of Earthly Objects, and Raising of high thoughts from very mean
things. As, once going with some feebleness and weariness up the Hill on which
his Meeting House now stands, he said unto the person that led him, This is
very like the way to Heaven, it is up Hill! the Lord by his Grace fetch us up!
and instantly spying a Bush near him, he as nimbl^ added; And truly there are
Thorns and Briars i^ the way too! Which instance I would not have singled out
from the many thousands of hi^ Occasional Reflections, but only that I might
suggest unto the good people of Roxbury, something for them to think upon, when
they are going up to the House of the Lord. It is enough that as the Friend of
the famous Vrsin could profess that he never went unto him without coming away,
aut doctior aut melior, either t^^ ^iser or the bette^ from him; so, it is an
ackno^ledgment which more than one Friend of o^ Eliot's has made concerning
him, I was (...) with him, but ^^^ot, or might have got some (...) from him.

(...) hearing from the great God, was an ^^^rcise of like satisfaction unto
the Soul of this good man, with speaking either to him, or of him. He was a
mighty Student of the sacred Bible; and it was unto him as his necessary food.
He made the Bible his Companion, and his Councellor, and the holy lines of
Scripture more Enamoured him than the profane Ones of Tully, ever did the
famous Italian Cardinal. He would not upon easy terms, have gone one day
together, without using a portion of the Bible as an antidote against the
infection of Temptation. And he would prescribe it unto others, with his
probatum est upon it; as once particularly a pious Woman, vexed with a wicked
Husband, complaining to him, That bad Company was all the day still infesting
of her House, and what should she do? He advised her, Take the Holy Bible into
your Hand, when the bad Company comes, and you will soon drive them out of the
House* the woman made the experiment, and thereby cleared her House from the
Haunts that had molested it. By the like way 'twas that (...) cleared his Heart
of what he was loath (...) Nesting there. Moreover, if ever any man could, he
might, pretend unto that evidence o^ Uprightness, Lord, I have loved the
Habitation o^ ^hine House; for he not only gave somethi^^ more than his
presence there twice on (...) Lords Days, and once a Fortnight besides (...)
b^ Lectures, in his own Congregation ou^ (...) made his weekly visits unto the
Lectures in the Neighboring Towns; how often was he seen at Boston,
Charlst^^n, Camb^i^ge, ^or^^^ster, waiting upon the Word of God, in the
Recurring Opportunities, and counting a Day in the Courts of the Lord better
than a thousand? It is hardly conceivable, how in the m^dst of so many Studies
and Labors as he was at home engaged in, he could possibly repair to so many
Lectures abroad; and herein he aimed, not only at his own Edification, but at
the Countenancing and Encouraging of the Lectures which he went unto. Thus he
took heed, that he might Hear, and he took as much heed how he He^rd; he set
himself as in the presence of the Eternal God, as the great Constantine used of
old, in the Assemblies where he came, and said, I will hear what God the Lord
will speak; he expressed a diligent attention, by a watchful and wak^f^l
posture, and by turning to the Texts quo^ed by the Preacher; he expressed a
suitable aff^c^ion by feeding on what was delivered, and accompanying it with
hands and eyes devoutly e^evated; and they whose good hap 'twas to go ^ome with
him, were sure of having another Sermon by the way, until their very Hear^^
burned in them. L^ct^ntius truly said, Non e^ ^era Religio, qua cum ^emplo
^elinquitur; but o^^ Eliot always carried much of Religion with him from the
House of God.

In a word, he was one who Lived in He^^^ while he was on Earth; and there is
no more the pure Justice in our endeavors that he should Live on Earth after
he is in Heaven. We cannot say that we ever saw him walking any whither but he
was therein walking with God; wherever he sat^, he had God by him, and it was
in the Everlasting Arms of God th t he Si^pi at n^ght. M^thoughts he a little
discovered his Heavenly way of livi^g, when walk^ng one day in his Garden, he
^luck^d ^p a w^^d that he saw now and then growing there; at when a Friend
pleasantly said unto him, Sir, you tell us, we must be Heavenly-(...); but he
immediately Reply d, I^ is ^^re; and ^his is no impediment unto that; for were
I s^re to go to H^aven to morrow, I would do what I do to D^^. From such a
frame of spirit it was that once in a visi^, fi^ding a Merchant in his Counting
House, where he saw Books of B^sines^ only on his Table, b^t all his Books of
Devo^io^ on the shelf, he gave this Advise unto him, Sir, Here Is Earth ^n the
Table, and Heaven on the she^f; pray d^^'t sit so much at the Table as
altogether to f^rget the shelf; let not earth by any ^ea^s thr^st H ^ve^^ out
of your mind.

Indeed I cannot gi^e a fuller Description of him, than what was in a
Paraphrase tha^ I have heard himself to make upon that Scripture, ^ur
Co^v^^sa^i ^is to H^aven. I writ from him as he uttered it.

Behold Said he, the Ancient and Excellent Character of a true Christian; it is
that which ^eter calls Holiness in all manner of Conversation; you shall not
find a Christian out of the way of Godly Conversation. For, first, a seventh
part of our time is all Spent in Heaven, when we are duly zealous for and
zealous on, the Sabbath of God. Besides, God has written on the Head of the
Sabbath Remember; which looks both Forwards and Backwards; and thus a good part
of the week will be spent in Sabbatizing. Well, but for the rest of our Time!
why, we shall have that spent in Heaven, ere we have done. For, Secondly, we
have many days for both Fasting and Thanksgiving, in our pilgrimage; and here
are so many Sabbaths more. Moreover, Thirdly, we have our Lectures every week;
and pious people, will not miss them, if they can help it. Furthermore, fourthly,
We have our private Meetings wherein we pray, and sing, and Repeat Sermons, and
confer together about the things of God; and being now come thus far, we are in
Heaven almost every day. But a little farther, Fifthly, we perform
Family Duties every day; we have our morning and evening Sacrifices, wherein
having read the Scriptures to our Families, we call upon the Name of God, and
ever now and then carefully Catechize those that are under our Charge. Sixthly,
we shall also have our daily Devotions in our Closets; wherein unto
Supplication before the Lord, we shall add some serious Meditation upon his
Word; a David will be at this work no less than thrice a day. Seventhly, We
have likewise many scores of Ejaculations in a day; and these we have, like
Nehemiah, in whatever place we come into. Eighthly, We have our Occasional
Thoughts, and our Occasional Talks, upon spiritual matters; and we have our
Occasional Acts of Charity, wherein we do like the Inhabitants of Heaven every
day. Ninthly, In our Callings, in our civil Callings, we keep up Heavenly
Frames; we buy and sell and toil, yea, we eat and drink, with some eye both to
the Command and the Honor of God in all. Behold, I have not now left an inch
of time to be carnal; it is all Engrossed for Heaven. And yet, lest here should
not be enough, Lastly, We have our spiritual Warfare. We are always
Encountering the Enemies of our Souls, which continually raises our hearts unto
our Helper and Leader in the Heavens. Let no man say, It Is impossible to live
at this rate; for we have known some live thus; and others that have written of
such a life, have but spun a Web out of their own blessed experiences.
New England has Examples of this life; tho, alas, it is to be lamented, that the
Distractions of the world, in too many professors do becloud the beauty of an
Heavenly Conversation. In fine, our Employment lies in Heaven. In the morning,
if we ask, Where am I to be to day? Our Souls must answer, In Heaven. In the
evening if we ask, Where have I been to day? Our Souls may answer t^ Heaven. If
thou art a Believer, thou art no stranger to H ^ven while thou live; and when
^hou dyest, Heaven will be no strange place to thee; no, thou have been there a
thousand times before.

In this language have I heard him express himself; and he did what he s^id; he
was a Boniface as well as a Benedict; and he was one of those Qui faciendo
docent, quae facienda docent.

It might be said of him, as that Writer characterises O^igen, Quemadmodum
doeuit, sic vi^it, and quemadmodum vixit sit docuit.

Article II. His particular care and zeal about the Lord's Day.
THis was the Piety, this the Holiness of our Eliot; but among the many
instances in which his H^liness was remarkable, I must not omit his exact
Remembrance of the Sabbath Day, to keep it holy.

It has been truly and justly Observed, Tha^ our whole Religion fares according
to our Sabbaths, that poor Sabbaths make poor Ch^istian^ and that a strictness
in our Sabbaths inspires vigor into all our other Duties. Our Eliot knew this,
and it was a most Exemplary zeal that he acknowledged the Sabba^h of our Lord
Jesus Christ withal. Had he been asked, Servasii Dominicum? he could have made
a right Christian primitive answer thereunto. The Sun did not set, the evening
before the Sabbath, till he had begun his preparation for it; and when the
Lord's Day came, you might have seen John in the Spirit, every week. Every day
was a sort of Sabbath to him, but the Sabbath day was a kind, type, a taste of
Heaven with him. He labored, that he might on this High-day, have no words or
thoughts but such as we e agreeable ^hereunto; he then allowed in himself no
Actions, but those of a Ra^sed Soul. One should hear nothing dropping from his
Lips on this day, but the milk and honey of the Country, in which there yet
remains a ^est for the people of God; and if he beheld in my person whatsoever,
whether old or young, my profanation of this day, he would be sure to ^estow
lively Rebukes upon it. And hence al^o unto the general Engagements of a
Covenant ^ith God, which 'twas his Desire to bring the ^ndians into, he added a
particular Article, wherein they bind themselves, mehquontamunat ^abbath,
pahketeaunat tohsohke pomantamog; i. e. ^o Remember the Sabbath Day, to keep it
holy, as ^ong as we live.

The mention of this, gives me an opportunity, not only to Recommend our
Departed Eliot, but also to Vindicate another great man, unto the Churches of
our Lord Jesus Christ. The Reverend and Renowned OWEN in his Elaborate
Exercitations on, The Lord's Day, had let fall such a passage of this

I judge, that the Observation of the Lord's Day is to be Commensurate unto the
use of our natural strength, on any other day; from morning to night. The
Lord's Day is to be s^t apart unto the ends of an holy Rest unto God, by every
one according as his natural strength will enable him to employ himself in his
lawful Occasions any other day of the week.

This passage gave some scandal unto several very Learned and Piou^ M^n; among
whom our Eliot was one; whereupon with his usual zeal, gravity and sanctity, he
wrote unto the Doctor, his Opinion thereabout; who returned unto him an answer
full of Respect, some part where of I shall here transcribe.

As to what concerns the Natural strength of man (says he) Either I was under
some mistake in my Expression, or you seem to be so, i^ your Apprehension. I
never thought, and (...) hope, I have not said, for I cannot find it that the
Continuance of the Sabbath is to b^ commensurate unto the natural strength of
man but only that it is an Allowable mean of me^ Continuance in Sabbath Duties,
which I su^pose you will not deny, lest you should ca^ the Consciences of
professors into inextricable Difficulties.

When first I engaged in that work, I intended not to have spoken one word
about the practical Obs^rvation of the Day; but only to have endeavored the
Revival of a Truth which at present is despised and contemned among us, and
strenuously opposed by sundry Divines of the United Provinces, who call the
Doctrine of the Sabbath, Figmentum Anglicanum. Upon the Desire of some Learned
Men in these parts, it was, that I undertook the Vindica^ion of it. Having now
discharged the Debt, which in this matter I owed unto the Truth and Church of
God, tho not as I ought, yet with such a composition as I hope, through the
Interposition of our Lord Jesus Christ might find acceptance with God and his
Saints, I suppose I shall not again engage on that Subject.

I suppose there is scarce an^ one alive in the world, who has more Reproaches
cast upon him than I have; tho hitherto God has been pleased in some measure to
support my spirit under them. I still relieved my self by this, That my poor
Endeavors have found acceptance with the Churches of Christ: But my holy,
wise, and gracious Father, sees it needful to try me in this matter also; and
what I have received from you (which it may be contains not your sense alone)
has printed deeper, and left a greater impression upon my mind, than all the
virulent Revilings, and false Accusations I have met withal, from my professed
Adversaries. I do acknowledge unto you, that I have a dry and barren Spirit,
and I do heartily beg your prayers, that the Holy One would, notwithstanding
all my sinful provocations, water me from above; but that I should now be
apprehended to have given a wound unto Holiness in the Churches, it is one of
the saddest frowns in the cloudy B^ows of Divine Providence.

The Doctrine of the Sabbath, I have asserted, though not as it should be done,
yet as well as I could; The Observation of it in Holy Duties unto the utmost of
the strength for them, which God shall be pleased to give us, I have pleaded
for; the necessity also of a serious preparation for it in sundry praevious
Duties, I have declared. But now to meet with severe Expressions -- It may be
it is the will of God, tha^ vigor should hereby be given to my form
Discouragements, and that there is a Call i^ it, to surcease from these kinds
of labors.

I have transcribed the more of this Lette^ because it not only discovers the
concern which our Eliot had for the Sabbath of God, but als^ it may contribute
unto the worlds good Rece^tion and Perusal of a golden Book on that Su^ject,
written by one of the most Eminent Persons which the English Nation has been
adorn^ with.

Article III. His Exemplary Mortification.
THus did Eliot endeavor to live unto God; but how much at the same time did
he dye unto all the world?

'Twere impossible to finish the lively Picture of this pious and holy Eliot,
without some touches upon that Mortification, which accompanied him all his
days; for never did I see a person more mortified unto all the pleasures of
this Life, or more unwilling to moult the wing^ of an Heaven-born Soul, in the
dirty puddles of carnal and sensual Delights. We are all of us compounded of
those two things, the Man, and, the Beast; but so powerful was, The Man, in
this holy person, that it kept, The Beast, ever tied with a short Tender and
suppressed the irregular Calcurati^ns of it. He became so nailed unto the Cross
of the Lord Jesus Christ, that the Grandeurs of this world were unto him just
what they would be to a dying man; and he maintained an almost unparal^el'd
indifferency toward all the pomps, which Mankind is too generally flattered
and enchan^ed with.

The Lust of the flesh he could not reconcile himself to the least pampering or
indulging of; but he persecuted it with a continual A^tipathy; being upon
higher principles than Tully was acquainted withal, of his mind, Non est dignus
nomine hominis, qui non ^ di^^^ ^otum velit esse in isto genere voluptatis. The
Sleep that he allowed himself cheated him not of his Morning-hours; but he
reckoned the Morning no less a friend unto the Graces, than unto the Muses. He
would call upon Students, I pray look to it that you be morning-Birds! and for
many more than a score of years before he dyed, he removed his Lodging into his
Study, on purpose that being there alone, he might enjoy his ea^ly Mornings,
without giving the disturbance of the least noise to any of his Friends, whose
Affections to him else might have been ready to have called, Master spare thy
self. The Meat upon which he lived was a Cibus simplex, an homel^ but an
wholesome Diet. Rich Varieties, costly V^ands, and poinant Sauces, came not
upon his own Table, and when he found them on other men's, he rarely tasted of
them. O^e Dish and a plain one, wa^ his Dinner; and when invited unto a Feast,
(...) have seen him sit Magnifying of God, for the Plenty which His people in
this Wilderness we^^ within a few years arisen to; but not more than a Bit or
two of all the Dainties taken in^^ his own mouth all the while. And for a
Supper he had learned of his loved and blessed Patron old Mr. Cotton, either
wholly to omit it, or t^ make a small sup or two the utmost of it. The drink
which he still used was very small; he cared not for Wines or Drams, and I
believe, he never once in all his life knew what it was to feel so much as a
noxious fume in his head, from any of them; good, clear water was more
precious, as well as more usual with him, than any of those Liquors with which
men do so frequently spoil their own Healths, while perhaps they drink, those
of other men. When at a strangers House in the Summer time, he has bin
entertained with a glass, which they told him was Of water and wine, he has
with a complaisant gravity replied unto this purpose; Wine, it is a noble
generous Liquor, and we should be humbly th^nkful for it; but as I remember,
Water was made before it! So abstemious was he; and he found, that, Carere
suavitatibus istis, his Abstinence had more sweetness in it, than any of the
sweets which he abstained from; and so willing he was to have others partake
with him in that sweetness, that when he has thought the countenance of a
Minister has locked, as if he had made much of himself, he has gone to him with
that Speech, S^udy Mortification, Brother! study Mortification! and he made all
his Addresses with a becoming Majesty.

The Lust of the Eye, was put out by him in such a manner, that it was in a
Manner all one with him to be rich or poor. It could not be said of him, That
he sought great things for himself; but what estate he became owner of, was
from the Blessing of God upon the Husbandry and Industry of some in his Family,
rather than from any endeavors of his own. Once when there stood several Kine
of his own before his door, his Wife, to try him, asked him, Whose they were?
and she found that he knew nothing of them. He could not endure to plunge
himself into secular Designs and Affairs, but accounted Sacerdos in foro as
worthy of Castigation as Mercator in Templo; he thought that Minister and
Market-man, were not Unisons, and that the Earth was no place for Aaron's holy
Miter to be laid upon. It was the Usage of most Parishes in the Country, to
have an annual Rate for the maintenance of the Ministry, adjusted commonly by
the select-men of the Towns; which tho it raised not any exuberant Salaries for
the Ministers, who also seldom received all that the people had contracted
for, nevertheless i^ many places it prevented sore Temptations from befalling
those that were laboring in the Wor^ and Doctrine; who must else often have
experienced the Truth of Luthers Observation, Duriter profecto and misere
viverent Evangelij Ministri si ex Libera populi contributione essent
sustentan^^ However, for his part, he propounded that wh^^ stipend he had,
should be Raised by Contribution and from the fame temper it was, that a f^^
years before his Dissolution, being left without an Assistent in his Ministry,
he pressed his Congregation to furnish themselves with another Pastor; and in
his Application to them, he told them, It Is possible, you may think the burden
of maintaining two Ministers may be too heavy for you; but I Will deliver you from
that fear; I do here gave back my Salary to the Lord Jesus Christ, and now,
Brethren, you may fix that upon any man, that God shall make a Pastor for you.
But his Church wi^h an handsome Repl^, assured him, Tha^ they would count his
very p^esence worth a Salary, when he should be so superannuated as to do no
further Service for them.

And as for the Pride of Life, the Life of it was most exemplarily ex^ingu sh'd
in him. The Humility of his Heart made him, Higher by the Head than the rest of
the people. His Havit and Spirit were both such as declared him to be among the
Lowly, whom God has most Respect unto. His Apparel was without any Ornament,
except that of H^mility, which the Apostle Elegantly compares to a knot of
Comely Ribb^ns, in the Text where he bids us to be clothed w^^h it; any other
flanting Ribb^ns on those that came in his way he would ingenio^sly animadvert
upon; and seeing some Scholars once, he thought, a little too gaudy in their
Clothes, H^miliamini, Juvenes, Humuliamini, was his immediate complement unto
them. Had you seen him with his Leathern Gardae (for such an one he wore) about
his Loins, you would almost have thought what Herod feared, That John Baptist
was come to life again. In short, he was in all Regards, A Nazarite indeed;
unless in this one, that long Hair was always very loathsome to him; he was an
acute Ramist, but yet he professed himself a lover of a Trichotomy. Doubtless,
it may be lawful for us to accommodate the length of our Hair unto the modest
Customs which vary in the Churches of God; and it may be lawful for them that
have not enough of their own Hats for their own Health, to supply themselves
according to the sober modes of the places where they live. But the Apostle
tells us, Nature teaches us, that if a man have long hair, it is a shame to him;
where, by Nature can be meant, no other than, The difference of Sex; as the
word elsewhere is used.

Thus Mr. Eliot thought that for Men to wear their H^ir with a luxurious,
Delicate, Faeminine prolixity; or for them to preserve no plain Distinction of
their Sex, by the Hair of their Head and Face; and much more, for men thus to
disfigure themselves with Hair that is N^me of their own; and most of all, for
Ministers of the Gospel to ruffle it in Excesses of this kind; may prove more
than we are well aware, displeasing to the Holy Spirit of God. The H^ir of them
that professed Religion, long before his Death, grew too long for him to
swallow; and he would express himself continually with a boiling zeal
concerning it, until at last he gave over, with some Regret complaining, The
Lust is become insuperable! I know not whether that horrible Distemper
prevailing in some Europaean Countries known by the name of Plica polo^ica,
wherein the Hair of people matted into ugly and filthy forms, like Snakes upon
their heads, which whosoever cut off presently fell blind or mad; I say, I know
not whether this Disease was more odious in it self, than the sweeter, neater,
but prolix Locks of many people were to our Eliot. He was indeed one priscis
moribus, as well as Antiqua si^e; and he might be allowed somewhat even of
severity, in this matter on that account.

My Reader shall have a Touch or two, from a Manuscript of his, which I have in
my hands, against (as he calls it) The violent and insuperable Lust of Long
Hair. He thus argues.

It Is a sin for a man to do that whereof he has cause to be asha^ed, Pro.
14.34. Romans 6.21.

But it is a shame for a man to wear long hair, 1 Cor. 11.14. Therefore it is a
Sin.

Obj. It was then so; but now it is a fashion and glory to do otherwise.

Ans. Nature is the same now as then; Unchangeable. It speaks as loud now as it
did then; only our Ears are so covered with Locks, that we cannot hear it!

Again, Long Hair on the Head, and No Hair on the Face, is the Habit of a
Woman, 1 Cor. 11.16. But it is a sinful Abomination for a Man to wear the Habit
of a Woman, Deuteronomy. 22.5.

Therefore it is a ^inful Abomination, for a man to wear long Hair on his Head,
and no H^^^ on his F^ce.

With ^^^^e, and many other such persuasions did he endeavor to obvia e the
Luxury, which he saw the crimes degenera^ing apace into; and he added hereunto
his own Example, as a continual and effectual Sermon against what he thought
was to be, co^d^mned in the world.

For m^ own part, I cannot think Wigs unlawful things, but I must concur with
Mr. Eliot, so far as to think, that Im^oder^cy in them, as in Meats and in
Drink^ is very sinful.

Article IV. His Exq^ ^^te Charity.
HE that will w^^te of Eliot, must write of ^hari^^, or say nothing His Charity
was a S^ar of the ^i^st M^gnitude in the bright Constellation of his Virtues;
and the Rays of it were wonderfully various and extensive.

His Liberality to pious Uses, whether public or private, w^nt much beyond the
proportions of his little Estate in the world. Many Hundreds of Pounds did he
freely bestow upon the poor; and he would with a very forcible importunity
press his Neighbors to jo^n with him, in such Beneficences. 'Twas a mavelous
Alacrity, with which he embraced a^l opportunities of Relieving any, tha^ were
miserable; and the good people of ^oxbury doubtless cannot remember (but the
Righteous God will!) how often, and with what Ardors, with what Arguments, he
became a Beggar to them, for Collections in their Assemblies to support such
needy O^j^cts, as had fallen under his Observation. The poor counted him their
Father, and repaired still unto him, with a f^^ial confidence in their
Necessi^ies; and they were more than seven or ^igh^, or indeed than so many
scores, who rec ived their po^tions of his Boun^y. Like that worth^ and famous
Engl sh General, he could not persuade himself, That he had any thing but what
he gave away; but he drove a mighty Trade at such Exercises as he thought would
f^rnish him with Bil^s ^f Exc^^nge, which he hoped after many days to find the
comfort of; and yet after all, he would say like one of the most charitable
Souls that ever lived in the World, Tha^ looking over his Accounts, he could no
where fi d ^he God of Heaven charged a Debtor there. He did not put off his
Charity, to be put in his last Will, as many who therein show that their
Charity is against their will; but he was his own Administrator; he made his
own ^^ands his Executors, and his own Eyes his Overs^ers. It has been Remarked,
That liberal men are often long-lived m n; so do they after ma^y days find the
B^e^d with which the^ have been willing to keep o^^er men ^^^e. The great age
of our Eliot was but agreeable to this Remark; and when his Age had unfitted
him for almost all Employments, and bereaved him of those Gifts and Parts which
once he had been Accomplished with, being asked, How he did? he would sometimes
answer, Alas, I have lost every thing; my Understanding leaves me, my Memory
fails me, my Utterance fails me; but I thank God, my Charity holds out still; I
find that rather grows than fails! And I make no question, That at his Death,
his happy Soul was Received, and welcomed, into the everlasting Habitations, by
many scores got thither before him, of such as his Charity had been liberal
unto.

But besides these more Substantial Expressions of his Charity, he made the
Odours of that Grace yet more fragrant unto all that were about him, by that
Pittifulness and that Peaceableness, which rendered him yet further Amiable. If
any of his Neighborhood were in distress, he was like a Brother born for their
Adversity; he would visit them, and comfort them, with a most Fraternal
Sympathy; yea, it is not easiy to recount how many whole days of Prayer with
Fasting he has got his Neighbors to keep with him, on the behalf of those
whose Calamities he found himself touched withal. It was an extreme
Satisfaction to him, that his Wife had attained unto a considerable skill in
Physic and Chyrurgery, which enabled her to dispense many safe, good, and
useful Medicines, unto the Poor that had occasion for them; and some hundreds
of sick and weak and maimed people owed praises to God, for the Benefit which
therein they freely received of her. The good Gentleman, her Husband would
still be casting Oil into the Flame of that Charity, wherein she was of her own
accord abundantly forward thus to be doing of good unto all; and he would urge
her to be serviceable unto the worst Enemies that he had in the world. Never
had any man fewer Enemies than he! But once having delivered something in his
Ministry, which displeased one of his Hearers, the man d^d passionately abuse
him for it, and this both with Speeches and with Writings that reviled him. Yet
it happening not long after, that this man gave himself a very dangerous Wound,
Mr. Eliot immediately sends his Wife to cure him; who did accordingly. When the
man was well he came to thank her; but she took no Rewards; and this Good man
made him stay and eat with him, taking no notice of all the Calumnies with
which he had loaded him; but by this Carriage he strangely mollifyed and
conquered the Stomach of his Reviler.

He was also a great Enemy to all Contention, and would ring a loud
Courseu-Bell wherever he saw the Fires of Animosity. When he heard any
Ministers complain, that such and such in their Flocks, were too difficult for
them, the strain of his Answer still was, Brother, Compass them! and Brother,
Learn the meaning of those three little Words, Bear, Forbear, Forgive. Yea, his
Inclinations for Peace, indeed sometimes almost made him to sacrifice Right it
self. When there was la^d before an Assembly of Ministers, a b^ndle of Papers,
which con ained certain mat^ers of Difference and Contention, between some
people which our Elio^ thought should rather unite, with an Amnesty upon all
their former Quarrels, he (with some Imitation of what Constantine did upon the
l^ke occasi^n) hastily threw the papers in^o the Fire before them all, and with
a zeal f^r peace as h^^ as that F^^^, sa^d immediately, B^eth^en, wonder not at
what I have done; I did it on my knees this m^rning before I came among you.
Such an ex^^ss (if it were one fl^w^d from his Charitab^e Inc^ina ions ^o be
sound among those Peace-m^^ers when by following the Exemple of that Man who is
our Peace, come to be called, The children of God. Very worth ly might he be
called an Ire^ae^s, as being all for Peace; and the Commendation which
Epiphanius gives unto the Ancient of that Name, did belong unto our Eliot, he
was a most bl^ss^d and a most holy man. He d sliked all sorts of B^^very; but
yet with an ingenious Note upon the Greek word in Col. ^.15 he propounded, That
peace might brave it among us. In short, wherever he came, it was like
another old John, with solemn and earnest perswasives to love, and when he
could say little else, he would give that Charge, My Children, love one another!

Finally, 'twas his Charity which disposed him to continual Apprecations for
and Benedictions on those that he met withal; he had, an Heart full of good
Wishes and a Mouth full of kind Blessings for them. And he often made his
Expressions very wittily agreeable to the circumstances which he saw the
persons in. Sometimes when he came into a Family, he would call for all the
young people in it that so he might very Distinctly lay his holy hands upon
every one of them, and bespeak the mercies of Heaven for them all.

Article. V. Some Special Seize, that were the Effects of his Piety, and
Charity.
But what was the Effect of this Exemplary Piety, and Charity in our Eliot? It
will be no wonder, to my Reader, if I tell him, That this good man walked in
the light of Gods Countenance all the day long. I believe he had a continual
Assurance of the divine Lo e, marvellously Sealing, Strengthening, and
Refreshing of him, for many lustres of years before he Died; and for this
cause, the fear of Death was Extirpated out of his heavenly Soul, more than out
of most men alive. Had our blessed Jesus at any time sent his Wggons to fetch
this old Jacob away, he would have gone without the least Reluctancies.
Laboring once under a Feavour and Ague, a Visi^ant asked him, How he did? and
he Replied Very well, but anon I expect a paroxysm. Sa^d the Visi^ant, Sir,
fear not; but unto that he answered, Fear! No, no; I been't afraid, I thank
God, I been t afraid to Die! Dying would not have been any more to him, than
Sleeping to a weary man.

And another Excellency, which accompanied this Courage and Comfort in him was,
A wonderful Resignation to the Will of God, in all Events. There were sore
Afflictions that sometimes befell him; especially when he followed some of his
hopeful and worthy Sons, two or three desirable Preachers of the Gospel, to
their Graves. But he sacrificed them, l ke another Abraham; with such a sacred
ind^fferency, as made all the Spectators to say, This could not be done without
the Fear of God. Yea, he bore all his Trials with an admirable patience, and
seemed loath to have any will of his own, that should not be wholly melted and
molded into the Will of his Heavenly Father. Once being in a Boat at Sea, a
larger Vessel unhappily Overrun, and Over-set that little one which had no
small Concerns, because Eliot's in the bottom of it; he immediately sunk
without any expectation of ever going to Heaven a^y other way; and when he
imagined that he had but one breath more to draw in the world, it was this, The
will of the Lord be done! but it was the will of the Lord, that he should
survive the danger; for (...) was rescued by the help that was then at hand,
and he that had long been like Moses in eve^^ thing else, was now dr^wn out of
the Wate^ (...) Which gives me oppor^unity to mention or Remarkable that had
some Relation hereunto. This Accident happened in the Time of our Indian Wars,
when some furious English People that clamoured for the ex^irpation of the
P^aying Indians, which were in subjection unto us, as well as the Pagan Indians
that were in Hostility against us, vented a very wicked Rage at our holy Eliot,
because of his concernment for the Indians; and one profane Monster hearing how
narrowly Mr. Eliot escaped from Drowning, it is said, he wished this man of God
had then been Drowned. But within a few da^s, that woeful man by a strange
Disaster wa^ Drowned in that very place, where Mr. Eliot had received his
Deliverance.

There was indeed a certain health of Soul which he arrived unto; and he kept
in a b^essed measure clear of those Distempers which too often disorder the
most of men. But the God of Heaven favored him with something that was yet
more Extraordinary! By getting and keeping near to God, and by dwelling under
the shadow of the Almighty, ^he contracted a more exquisite sense of mind, than
what is usual among other Professors of Christianity; he sometimes felt a lively
touch of God upon his refined and exalted Spirt, which were not in any paper of
ours lawful or easy to be uttered; and he was admitted unto a singular
Familiarity with the Holy One of Israel. Hence 'twas, that as Bodies of a rare
and fine constitution, will for^bode the Changes of the Weather, so the
sublimed Soul of our Eliot often had strange Forebodings of things that were to
come I have been astonished at some of his Predictions, that were both of a
more personal, and of a more general Application, and were followed with exact
Accomplishmen^s. If he said of any Affair, I cannot bless it! it was a wo^se
Omen to it, than the most inauspicious praesages in the world; but sometimes
after he had been with God about a thing, he was able successfully to foretell,
I have set a mark upon it, it will do well? I shall never forget, That when
England and Holland were plunged into the unhappy War, which the more sensible
Protestants everywhere had but sorrowful Apprehensions of, our Eliot being in
the height and heat of the War, privately asked, What News we might look for
next? answered unto the surprise of the Enquirer, Our next News will be, a
peace between the two Protestant Nations; God knows, I pray for it every day;
and I am verily persuaded, we shall bear of at speedily! and it came to pass
accordingly.

It is to be confessed, That the written Word of God, is to be regarded as the
perfect and only Rule of our Lives; that in all Articles of Religion if men
speak not according to this word, there is no light in them; and that it is no
warrantable or convenient thing for Christians to look for such Inspirations as
directed the Prop^et^ that were the Penmen of the Scriptures. Nevertheless,
there are some uncommon Instances of Communion and Fruition, which in our days
the Sovereign God here and there favors a good man withal; and they are very
Heavenly persons, persons well purified from the Faecul^n^tes of Sensuality,
and persons better purged from the Leaven of envy and malice, and intolerable
pride, than usually those vain pretenders to Revelations, the Quakers, are,
that are made partakers of these Divine Dainties. Now such an one was our
Eliot; and for this, wo^thy to be had in everlasting Remembrance.

It would not be improper, under this File to lodge the singular and surprising
successes of his Pr^y rs! for they were such, that in our distresses we still
repaired unto him, under that encouragement, He is a Pr^phet, and he shall pray
for thee, and thou stalt Live. I shall single out but one, from the many that
might be mentioned. There was a godly Gentleman of Charlstown, one Mr. Foster,
who with his Son, was taken Captive by Turkish Enemies Much prayer was
employed, both privately and publicly, by the good people here, for the
Redemption of that Gentleman; but we were at last informed, that the bloody
Prince in whose Dominions he was now a Slave, was resolved that in his
Lifetime no Prisoner should be released; and so the Distressed Friends of this
Prisoner, now concluded, Our Hope is lost! Well upon this, Mr Eliot in some of
his next prayers, before a very solemn Congregation, very broadly begged,
Heavenly Father, work for the Redemption of thy poor Servant Foster; and if the
Prince which detains him will not, as they say, dismiss him as long as himself
lives, Lord, we pray thee to kill that cruel Prince; kill him, and glorify thy
self upon him. And now, behold the answer. The poor Captived Gentleman quickly
Returns to us that had been mourning for him as a lost man, and brings us News,
that the Prince which had hitherto held him was come to an untimely Death, by
which means he was now set at Liberty. Thus we now know, That a Prophet has
been among us!

Part II. Or, Eliot, As a MINISTER.
Article I. His Ministerial Accomplishments.
THe Grace of God, which we have seen so Illustriousl^ Endowing and Adorni^g of
our Eliot, as well Qualified him for, as Disposed him to, the employment
wherein he spent about Six Decads of his years; which was, The service of the
Lord Jesus Christ, in the ministry of the Gospel. This was the work to which he
applied himself; and he undertook it, I believe, with as Right Thoughts of it,
and as Good Ends in it, as ever any man in our Da^^s was acted with. He looked
upon the Con^uct of a Church, as a thing no less Dange^ou^ than Important, and
attended with so many Difficulties, Temptations, and H^miliations, as that
nothing but a C^^l from the Son of God, could have encouraged him unto the
susception of it He saw that flesh and blood would find it no very pleas^nt
thing, to be Obliged unto the oversight of a Number, that by a solemn Covenan^
should be listed among the Volunteers of the Lord Jesus Christ; that it was no
easy thing to feed the fouls of such a people and of the Children and the
Neighbors which were to be brought into the same Sheepfold with them; to bear
their manners with all patience, not being by any of their infirmities
discouraged from Teaching of them, and from wa^ching and praying over them; to
value them highly as the Flock which God has purch^sed with his own blood,
notwithstanding all their miscarriages; and in all to examine the Rule of
Scripture for the warrant of whatever shall be done; and to Remember the Day of
Judgment, wherein an Account must be given of all that has been done; having in
the mean time no expectation of the Riches and Grandeurs which accompany a
worldly Domination. It was herewithal his opinion, That (as the great Owen
expresses it) notwithstanding all the countenance that is given to any Church
by the public Ministry, yet whilst we are in this world, those who will
faithfully discharge their Duty, as Ministers of the Gospel, shall have need to
be prepared for suffering; and it was in a sense of these things that he gave
himself up to the sacred Ministry. A Stranger to Regenera^ion can be but poorly
Accomplished, for such a Ministry; and however God may prosper the Sermons of
such a man for the advantage of his Church: however the building of the Ark may
be helped on by such Carpenters as perish in the Flood; and the Tyrians may do
some work about the Temple, who arrive to no Worship in the Inner-Courts
thereof, and, as Austin Expressed it, a Stone-cutter may convey water into a
Garden, without having himself any advantage of it; Nevertheless, the
unsanctif^'d Minister, how Gifted, how Able soever he may be, must have it
still said unto him, Thou lackest one thing! and that, One Thing, our Eliot
had. But the One Thing, was not, All! as indeed, it would not have been,
Enough. God furnished him with a good measure of Learning too, which made him
capable to, Divide the word aright. He was a most Acute Grammarian; and
understood very well, the Languages wh ch God fi st wrote his Holy Bible in. He
had a sharp insight into all the other Liberal Arts, and made little Sy^^ems of
them, for the use of certain Indians, whose exacter education he was desirous
of. But, above all, he had a most eminent skill in Th^^dog^; and that which
profane scoff^rs r^proached as the Disgrace of the blessed A^^^ng all of whose
Works always weigh down the p^^rest Gold, was the H^nour of our Eliot, namely
to be Scriptura^ius Theologus, or, One mighty in the Word; which enabled him to
convince Gainsayers, and on all occasions to show himself, A thorough Divine,
and, A Workman that needed not be ashamed.

In short, he came like another B^zaleel, or Aholiab, unto the Service of the
Tabernacle. And from one particularity in that part of h^s Learning, which lay
in the Affairs of the Tabernacle, it was, that in a little Book of his we have
those lines, which for a certain cause I now transcribe; Oh that the Lord would
put it (say^ he) into the heart of some of his Religious and Learned Servants,
to take such pains about the Hebrew Language, as to fit it for universal Use!
Considering, that above all Languages spoken by the lip of Man it is most
capable to be enlarged, and fitted to express all things, and motions, and
notions, that our humane intellect, is capable of in this mortal life;
considering also, that it is the Invention of God himself; and what one is
fitter to be the universal Language, than that which it pleased our Lord Jesus
to make use of, when he spoke from Heaven unto Paul!

Article II. His Family-Government.
THe Apostle Paul, reciting and requiring the Qualifications of a Gospel
Minister, gives Order, that he be, The Husband of one Wife, and one that rules
well his own House, having his Children in subjection with all gravity. It
seems, that a man's carriage in his own House is a part, or at least a sign, of
his due Deportment in the House of God; and then, I am sure, our Eliot's was
very Exemplary. That one Wife which was given to him truly from the Lord, he
loved, prized, cherished, with a kindness that notably represented the
Compassion which he (thereby) taught his Church to expect from the Lord Jesus
Christ; and after he had lived with her for more than half an hundred years, he
followed her to the Grave with Lamentations beyond those, which the Jews from
the figure of a letter in the Text, affirm, that Abraham deplored his aged
Sarah with; her Departure made a deeper impression upon him than what any
common Affliction could. His whole Conversation with her, had that sweetness,
and that gravity and modesty beautifying of it, that every one called them
Z^cha^y and Elizabeth. His Family, was a little Bethel, for the Worship of God
constantly and exactly maintained in it; and unto the daily prayers of the
Family, his manner was to pr^fix the Reading of the Scripture; which being
done, 'twas also his manner to make his young people choose a certain passage
in the Chapter, and give him some Observation of their own upon it. By this
method he did mightily sharpen and impro^^, as well as try, their
Understandings, and endeavor to make them wise unto Salvation. He was likewise
very strict in the Education of his Children, and more careful to mend any
error in their Hearts and Lives, than he could have been to cure a blemish in
their Bodies. No Exorbitancies or Extravagan^ies could find a room under his
Roof, nor was his House any other than a School of Piety; one might have there
seen a perpetual mixture of a Spartan and a Chr^stian D^scipl^ne. Whatever
Decay there might be upon Family-Religion among us, as for our Eliot, we knew
him, that he would command his Children, and his Household after him, that they
should keep the way of the Lord.

Article III. His way of Preaching.
Such was he in his less^r Family! and in his greater Family, he manifested
still more of his Regards to the rule of a Gospel-minist^y. To his
congregation, he was a Preacher that made it is care to give every one their
meat in due season. It was Food and not Froth; which in his public sermons, he
entertained the souls of his people with, he did not starve them with empty and
windy speculations, or with such things as, Animum non dant, quia non habent;
much less did he k^ll them with such poison as is now too commoly exposed b^
the Arminian and Socinian Doctors that have lately too often sat in M^ses's
chair. His way of preaching was Very plai^: so that the very Lambs might wade,
into his Discourses on those texts and themes, wherein Elephants might swim;
and herewithal, it was very powerful, his Delivery was always very graceful and
grateful; but when he was to use Reproofs and Warnings against any Sin, his
vo^ce would rise into a warmth which had in it very much of Energy as well as
Decency; he would brandish the Swords, and sound the T^umpets of God against
all Vice, with a most penetrating Liveliness, and make his Pulpit, another
Mount Sinai, for the flashes of Lightning therein displayed against the
Breaches of the Law given up n that burning Mountain. And, I observed, that
there was usually a specia^ Fervor in the R^bukes which he bestowed upon
Carnality, a carnal frame and life in Professors of Religion; when he was to
brand the Earthly-mind^dness of Church Members, and the Allowance and the
Indulgence which they often gave un^o themselves in sensual Delights, here he
was a right Bodnerges; he then spoke, as 'twas sa^d one of the Ancients did,
Quot verba tot Fulmina, as many Thunderbolts as Words.

It was another property of his Preaching, that there was e^ermore much of
CHRIST in it; and with Paul, he could say, I determined to know nothing but
Jesus Christ; having that Blessed Name in his D^scourses, with a frequency like
that, with which Paul mentions it in his Epistles. As 'twas noted of Dr. Bodly,
that whatever subject he were upon, in the Application still his Use of it
would be, to drive men unto the Lord Jesus Christ; in like manner, the Lord
Jesus Christ was the Loadstone which gave a touch to all the Sermons of our
Eliot; a glorious, precious, lovely Christ was the point of Heaven which they
still verged unto. From this Inclination it was, that although he Printed several
English Books before he died, yet his heart seemed not so much in any of them,
as in that serious and savoury Book of his Entitled, The Harmony of the
Gospels, in the holy History of Jesus Christ. From hence also 'twas, that he
would give that Advice to young Preachers, pray let there be much of Christ in
your Ministry; and when he had heard a Sermon, which had any special Relish of
a blessed Jesus in it, he would say thereupon, O bl^ssed be God, that we have
Christ so much and so well preached in poor New England!

Moreover, he liked no Preaching, but what had been well-st^died for; and he
would very much commend a Sermon which he could perceive had required some good
Thinking and Reading in the Author of it. I have been present, when he has unto
a Preach^r then just come home from the Assembly with him, thus expressed
himself, Brother, there was Oil required for the Service of the Sanctuary; but
it must be beaten Oil; I praise God, that I saw your Oil so well beaten to day;
the Lord help us always by good Study to beat out Oil, that there may be no
knots in our Sermons left undissolved, and that there may a clear light be
thereby given in the House of God! And yet he likewise looked for something a
Sermon beside and beyond the mere study of man, he was for having the Spirit of
God, breathing in it and with it; and he was for speaking those things, from
those impressions and with those Affections, which might compel the Hearer to
say, The Spirit of God was here! I have heard him complain, It is a sad thing,
when a Sermon shall have that one Thing, The Spirit of God, wanting in it.

Article IV. His Cares about the Children of his people.
BUt he Remembered, that he had Lambs in hi^ flock, and like another David he
could not endure to see the Lion sieze upon any of them. He always had a mighty
concern upon his mind for little Children; 'twas an affectionate stroke in one
of the little Papers which he published for them, Sure Christ is not willing to
lose ^is Lambs; and I have cause to remember with what an hearty, fervent,
zealous Application, he addressed himself, when in the Name of the Neighbor
Pastors and Churches he gave me, The Right Hand of Fellowship, at my
Ordination, and said, Brother, Art thou a Lover of the Lord Jesus Christ? Then,
I pray Feed his Lambs.

One thing whereof he was very desirous for poor Children, was the Covenanting
of them; he was very sollicitous that the Lambs might pass under the Lords
^ything Rod, and be brought under the B^nd of the Covenant. He vey openly and
earnestly maintained the cause of Infant Baptism, against a sort of persons
Risen since the Reformation, (among which indeed there are many godly men, that
were dear to the Soul of our Eliot) who forget that in the Gospel Church State
as well as in the J^wish, The Promise is to Believers and their Child en: and
are unwilling to reckon Child^en among the Disciples of Jesus Christ: or to
grant, That of such is the Kingdom of Heaven: or to know, That the most
undoub^ed Records of Antiquity affirm Infant Baptism to have been an usage in
all the Primitive Churches; That even before the early days of Nazianz n,
Chrys^s^om, Basil, Athanasius, Epiphanius, in the Greek, and Ambrose Jerome,
A^stin, in the Latin Church, all of which give glorious Testimonies for Infant
Baptism, even Cyprian, before these assures us that in his days there was no
doubt of it; and O^igen before him could say, 'Twas from the Apostles that the
Church took up the Baptism of Infants; and Clemens Romanus before him could
say, That Children should be Recipients of the Discipline of Christ; besides
what plain evidence we have in Irenaeus and Justin Martyr; and that the very
Arguments with which some of the Ancients did superstitiously advise the delay
of Baptism, do at the same time confess the Divine Right of Infants in it. Our
Eliot could by no means look upon the Infants of Godly Men, as Unholy, and
Unbelievers, and unfit Subjects to have upon them a Mark of Dedication to the
Lord.

Wherefore, when there was brought among us a Book of pious Mr. Norcot's,
whereby some became Disposed to, or Confirmed in, a prejudice against
Paedo-Baptism, it was not long before Mr. Eliot published a little Answer
thereunto; the first lines whereof presently discover what a Temper he writ it
with; says he, The Book speaks with the voice of a Lamb, and I think the Author
is a Godly, though Erring Broth^ but he acts the cause of a Roaring Lion, who
by (...) crafty ways, seeks to devour the poor Lambs of the Flock of Christ.
And so he goes on to plead the cause of them that cannot speak for themselves.
No man could entertain a person of a different persuasion from himself, with
more sweetness and kindness, than he, when he saw, Aliquid Christi, or the Fear
of God prevailing in them; he could uphold a most intimate Correspondence with
such a man, as Mr. Jessey, as long as he lived; and yet he knew how to be an
Hammer upon their unhappy Errors.

But having once Baptized the Children of his Covenanting Neighbors, he did
not as too many Ministers do, think, that he had now done with them. No,
another thing wherein he was very laborious for poor Children was, the
Catechizing of them; he kept the great Ordinance of Catechizing, both publicly
and privately, and spent a world of time, about the end of the Second Century,
before there had in the least begun to Start up New Officers in the Church of
God; we and there were persons called unto the Office of Public Teaching, who
were not Pastors, not Rulers, not called unto the Administration of other
Ordinances; those in the Church of Alexaandria, were of a special Remark and
Renown for their Abilities this way; and their Employment was to Explain and to
Defend the princi^^^ of the Christian Religion, unto all with ^^e ^om they
could be concerned. Here was the Catechist, with reference unto whom the
Apostle says, Let the Catechized communicate unto him in all good things. Now,
though some think, a Teacher purely as such, has no Right unto further Church
Administrations, any more than the Rabby's or Doctors among the Jews, had to
Offer Sacrifices in the Temple; yet he who is called to be a Tea^her, may at
the same time also be called to be an Elder, and being now a Teaching Elder, he
becomes interested in the whole Government of the Church, he has the power of
all Sacred Administrations. It Is the latter and more complete and perfect
character, which the Churches of New England have still acknowledged in their
Teachers; and such a Teaching Elder did our Eliot remember himself to be. He
thought himself under a particular Obligation to be that Officer, which the
Apostle calls in 1 Cor. 4.15. An Instructor of the young; no^ was he ashamed,
any more than some of the worthiest men among the Ancients were, to b^ called,
A Catechist. He would observe upon Joh. 21.15 That, the care of the Lambs,
^^onet hird part of the charge over the Church of God. ^t would be incredible
if I should relate what pains he took to keep up the blessed Eccho's of Truth,
between himself, and the young people of his Congregation; and what prudence he
used, in suiting of his C^techisms to the age and strength of his little
C^techumens. But one thing I must observe, which is, That although there may be,
(as one has computed) no less than five hundred Catecoisms extant, yet Mr.
Eliot gave himself the Travail of adding to their number, (...) composing of
some further. Catechisms, which were more particularly designed as an Antido^
for his own people, against the Contagion o^ such Errors as might threaten any
peculiar danger to them. And the effect and success of this Catechizing, bore
proportion to the indefatiga^ble industry with which he prosecuted it; it (...)
a well-principled people that he has left behin^ him. As when certain Jesui^s
were sent among the Waldenses to corrupt their Children, they returned with
much Disappointment and Confusion, because the Children of seven years old,
were well-principled enough to Encounter the most Learned of them all; so, if
any Seducers were let loose to wolve it among the good people of Roxbury, I am
confident, they would find as little prey in that well-instructed place, as in
any part of all the Country; no civil Penalties would signify so much to save
any people from the Snares of buisy Heretics, as the unwearied Catechizing of
one Eliot has done to preserve his people from the gangren of ill opinions.

There is a third instance of his Regards to the welfare of the poor Children
under his charge; and that is, his perpetual Resolution and Activity to support
a good School in the Town that belonged unto him. A Grammar School he would
always have, upon the place, whatever it cost him; and he importuned all other
places to have the like. I cannot forget the Ardour with which I once heard him
pray, in a Synod of these Churches, which met at Boston to consider, How the
miscarriages which were among us might be prevented; I say, with what Fervor
he uttered an Expression to this purpose, Lord, for Schools every where among
us! That our Schools may flourish! That every Member of this Assembly may go
home and procure a good School to be encouraged in the Town where he lives!
that before we die, we may be so happy as to see a good School encouraged in
every Plantation of the Country. God so blessed his Endeavors, that Roxbury
could not live quietly without a Free School in the Town; and the issue of it
has bin one thing, which has made me almost put the Title of Schola Illustris
upon that little Nursery; that is, that Roxbury has afforded more Scholars,
first for the College, and then for the Public, than any Town of its bigness,
or, if I mistake not, of twice its bigness in all New England. From the Spring
of the School at Roxbury, there have run a large number of the streams, which
have made glad this whole City of God. I persuade my self, that the good people
of Roxbury, will for-ever scorn to begrutch the Cost, or to permit the Death,
of a School which God has made such an honor to them; and this the rather,
because their Deceased Eliot has left them a fair part of his own Estate, for
the maintaing of the School in Roxbury; and I hope, or at least, I wish, that
the Ministers of New England may be as ungainsayably importunate with their
people, as Mr. Eliot was with his, for Schools which may seasonably tinge the
young Souls of the Rising Generation. A want of Education for them, is the
blackest and saddest of all the bad Omens that are upon us.

Article V. His Church Discipline.
IT yet more Endears unto us the Memory of our Eliot, that he was not only an
Evangelical Minister, but also a true New-English one; he was a Protestant, and
a Puritan, and one very full of that Spirit which acted the first Planters of
this Country, in their peaceable Secession from the unwarrantable things
elsewhere imposed upon their Consciences. The Judgment and Practice of one that
readily underwent all the misery attending the Infancy of this Plantation, for
the sake of a true Church Order, is a thing which we young people should count
worthy to be enq^ired after; and since we saw him so well behaving himself in
the House of God, it cannot but be worth while to know what he thought about
the Frame, and Form, and Constitution of that blessed House.

He was a modest, humble, but very reasonable N^n conformist un^o the
Ceremonies, which have bin such unhappy Apples of strife, in the Church of
England; otherwise the dismal thickets of America, had never seen such a person
in them. He could not count it lawful for him ordinarily to perform his
Ministerial Acts of solemn and public Prayer, by reading or using any Forms of
Prayer composed by other persons for him, as thousands of Preachers do at this
day. And th^s, not only because an Ab^lity to express the case of a
Congregation in prayer, is a Ministerihl Gift, which our Lord forbids his
Ministers to Neglect; and a Minister that should only Read Forms of Sermons
composed for him, would as truly discharge the Duty of Preaching, as one that
sh^^ only read such Forms of prayers, would the dut^ of praying in it; but also
because he could no^ find that any Forms of prayer were used in an^ part of the
Church, until about four hundred years after Christ; nor any made for more than
some single Province until s^x hundred years; nor any imposed until eight
hundred, when all manner of Abominable Things began to be found in the Temple
of God; and he had over and above, his particulrr Dissatisfactions at the
English Liturgy, for weighty causes rather increased than abated since his
first notice of them. He could not wear a Surplice in and for the Worship of
God; as well-knowing the Original of that unholy Vestment, and agreeing with
Dr. Abbot; who was no Fanatic, and yet says in his Book of Antichrist, That
all Priestly Garments, whereby Ministers are distinguished, from the rest of
the Church, are a special part of the character of the Beast. He could not use
the Cross in Baptism; forasmuch as Dr. Tailor himself confesses, it is An
Vninstituted Ceremony retained as a part of External Worship; and so it is as
much a violatiion of the Second Commandment in the Law of our God, as the oil,
cream, salt and spit^le, with which that Institution has been defiled by the
Roman Catholics. Indeed, he thought with Learned Parker, That the Cross is the
greatest Devil among the Idols of Rome. He could not Kneel before the
Eucharist; inasmuch as it was a usage introduced about the thirteenth Century,
merely to suit and serve the Idolatry of the Transubstantiation. He conceived,
that no protestation of ours could now free this gesture from the just
interpretation of Idolatry, because of the antecedent interpretation put upon
it by those that first contrived it, enjoined it, and have hitherto maintained
it; and it affrighted him to read what the Popish Writers assert about
Kneeling, if the Sacramental Bread remain Bread after the Consecration. He
could not understand a Bishop that should not be ejusdem Jurisdictionis, and
much less one that should not be ejusdem Ordinis with a Presbyter; and when he
saw the Clergy of a whole Nation at length and of late so much Annihilate
themselves, as to Subscribe unto Canons which took away from every
Parish-Minister, all Obligation to teach, or Authority to rule, in the Church
of God, he soon said upon it, Unto their Assembly, mine Honor, be not thou
United.

It afflicted him to see these, and more such as these, things continued in the
Church of England, by the Artifice of certain persons who were loath to have the
Refomation carried on unto those further Degrees which the most eminent of the
first Reformers had in their Holy Designs; and it filled him with a just
Horror, and sorrow! to see above twenty Hundred faithful Ministers in one
Black Day turned out of their employments, and several Thousands of Christians
and Families in a little while Ruined, because they could not swallow down such
unaccountable superstitions.

We see what was not his opinion! but let us hear, what it was. It was his as
well as his master, the great Ramus ^s principle, that in the Reformati^e of
Churches to be now endeavored things ought to be Reduced unto the Order
wherein we find them at t^eir Primitive, Original, Apostolical Institution. And
in pursuance of this principle, he Justly Espoused that way of
Church Government which we call, the Congregational; he was fully persuaded,
that the Church State which our Lord Christ has instituted in the New
Testament, is, In a Congregation or Society of Professed Believers, Agreeing
and Assembling together, among themselves, with Officers, of Divine
Appointment, for the Celebration of Evangelical Ordinances, and their own
mutual Edification; For he saw it must be a cruel hardship used upon the
Scriptures, to make them so much as Lisp the least intimation of any other
Church State prescrib d unto us; and he could assert, That no Approved Writers,
for the space of two hundred years after Christ, make any mention of any other
Organical, V^sible, Professing Church, but that only which is Congregational.
He looked upon the Congregational way as a Largess of Divine Bounty bestowed by
the Lord Jesus, on his people, that followed him into this Wilderness, with a
peculiar zeal for Communion with him, in his pure Worship here. He perceived in
it, a sweet sort of Temperament, between Rigid Presbyterianism, and Levelling
Brownism; So that on the one side, the Liberties of the people are not
oppressed and overlaid; on the other side, the Authority of the Elders is not
rendered insignificant, but a d^ie Balance is herein kept upon them both; And
hence he closed with our platform of Church Discipline, as being the nearest of
what he had yet seen, to the pattern in the Mount.

He could not comprehend, that this Church State can arise from any other
Formal cause, But the Consent, Conc^rrence, Confederation of those concerned in
it; he looked upon a Relation unto a Church, as not a Natural, or a Violent,
but a Voluntary thing, and so that it is to be entered no otherwise than by an
Holy Covenant, or, as the Scripture speaks, by giving our selves first unto the
Lo^d, and then one unto another. He could not think, that Baptism alone was to
be accounted the cause, but rather the effect, of Church-member-ship; inasmuch
as upon the dissolution of the Church to which a man belongs, his Baptism would
not become a Nullity: nor that mere ^ rof ssum would render men members of this
or that Church; for then it would be impossible to cut off a corrupt member
from that Body Politic: Nor that mere Co-habitation would make Church Members;
for then the vilest infidels would be actually incorporated with us And a
Covenant, was all that he now saw remaining in the Inventory.

But for the Subjects to be admitted by Churches unto all the privileges of
this Fellowship with them he thought, they ought to be such as a trying
Charity, or a charitable Trial, should pronounce, Regenerate. He found the
first Churches of the Gospel mentioned in the Scripture, to be Churches of
Saints; and that the Apostles writing to them, still acknowledge them to be
Holy Brethren, and such as were made meet for to be partakers of the
Inheritance of the Saints in Light; and that a main end of Church Fellowship,
is to represent unto the world, the Qualifications of those that shall Ascend
into the Hill of the Lord, and Stand in his Holy Place forever. He would
therefore have, Bona Men's, and Purum pectus, and Vita Innocens, required, as
Lactantius tells us, they were in his Days, of all Communicants at the Table
of the Lord; and with Holy Chrysostom, he would sooner have given his
Heart-blood, than, the Cup of the Lord, unto such as had not the hopeful Marks
of our Lord's Disciples on them. The Churches of New England still retain a
Custom which the great Justin Martyr in the second Century assures us to have
been in the Primitive Churches of his Time; namely, To Examine those they
Receive, not only about their persuasion, but also whether they have attained
unto a work of Grace upon their Souls. In the prosecution hereof, besides the
Enquiries of the Elders into the Knowledge and Belief and Conversation of them
that offer themselves unto Church Fellowship, it is expected, though I hope not
with any severity of imposition, that in the Addresses which the^ make to the
Churches, they give some written, if not oral Account, of what impressions the
Regenerating Word of God has had upon their Souls. This was a Custum which this
holy man had a mavelous esteem and value for; and I have taken from his Mouth
such as these Expressions very publicly delivered thereabouts.

It is matter (said he) of great Thankfulness, that we have Christ Confessed in
our Churches, by such as we Receive to full Communion there. They open the
works of Christ in their Hearts, and the Relation thereof is an eminent
Confession of our Lord; experienced Saints can gather more than a little from
it. It is indeed an Ordinance of wonderful benefit; the Lord planted many
Vineyards in the first Settlement of this Country, and there were ma- Noble
Vines in them; it was their Heavenly-mindedness which disposed them to this
Exercise, and by the upholding of it, the Churches are still filled with Noble
Vines; it mightily maintains purity of Churches. It Is the duty of every
Christian, With the mouth Confession is made unto Salvation. As among the Jews,
usually most men did once in their life, celebrate a Jubilee; thus, this
Confession of Christ, is methinks, a sort of Jubilee; and every good man among
us, is at least once in his life called unto it. It is a thing that gives great
glory to the Lord Jesus Christ; and younger Converts are thereby exceedingly
Ed^fy'd; and the Souls of Devout Christians are hereby very much ingratiated
one unto another. The Devil knows what he does, when he thrusts so hard to get
this Custom out of our Churches. For my part, I would say in this case, Get
thee behind me Satan; thou give an horrible offense unto the Lord Jesus
Christ. Let us keep up this Ordinance with all gentleness; and where we see the
least spark of Grace held forth, let us prize it more than all the Wit in the
world.

There were especially two things, which he was loath to see, and yet feared he
saw, falling in the Churches of New England. One was, (...) thorough
Establishment of Ruling-Elders in our Churches; which he thought sufficiently
warranted by the Apostles mention of, Elders that Rule well, who yet labor not
in Word and Doctrine. He was very desirous to have prudent and gracious men set
over our Churches, for the Assistence of their Pastors, in the Church acts that
concern the Admission and Excl^ s^n of Members, and the Inspection of the
Conversation led by the Communicants, and the Instruction of their several
Families, and the Visitation of the Afflicted in the Flock over which they
should preside. Such Helps in Government had he himself been blessed withal;
the last of which was the well-deserving Elder Bowls; and of him, did this
good man, in a Speech to a Synod of all the Churches in this Colony, take
occasion to say, There is my Brother Bowls, the godly Elder of our Church at
Roxbury, God helps him to do great things among us! Had all our Pastors been so
well accommodated, it is possible there would be more encouragement given to
such an Office as that of Ruling Elders.

But the mention of a Synod brings to mind another thing, which he was
Concerned, that we might never want; and that is, a frequent Repetition of
Needful Synods in our Churches. For though he had a deep and a due care to
preserve the Rights of particular Churches, yet he thought all the Churches of
the Lord Jesus by their Union in what they profess, in what they intend, and in
what they enjoy, so compacted into one Body Mystical, as that all the several
particular Churches every where should act with a regard unto the good of the
whole, and unto the common Advice and Counsil of the Neighborhood; which
cannot be done always by Letters missive, like those that passed between
Corinth and Rome in the early days of Christianity; but it requires a
Convention of the Churches in Synods, by their Delegates and Messengers. He did
not count Churches to be so Independent, as that they can always discharge
their whole Duty, and yet not act in a conjunction with Neighbour-Churches; nor
would he be of any Church that will not acknowledge it self accountable to
rightly composed Synods, which may have occasion to enquire into the
circumstances of it; he saw the main Interest and Business of Churches might
quickly come to be utterly lost, if Synods were not often called for the
Repairing of Inconveniences, and he was much in contriving for the regular and
repeated meeting of such Assemblies.

He wished for Councils to suppress all damnable Heresies or pernicious
Opinions that might ever arise among us; for Councils to extinguish all
dangerous Divisions, and scandalous Contentions which might ever begin to flame
in our Borders; for Councils to rectify all Male-Administrations in the midst
of us, or to Recover any particular Churches out of any Disorders which they
may be plunged into, for Councils to enquire into the Love, the Peace, the
Holiness ma^ntained by the several Churches; in fine, for Councils to send
forth fit Laborers into those parts of our Lords Harvest; which are without
the Gospel of God. He beheld an Apostolical Precept and Pattern for such
Councils; and when such Councils convened in the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ,
by the consent of several Churches concerned in mutual Communion, have
Declared, Explained, Recommended the mind of God from his word unto us, he
reckoned a truth so delivered, challenged an Observation from the particular
Churches, with a very great Authority.

He therefore Printed an ingenious little Book wearing this Title, The Divine
Management of Gospel-Churches by the Ordinance of Councils, constituted in
order according to the Scriptures, which may be a means of uniting those two
holy and eminent Parties, the Presbyterians, and the Congregational. It is a
remarkable Concession made by the Incomparable Jurieu who is not reckoned a
Congregational man, in his Traite de L'Vnite de L'Eglise, That the Apostolical
Churches lived not in any Confederation for mutual Dependence. The grand
Equipage of Metropolitans, of Primates, of Exarchs, of Patriarks, was yet
unknown; nor does it any more appear to us, that the Churches then had their
Provincial, National, and Ecumenical Synods; every Church was its own
Mistress, and independent on any other. But on the other side, our Eliot, who
was no Presbyterian, conceived Synods to be the Institutions of our Lord Jesus
Christ, the Apostolical Churches themselves acknowledging a Stamp of Divine
Right upon them.

Such as these were the sentiments of our Eliot; and his deserved Reputation in
the Churches of New England, is that which has caused me to foresee some
Advantage and Benefit arising unto the concerns of the Gospel, by so large a
Recitation as I have now made thereof.

The Reader has now seen, An able Minister of the New Testament.

Part III. Or, Eliot as an Evangelist.
THe Titles of a Christian and of a Minister, have rendered our Eliot
considerable; but there is one memorable Title more, by which he has been
signalized unto us. An honorable person did once in Print put the Name of an
Evangelist upon him; whereupon in a Letter of his to that person afterward
Printed, his Expressions were, There is a Redundancy, where you put the Title
of Evangelist upon me; I beseech you to suppress all such things let us do and
speak and carry all things with Humility; it is the Lord who has done what is
done; and it is most becoming the Spirit of Jesus Christ to lift up him, and
say ourselves low; I wish that word could be obliterated. My Reader sees what a
caution Mr. Eliot long-since entered against our giving him the Title of an
Evangelist; but his Death has now made it safe, as his Life had long made it
just, for us to acknowledge him with such a Title. I know not whether that of
an Evangelist, or one separated for the employment of Preaching the Gospel in
such places where no Churches have hitherto been gathered, be not an Office
that should be continued in our days; but this I know, that our Eliot very
notably did the Service and Business of such an Officer.

The Natives of the Country now Possessed by the New-Englanders, had been
forlorn and wretched Heathen ever since their first herding here; and tho we
know not When or How those Indians first became Inhabitants of this mighty
Continent, yet we may guess that prob^bly, the Devil decoyed those miserable
Salvages hither, in hopes that the Gospel of the Lord Jesus would never come
here to destroy or disturb his Absolute-Empire over them. But our Eliot was in
such ill terms with the Devil, as to alarm him with sounding the
Silver-Trump^ts of Heaven in his Territories, and make some Noble and Zealous
Attempts toward outing him of his Ancient possessions here. Just before the
first Arrival of the English in these parts, a prodigious Mortality had swept
away vast Numbers of the poor Indians; and those Pagans who being told by a
Shipwrack'd Frenchman which died in their hands, That God would shortly
extirpate them, and introduce a more civil and worthy people into their place,
blasphemously replied, That God could not kill them; were quickly killed with
such a raging and wasting Pe^tilence, as left the very earth covered with their
Carcases. Nevertheless, there were, I think, Twenty several Nations (if I may
call them so) of Indians upon that spot of ground, which fell under the
Influence of our Three Vni^^d Colonies; and our Eliot was willing to rescue as
many of them as he could, from that old usurping Landlord of America, who is
by the wrath of God, the Prince of this world.

I cannot find that any besides the Holy Spirit of God, first moved him to the
blessed Work of Evangelizing these perishing Indians; 'twas that Holy Spirit
which laid before his mind the Idaea of that which is now on the Seal of the
Massachuset-Colony; A poor Indian having a Label going from his mouth, with a,
COME OVER AND HELP US. It was the Spirit of our Lord Jesus Christ, which
enkindled in him a Pity, for the dark dying, damning souls of these Natives,
whom the god of this world had blinded, through all the By past Ages. He was
none of those that make, The Salvation of the Heathen, an Article of their
Creed; b^t (setting aside the unrevealed and extraordinary Steps which the Holy
One of Israel may take out of His usual Paths) he thought men to be lost if
our Gospel be hidden from them; and he was of the same Opinion with one of the
Ancients, who said, Some have endeavored to prove Plato a Christian, till they
prove themselves little better than Heathen. It is indeed a principle in the
Turkish Alcoran, That Let a man's Religi^n be what it will, he shall be saved,
if he conscientiously live up to the Rules of it: but our Eliot was no
Mohammedan. He could most heartily subscribe to that passage in the Articles of
the Chapter of Eng^. They are to be held accursed, who presume to say, that every
man shall be saved by the Law or Sect which he professes, so that he be
diligent to frame his life according to that Law, and Light of Nature; For Holy
Scripture does set out unto us, Only the Name of Jesus Christ, whereby men must
be Saved. And it astonished him to see many dissembling Subscribers of those
Articles, while they have grown up to such a Phrensy, as to deny peremptorily
all Church State, and all Salvation to all that are not under Diocesan Bishops,
yet at the same time to grant that the Heathen might be saved without the
Knowledge of the Lord Jesus Christ. No, it very powerfully moved his holy
Bowels, to hear the Thunderclapps of that Imprecation over the heads of our
Naked Indians, Pour out thy Fury upon the Heathen that know thee not; and
thought he, What shall I do to rescue these Heathen from that all-devouring
Fury?

But when this Charitable pity had once begun to flame, there was a
concurrence of many things to cast Oil into it. All the good men in the Country
were glad of his Engagement in such an undertaking; the Ministers especially
encouraged him, and those in the Neighborhood kindly supplied his place, and
performed his work, in part, for him at Roxbury, ^hile he was Abroad Laboring
among them that were Without. Hereunto, he was further ^wakened by those
expressions in the Royal Charter, in the assurance and protection whereof this
Wilderness was first peopled; namely, To win and incite the Natives of that
Country to the knowledge and Obedience of the only true God and Savior of
Mankind, and the Christian Faith, in our Royal Intention, and the Adventurers
free profession is the principal end of the Plantation. And the remarkable zeal
of the Romish Missionaries, compassing Sea and Land that they might make
Proselytes, made his devout Soul think of it with a further Disdain, that we
should come any whit behind in our care to Evangelize the Indians, whom we
dwelt among. Lastly, when he had well begun this Evangelical Business, the good
God, in an answer to his Prayers, mercifully stirred up a liberal Contribution
among the godly people in England for the promoting of (...) by means whereof,
a considerable Estate and Income was at length entrusted in the hands of an
Honorable Corporation, by whom it is to this Day very carefully employed in the
Christian Service, which it was designed for. And then, in short; inasmuch as
our Lord Jesus had bestowed on us, our Eliot was gratefully and generously
desirous to obtain for him, The Heathen for an Inheritance, and the utmost
parts of the Earth for a Possession.

The exemplary Charity of this excellent person in this important Affair, will
not be seen in its due Luster, unless we make some Reflections upon several
circumstances which he behold these forlorn Indians in. Know then, that these
doleful Creatures are the veriest Ruins of Mankind, which are to be found any
where upon the face of the Earth. No such Estates are to be expected among
them, as have been the B^^^s which the pretended Converters in other Countries
have snapped at. One might see among them, what an hard master the Devil is, to
the most devoted of his Vassals! These abject Creatures, live in a Country full
of Mines; we have already made entrance upon out Iron; and in the very surface
of the ground among us, there lies Coper enough to suppl^ all this world;
besides other Mines hereafter to be exposed; but our shiftless Indians were
never Owners of so much as a Knife, till we come among them; their name for an
English man, was a Knife man; Stone was instead of Metal for their tools; and
for their Coins, they have only little Beads with Holes in them to string them
upon a bracelet, whereof some are white; and of these there go six for a penny;
some are black or blew; and of these, go three for a penny; this Wampam, as
they call it, is made of the Shellfish, which lies upon the Seacoast
continually.

They Live in a Country, where we now have all the conveniences of humane life:
but as for them, their housing is nothing but a few w^^ts ^^'d about poles
fastened in the earth, where a good fire is their Bed-Clothes in the coldest
seasons; their Clothing is but a skin of a Beast, Covering their Hind-parts,
their Fore-parts having but a little Apron where Nature calls for secrecy; their
diet has not a greater dainty than their Nokehick, that is, a spoonful of their
parched meal, with a spoonful of water, which will strengthen them to travel a
day together; except we should mention the Flesh of Deers Bears, Mouse,
Rackoons, and the like, which they have when they can catch them; as also a
little fish, which if they would preserve 'twas by drying, not by salting; for
they had not a grain of Salt, in the world, I think, till we bestowed it on
them. Their Physic is, excepting a few odd Specificks, which some of them
Encounter certain cases with, nothing hardly, but an Hot-house, or a Powaw;
their Hot-House is a little cave about eight foot over, where after they have
terribly heated it, a crew of them go sit and sweat and smoke for an hour
together, and then immediately run into some very cold adjacent brook, without
the least mischief to them; it is this why they recover themselves from some
Diseases, particularly from the French; but in most of their dangerous
Distempers, it is a Powaw that must be sent for; that is, a Priest, who has more
Familiarity with Satan then his Neighbors; this Conjurer comes and Roars,
(...) Howls, and uses Magical Ceremonies over the Sick man, and will be well
paid for it when he has done; if this don't effect the cure, the man's Time is
come, and there is an end.

They live in a Country, full of the best Ship-Timber under Heaven: but never,
saw a Ship till some came from Europe hither; and then they were scared out of
their wits, to see the Monster come sailing in, and spitting fire with a mighty
noise, out of her floating side; they cross the water, in Canoo's, made
sometimes of Trees which they burn and hew, till they have ^ollow'd them; and
sometimes of Barks, which they stitch into a light fort of a Vessel, to be
^asily carried over land; if they over-sett, it is but a little paddling like a
dog, and they are soon where they were.

Their way of living, is infinitely Barbarous: the men are most abominably
sloathful; making their poor Sqaws, or wives, to plant, and dress, and barn,
and beat there Corn, and Build their Wigwains for them; which perhaps may be
the reason of their extraordinary ease in Childbirth. In the mean time, their
chief employment, when they will condescend unto any, is that of Hunting; wherein
they will go out some scores, if not Hundreds of them in a company, driving all
before them.

They contnue in a place, till they have burnt up all the Wood thereabouts, and
then they pluck up Stakes; to follow the Wood, which they cannot fetch home
unto themselves; hence when they enq^ire about the English, Way come the ^ither
they have themselves very Learnedly determined the case, I was because we
wanted ^^ring. No Arts are understood among them, unless just so far as to
maintain their Brutish Conversation, wh ch is little more than is to be found
among the very Bevers upon our Streams.

Their Division of Time is by Sleeps, and Moons, and Winters; and by lodging
abroad, they have somewhat observed the motions of the Stars; among which it has
been surprising unto me to find, that they have always called Charles^s Wain by
the name of Paukunnawaw, or The Bear, which is the name whereby Europeans (...)
have distinguished it. Moreover, they have little (...) any Traditions among
them worthy of our notice; and Reading and Writing is altogether unknown to
them, though there is a Rock or two in the Country that has unaccountable
Characters Engraved upon it. All the Religion they have amounts unto thus much;
they believe, that there are many Gods, who made and own the several Nations of
the world; of which a certain Great God in the South-west Regions of Heaven
bears the greatest Figure. They believe, that every remarkable Creature has a
peculiar God within it, or about it: there (...) with them, a Sun-God, a
Moon-god, and the lik^ and they cannot conceive but that the fire mu^^ be a
kind of a God, inasmuch as a Spark of it will soon produce very strange
effects. They believe that when any good or ill happens to them, there is the
favor or the anger of a God expressed in it; and hence as in a time of
Calamity they keep a Dance, or a day of extravagant ridiculous Devotions to
their God, so in a time of Prosperity they likewise have a Feast, wherein they
also make presents one unto another. Finally, they believe, that their cheef
God Kautantowit, made a man and woman of a Stone; which, upon dislike, he broke
to pieces, and made another man and woman of a Tree, which were the Fountains
of all Mankind; and, that we all have in us immortal Souls, which, if we were
godly, shall go to a splendid Entertainment with Kautantowit, but otherwise,
must wander about in a restless Horror for-ever. But if you say to them any
thing of a Resurrection, they will reply upon you, I shall never believe it!
And when they have any weighty undertaking before them, it is an usual thing for
them to have their Assemblies, wherein after the usage of some Diabolical
Rites, a Devil appears unto them; to inform them and advise them about their
circumstances; and sometimes there are odd Events of their making these
Applications to the Devil. For instance, it is particularly affirmed, That the
Indians in their Wars with us, finding a sore inconvenience by our D^gs, which
would make a sad yelling if in the Night they scented the approaches of them,
they sacrificed a Dog to the Devil; after which no English Dog would bark at an
Indian for diverse months ensuing. This was the miserable people, which our
Eliot propounded unto himself, the saving of! And he had a double work
incumbent on him; he was to make Men of them, ere he could hope to see them
Saints; they must be civilized er'e they could be Christianized; he could not,
as Gregory once of our Nation, see any thing Angelical to bespeak his Labors
for their eternal Welfare; all among them was Diabolical. To think on Raising a
number of these hideous Creatures, unto the Elevations of our Holy Religion,
must argu^ more than common or little Sentiments in the Undertaker; but the
Faith of an Eliot could encounter it!

I confess, there was one, I cannot call it so much guess as wish, wherein he
was willing a little to indulge himself; and that was, T^^^ our Indians are the
posterity of the dispe^sed and rejected Israelites, concerning whom our God has
promised that they shall yet be saved, by the ^eliverer coming to turn away
ungodliness, from them. He saw the Indians using many Parables in their
Discourses; much given to Anointing of their Heads; much delighted in Dancing,
especially after Victories; computing their Times by Nights and Months; giving
Dowries for Wives, and causing their Women to dwell by themselves, (...)
certain seasons, for secret causes; and accustoming customing themselves to
grievous Mournings and Yellings for the Dead; all which were, usual things
among the Israelites. They have too a great unkindness for our Swine; but I
suppose that is because our H^gs devour the Clams which are a Dainty with them.
He also saw some learned men, looking for the lost Israelites among the Indians
in America, and counting that they had Thorow-good reasons for doing so. And a
few small Arguments, or indeed but Conjectures, meeting with a favorable
Disposition in the Hearer, will carry some conviction with them; especially, if
a Report of a Menasseh ben Israel be to back them. He saw likewise the
Judgments threatened unto the Israelites of old, ^trangly fulfilled upon our
Indians; particularly that, Ye shall eat the flesh of your Sons, which is done
with exquisite Cruelties upon the Prisoners that they take from one another in
their Battles. Moreover, it is a Prophesy in Deuteronomy. 28.68. The Lord shall bring
thee into Egypt again with Ships, by the way whereof I spoke unto thee, Thou
shall see it no more again; and there shall ye be sold unto your Enemies, and
no man shall buy you. This did out Eliot imagine accomplished, when the
Captives taken by us in our late wars upon them, were sent to be sold, in the
Coasts lying not very remote from Egypt on the Mediterranean Sea, and scarce
any Chapmen would offer to take them off. Being upon such as these accounts not
unwilling, if it were possible, to have, the Indians found Israelites, they
were you may be sure, not a whit the less, Beloved for their (supposed) Fathers
sake; and the Fatigues of his Travails went on the more cheerfully, or at
least, the more hopefully, because of such possibilities.

The First step which he judged Necessary now to be taken by him, was to learn
the Indian-language; for he saw them so stupid and senseless that they would
never do so much as enquire after the Religion of the strangers now come into
their Country, much less would they so far imitate us as to leave off their
beastly way of living, that they might be partakers of any Spiritual Advantage
by us: unless we could first address them in a Language of their own. Behold,
new difficulties to be surmounted by our indefatigable Eliot! He hires a Native
to teach him this exotic language, and with a laborious care and skill,
reduces it into a Grammar which afterward he published. There is a Letter or
two of our Alphabet, which the Indians never had in theirs; tho there were
enough of the Dog in their Temper, there can scarce be found an R in their
language; save that the Indians to the Northward, who have a peculiar Dialect,
pronounce an R where an N is pronounced by our Indians; but if their Alphabet
be short, I am sure the words composed of it are long enough to tire the
patience of any scholar in the world; they are Sesquipedalia Verba which their
Linguo is composed of; one would think, they had been growing ever since Babel,
unto the Dimentions to which they are now extended. For instance, if my Reader
will count how many Letters there are in this one word, Nummatchekodtantamooong
anunnonash, when he has done, for his reward I Will tell him, it signifies no
more in English than, our Lusts; and if I were to translate, our Loves, it must
be nothing shorter than, Noowomantammoo^nkanunonnash. Nor do we find in all
this Language the least Affinity to, or Derivation from, any Europae^n speech
that we are acquainted with. I know not what thoughts it will produce in my
Reader, when I inform him, that once finding that the Demons in a possessed
young woman, whereof I have heretofore given the world some account, understood
the Latin and Greek and H brew Languages, my curiosity led me to make trial of
this Indian language, and the Demons did seem as if they did not understand it.
This tedious language our Elio^ quickly became a master of; he employed a
pregnant and witty Indian, who also spoke English well, for his assistance in
it; and compiling some discourses by his help, he would single out a Word, a
Noun, a Verb, and pursue it through all its variations: having finished his
grammar, at the Close he writes, Prayers and Pains through Faith in Christ Jesus
will do any thing! and being by his Prayers and Pains thus furnished, he set
himself in the Year 1646, to preach the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, among
these Desolate outcasts.

It remains, that I lay before the world, the Remarkable Conduct and Success of
this Famous Man, in his great Affayr; and I shall endeavor, to do it, by
Englishing and Rep^inting a letter, sent a while since by my Father, unto his
Learned and Renoun'd correspondent, the Venerable Dr. Leusden at Vtrecht: which
letter has already been published, if I mistake not, in Four or Five diverse
Languages. I find it particularly published, by the most Excellent Jurieu, at
the end of a Pas^oral Letter; and this Refliecton then worthily made upon it,
Cette Lettre doit apporter une ^res grande Consolation, a toutes les bonnes
ames, qui sont altereos de Justice, and qui sont enflammees d^ ^^le de la
gloire de Dieu. I therefore persuade my self that the Republication of it will
not ^e ungrateful unto many good Souls in our Nation, who have a due thirst and
zeal for such things as are mentioned in it; and when that is done, I shall
presume to make some Ann^tations for the illustration of sundry memorable
things therein Pointed at.

A LETTER Concerning the Succefs of the Gospel, amongst the INDIANS in
New England. Written by Mr. Increase Mather, Minister of the Word of God at
Boston, and Rector of the College at Cambridge in New England, to Dr. John
Leusden, Hebrew Professor in the University of Vtrecht.
Translated out of Latin into English.
Worthy and much Honored Sir,
YOur Leters were very grateful to me, (a) by which I understand that you and
others in your famous University of Vtrecht desire to be informed concerning
the converted Indians in America: Take therefore a true Account of them in a
few words.

It is above forty Years since that truly godly Man, Mr. John Elliot, Pastor
of the Church at Rocksborough, (about a mile from Boston in New England) being
warmed with a holy Zeal of Converting the Americans, set himself to learn the
Indian Tongue, that he might more easily and successfully (b) open to them the
Mysteries of the Gospel; upon account of which he has been (and not
undeservedly) called, The Apostle of the American Indians. This Reverend
Person, not without very great labor, Translated the whole Bible into the
Indian Tongue; (c) he Translated also several English Treatises of Practical
Divinity and Catechisms into their Language. Above 26 Years ago he gathered a
Church of Converted Indians in a Town called (d) Natick; these Indians
confessed their sins with Tears, and professed their Faith in Christ, and
afterward they and their Children were Baptized, and they were solemnly joined
together in a Church Covenant; the said Mr. Eliot was the first that
Administered the Lords Supper to them. The Pastor of that Church now is an
Indian, his Name is Daniel. Besides this Church at Natick, among our
Inhabitants in the Massachusetts Colony there are four Indian Assemblies, (e)
where the Name of the true God and Jesus Christ is solemnly called upon; these
Assemblies have some American Preachers. Mr. Eliot formerly used to Preach to
them once every fortnight, but now he is weakened with Labors and Old Age,
being in the Eighty fourth Year of his Age, and Preaches not to the Indians
oftener than once in two Months.

There is another Church, consisting only of Converted Indians, about fifty
Miles from hence in an Indian Town called Mashippaug: the first Pastor of that
Church was an English Man, who being skillful in the American Language,
Preached the Gospel to them in their own Tongue. (f) This English Pastor is
dead, and instead of him that Church has an Indian Preacher.

There are besides that, five Assemblies of Indians profess^ng the Name of
Christ, not far distant from Mashippa^g, which have Indian Preachers: (g) John
C^^ton, Pastor of the Church at Plymouth (Son of my venerable Fa^her-in-Law
John Cotton, formerly the famous Teacher of the Church at B ston) has made
very great progress in learning the Indian Tongue, and is very skifull in it;
he Preaches in their own Language to the last five mentioned Congregations
every Week. Moreover of the Inhabitants of Sacones in Plymo^th Colony there is
a great Congregation of those who for distinction sake are called Praying
Indians, because they Pray to God in Christ

Not far from a promontory called Cape ^od, there are six Assemblies of
Heathens who are to be reckoned as Catech^mens, amongst whom there are six
Indian Preachers: Samu^l Trea^, Pastor of a Church at Eastham, Preaches to
those Congregations in their own Language. There are likewise amongst the
Islanders of N^^^ucket a Church, with a Pastor who was lately a Heathen, and
several Meetings of Ca^ec^u^e^s who are instructed by the Converted Indians.
There is also another Island about seven Leagues long (called Marthas Vineyard)
where are two American Churches planted, which are more famous than the rest,
over one of which there presides an ancient Indian as Pastor, called Hiac^oms:
John Hiacooms, Son of the said Indian Pastor, also Preaches the Gospel to his
Contrymen. In another Church in that place, John ^ockinosh a Converted
Indian teaches. In these Churches ruling Elders of the Indians are joined to
the Pastors: The Pastors were chosen by the people, and when they had fasted
and prayed, Mr. Eliot and Mr. Cotton laid their Hands on them, so that they
were solemnly Ordained. All the Congregations (n) of the Converted Indians
(both the Catechumens and those in Church Order) every Lord's Day meet together;
the pastor or Preacher always begins with Prayer, and without a Form, because
from the Heart; when the Ruler of the Assembly has ended Prayer, the wh^^^
Congregation of Indians Praise God with singing some of them are excellent
Singers: After the Psalm, he that Preaches reads a place of Scripture (one or
more verses as he will) and expounds its gathers Doctrines from it proves them
b^ Scriptures and Reasons, and infers uses from them after the manner of the
English, of wh^^ have been taught; then another prayer to God in the Name of
Christ concludes the whole Service. Thus do they meet together twice every
Lord's Day. They observe no Holy Days but the Lord's Day, except upon some
extraordinary occasion; and then they solemnly set apart whole days, either in
giving Thanks or Fasting and Praying with great fervor of mind.

Before the English came into these Coasts these barbarous Nations were
altogether ignorant of the true God; hence it is that in their Prayers and
Sermons they use English Words and Terms; he that calls upon the most Holy Name
of God, says, Jehovah, or God, or Lord, and also they have learned and borrowed
many other Theological Phrases from us.

In short, There are six Churches of Baptized Indians in New England, and
eighteen Assemblies of Catechumens, professing the Name of Christ: Of the
Indians there are four and Twenty who are Preachers of the word of God, and
besides these there are four English Ministers who Preach the Gospel in the
Indian Tongue. (i) I am now my self weary with writing, and I fear left if I
should add more; I should also be tedious to you; yet one thing I must add
(which I had almost forgot) that there are many of the Indians Children who
have learned by heart the Catechism, either of that famous Divine William
Perkins, or that put forth by the Assembly of Divines at Westminster, and in
their own Mother Tongue can answer to all the Question^ in it.

But I must end I salute the Famous professor^ in your University, to whom I
desire you to communicate this Letter, as written to them also.

Farewell, Worthy Sir; the Lord preserve your Health for the Benefit of your
Country, his Church, and of Learning.

Boston in New England July 12. 1687. Yours ever, INCREASE MATHER,


(a) The Success of the Gospel in the EAST INDIES
AFter the Writing of this Letter, there came one to my Hands from the famous
Dr. Lousden, together with a new and fair Edition of his Hebrew Psalter,
Dedicated unto the Name of my Absent Parent. He therein informs me, That our
Example had awakened the Dutch to make some noble Attempts for the Furtherance
of the Gospel in the East Indies; besides what memorable things were done by
the Excellent Robert Junius, in Formosa fifty years ago. He also informs me,
That in and near the Island of Ceylon, the Dutch Pastors have Baptized about
three hundred Thousand of the Eastern Indians; for although the Ministers are
utterly ignorant of their Language, yet there are Schoolmasters who teach
them, The Lords Prayer, the Creed, the Ten Commandments, a Morning Prayer, an
Evening Prayer, a Blessing before Meat, and another after; and the Minister in
his Visits being assured by the Master, who of them has learned all of them
seven things, he thereupon counts they have such a perfect number of
Seize, that he presently Baptises them. The pious Reader will doubtless
bless God for this; but he will easily see that one of our Converted Indians
has cost more pains than many of those; more thorough work has been made with
them.

(b) Mr. Eliot's way of opening the Mysteries of the Gospel to our INDIANS
It Was in the year 1646. that Mr. Eliot accompanied by three more, gave a visit
unto an Assembly of Indians, of whom he desired a Meeting at such a time and
place, that he might lay before them the things of the^^ Eternal Peace. After a
serious Prayer, he gave them a Sermon which continued about a quarter above an
hour, and contained the principal Articles of the Christian Religion, applying
all to the condition of the Indians present Having done, he asked of them,
whether they understood? and with a general reply they answered, They
understood all. He then began what was his usual method afterward in treating
with them; that is, he caused them to propound such questions as they pleased,
unto himself; and he gave wise and good answers to them all. Their Questions
would often, though not always, refer to what he had newly Preached; and he this
way not only made a Proof of their profiting by his Ministry, but also gave an
Edge to what he delivered unto them. Some of their Questions would be a little
Philosophical, and required a good measure of Learning in the Minister
concerned with them; but for this our Eliot wanted not. He would also put
proper Questions unto them, and at one of his first Ex^rcises with them, he
made the young ones ca^able of regarding those three Questions,

Q. 1. Who made you and all the world?

Q. 2. Who do you look should save you from Sin and Hell?

Q. 3. How many Commandments has the Lord given you to keep?

It was his wisdom that he began with them upon such principles, as they
themselves had already some Notions of; such as that of an Heaven for good, and
Hell for bad people, when they Died. It broke his gracious heart within him to
see, what Floods of Tears fell from the Eyes of several among these Degenerate
Salvages, at the first Addresses which he made unto them; yea, from the very
worst of them all. He was very inquisitive to learn who were the Powawes, that
is, the Sorcerers and Seducers, that maintained the Worship of the Devil in any
of their Societies; and having in one of his first Journeys to them, found out
one of those Wretches, he made the Indian come unto him and said, Whether do
you suppose God, or Chepian (i. e. the Devil) to be the Author of all good? The
Conjurer answered, God. Upon this he added with a stern Countenance, Why do you
pray to Chepian then? and the poor man was not able to stand or speak before
him; but at last made promises of Reformation.

The Text which he first Preached upon, was that in Ezekiel. 37.9, 10. That by
Prophesying to the Wind, the Wind came and the dry bones lived; and it was an
observation made by one, who then justly confessed, there was not much weight
in it; That the word which the Indians use for Wind is Wauban, and an Indian of
that Name was one of the first that here zealously promoted the Conversion of
his Neighbors. But having thus entered upon the Teaching of these poor
Creatures, it is incredible how much time, toil, and hardship, he underwent in
the Prosecution of this Undertaking; how many weary days and nights rolled
over him; how many tiresome Journeys he endured; and how many terrible dangers,
he had experince of. If you briefly would know what he felt, and what carried
him through all, take it in his own words, in a Letter to the Honorable Mr.
Winslow; says he, I have not been dry night nor day, from the third day of the
week unto the sixth, but so Traveled, and at night pull off my Boots, wring my
blockings, and on with them again, and so continue, But God steps in and helps.
I have considered the Word of God in 2. Tim. 2.3. Endure hardship as a good
Soldier of Christ.

(c) His Translating the Bible, and other Books of Piety into the INDIAN TONGUE.
ONe of his Remarkable Cares for these illiterate Indians, was to bring them
into the use of Schools and B^^ks. He quickly procured the benefit of Schools
for them; wherein they profited so much, that not only very many of them
quickly came to Read and Write, but also several arrived unto a Lib^ral
Education in our College, and one or two of them took their degree with the
rest of our Graduates. And for Books, it was his chief desire that the sacred
Scriptures might not in an unknown Tongue be Locked or Hidden from them; very
hateful and hellish did the policy of Popery appear to him on this Account; Our
Eliot was very unlike to that Franciscan, who writing into Europe gloried much
how many thousands of Indian he had Converted, but added, That he desire^ his
Friend would send him the Book called the Bible; for he had heard of there
being such a Boo^ in Europe, which might be of some use to him. No, our Eliot
found he could not live without a Bible himself; he would have parted with all
his Estate sooner than have lost a Leaf of it; and he knew it would be of more
than some use unto the Indians too; he therefore with a vast Labor translated
the Holy Bible into the Indian Language. Behold, ye Americans, the greatest
Honor that ever you were Partakers of (...) This Bible was Printed here at our
Cambrid^^; and it is the only Bible that ever was Printed in all America, from
the very Foundation of the World. The whole Translation he writ^ with but one
Pen; which Pen had it not been lost, would have certainly deserved a Richer
Case than was bestowed upon that Pen which Holland writ his Translation of
Plutarch with. The Bible being justly made the Leader, of all the rest, a
Little Indian-Library quickly followed: for besides Primers, and Grammars, and
some other such Composures, we quickly had, The Practice of Piety, in the
Indian Tongue and the Reverend Richard Bax^ers, Call to the Unconverted: he
also Translated, some of Mr. Shepherd's Composures; and such Ca^ech^s^ms
likewise as there was occasion for. It cannot but be hoped that some Fish were
to be made Alive, since the Waters of the Sanctuary thus came un^^ them.

(d) His Gathering of a Church at NATICK
The Indians that had felt the Impressions of his Ministry, were quickly
distinguished by the Name of, Praying Indians; and these Praying Indians as
q^ickly were for a more Decent, and English way of Living, and they desired a
more Fixed Cohabitation. At several Places did they now combine and settle; But
the place of Greatest Name among their Towns, is that of Natick.

Here 'twas, that in the year 1651. those that had heretofore lived like the
wild Beasts in the Wilderness now compacted themselves into a Town; and they
first applied themselves to the forming of their Civil Government. Our Gene^al
Court, notwithstanding their exact study to keep these Indians very sensible of
their being subject unto the English Empire, yet had allowed them their smaller
Courts, wherein they might govern their own smaller Cases and Concerns, after
their own particular Modes, and might have their Town-Orders, if I may cast
them so, peculiar to themselves. With respect hereunto, Mr. Eliot on a Solemn
Fast made a public Vow, That seeing these Indians were not prep ssessed with
any Forms of Government, he would ^nstruct them into such a Form, as we had
written in the Word of God, that so they might be a people in all things ruled
by the Lord. Accordingly, he Expounded unto them the eighteenth Chapter of
Exodus; and then they chose Rulers of Hundreds, of Fifties, of Tens; and
therewithal Entered into this Covenant.

We are the sons of Adam; We and our Forefathers have a long time been Lost in
our sins; but now the mercy of the Lord begins to find us out again;
therefore the grace of Christ helping us, we do give our selves and our
Children, unto God, to be his people. He shall Rule us in all our Affairs; The
Lord is our Judge, the Lord is our Lawgiver, the Lord is our King; he will
save us; and the wisdom which God has taught us in his Book shall guide us. Oh
Jehovah, Teach us Wisdom; send thy Spirit into our hearts; take us to be thy
people, and let us take thee to be our God.

Such an o^inion about the perfection of the Scripture had he, that he thus
expressed himself upon this occasion, God will bring Nations into Distress and
Perplexity, that so they may be forced unto the Scriptures; all Governments
will be shaken, that men may be forced at length to Pitch upon that firm
foundation, The Word of God.

The Little Towns of these Indians being pitched upon this foundation, they
utterly abandoned that Polygamy which had heretofore been Common among them;
they made severe Laws against Fornication, Drunkenness, and Sabbath-breaking,
and other Immoralities; and they next began to Lament after the Establishment
of a Church Order among them, and after the several Ordinances and Privileges
of a Church Communion. The Churches of New England have usually been very
strict in their Admissions to Church Fellowship, and required very signal
demonstrations of a Repenting and a Believing Soul, before they thought men fit
subjects to be entrusted with, The Rights of the Kingdom of Heaven. But they
seemed rather to Augment than Abate their usual Strictness, when the
examination of the Indians was to be performed. A Day was therefore set apart,
which they called, Natootom^threack^suk, or, a Day of Asking Questions, when
the ministers of the Adjacent Churches, assisted with all the best Interpreters
that could be had, publicly examined a good Number of these Indians, about
their Seize both in Knowledge and in Virtue. And notwithstanding the
great satisfaction then received, our Churches being willing to proceed Surely,
and therefore Slowly, in Raising them up to a Church State which might be
Comprehended in our Consociations, the Indians were afterward called in
Considerable Assemblies convened for that purpose, to make open Confessions of
their Faith in God and Christ, and of the Efficacy which his word had upon them
for their Conversion to Him; which Confessions being taken in writing from
their mouths by able Interpreters, were scanned by the people of God, and found
much Acceptance with them.

I need pass no further Censure upon them, than what is given by my
Grandfather, the well-known Richard Mather, in an Epistle of his, Published on
this occasion; says he, There is so much of Gods work among them, as that I
cannot but count it a great evil, yea a great injury to God and His Goodness,
for any to make light of it. To see and hear Indians opening their mouths, and
lifting up their hands and eyes, in Prayer to the Living God, calling on him by
his Name Jehovah, in the Mediation of Jesus Christ, and this for a good while
together; to see and hear them. Exhorting one another from the Word of God; to
see and and hear them confessing the Name of Christ Jesus, and their own
sinfulness; sure this is more than usual! And though they spoke in a Language, of
which many of us understood but little, yet we that were present that day, we
saw and heard them perform the Duties mentioned with such grave and sober
Countenances; with such comely Reverence in their Gesture, and their whole
carriage, and with such plenty of Tears trickling down the Cheeks of some of
them, as did argue to us that they spoke with the Holy Fear of God, and is much
affected our Hearts.

At length was a Church State settled among them: they entered, as our Churches
do, into an holy Covenant, wherein they gave themselves, first unto the Lord,
and then unto one another, to attend the Rules, and Helps, and expect the
Blessings of the Everlasting Gospel; and Mr. Eliot, having a Mission from the
Church of Roxbury, unto the work of the Lord Christ among the Indians,
conceived himself sufficiently Authorized unto the performing of all
Church-work about them; grounding i^ on Act. 13.1, 2, 3, 4. and he accordingly
Administered, first the Baptism, and then the Supper of the Lord unto them.

(e) The Hindrances and Obstructions, that the DEVIL. gave unto HIM.
WE find four Assemblies of Praying Indians besides that of Natick, in our
Neighborhood. But why no more? Truly, not because our Eliot was wanting in his
Offers and Labors for their good; but because many of the obdurate Infidels
would not receive the Gospel of Salvation. In one of his Letters, I find him
giving this ill report, with such a good reason for it; Lyn- Indians are all
naught, save one, who sometimes comes to hear the Word; and the reason why they
are bad, is, principally because their Sachim is naught, and cares not to pray
unto God. Indeed the Sachims, or the Princes, of the Indians generally did all
they could that their Subjects might not entertain the Gospel; the D^vils
having the Sachims on their side, thereby kept their possession of the people
too. Their Pauwaws or Clergymen, did much to maintain the Interest of the
Devils in this Wilderness, those Children of the Devil; and Enemies of all
Righteousness, did not cease to pervert the Right ways of Lord; but their
Sachims or Magistrates did M^re toward it; for they would presently Raise a
Storm of Persecution upon any of their vassals that should Pray unto the
Eternal God. The ground of this conduct in them, was, an odd Fear, that
Religion would abridge them of the Tyranny which they had been used unto; they
always like the Devil held their people i^ a most absolute servitude, and Ruled
by no Law but their Will, which left the poor Slaves nothing that they could
call their Own. They now suspected that Religion would put a Bridle upon such
usurpations, and oblige them to a more Equal and Humane way of Government; they
therefore some of them, had the Impudence to Address the English, that no
motions about the Christian Religion might ever he made unto them; and Mr.
Eliot sometimes in the Wilderness, without the Company or Assistence of any
other Englishman, has been treated in a very Threatening and Barbarous manner
by some of these Tyrants; but God inspired him with so much Resolution as to
tell them, I am about the work of the Great God, and my God is with me; so that
I fear neither you, nor all the Sachims in the Country; I Will go on, and do you
Touch me, if you dare! upon which the Stoutest of them have shrunk and fell
before him. And One of them he at length Conquered by preaching unto him a
Sermon upon the ^emp^ations of Our Lord; particularly, the Temptation fetched
from the Kingdoms and Glories of the World.

The Little Kingdoms and Glories of the Great Men among the Indians, was a
Powerful Obstacle to the success of Mr. Eliots Ministry; and it is observable
that several of those Nations which thus refused the Gospel, qu ckly af^erwards
were so Divel-driven as to begin an unjust and bloody War upon the English,
which issued in their speedy and utter Extirpation from the Face of Gods Earth.
It was particularly Remarked, in ^hilip, the Ringleader of the most calamitous
war that ever they made upon us; our Eliot made a Tender of the Everlasting
Salvation to that King; but the monster entertain d it with contempt and anger,
and after the Indian mode of joining signs with words he took ^ Button upon the
Coat of the Revere^^ Man, adding That he cared for his Gospel, just a^ much as
he cared for that Button. The world has heard what a Terrible Ruin soon came
upon that woeful Creature, and upon all his People. It was not long before the
Hand which now writes, upon a certain o^casion took off the jaw from the
blasphemous exposed Skull of that Leviathan; and the Renowned Samuel Lee is now
Pastor to an English Congregation, sounding and showing the praises of Heaven,
upon that very spot of ground, where Philip and his Indians were lately
worshipping of the Devil.

Sometimes the more immediate Hand of God, by cutting off the principal
Opposers of the Gospel among the Indians made way for Mr. Eliot's Ministry. As,
I remember, he relates that an Association of profane Indians near our
Weym^uth, set themselves to deter and seduce the Neighbor Indians from the
R^ght w^^s of the Lord. But God q^ickly sent the Smallpox among them, which
^ike a great Plague soon swept them away, and thereby engaged the rest unto
himself. I need only to add, That one Attempt made by the Devil, to prejud^ce
the Pagans against the Gospel, had something in it extraordinary. While Mr.
Eliot was Preaching of Christ unto the other Indians, a Demon appeared unto a
Prince of the Eastern-Indians, in a shape that had some Resemblance of Mr.
Eliot or of an English Minister, pretending to be, The English-man's God. The
Spectre commanded him, To forbear the drinking of Rum, and To observe the
Sabbath Day, and To deal justly with his Neighbors, all which things had been
inculcated in Mr. Eliot's Ministry; promising therewithal unto him, That if he
did so, at his death his Soul should Ascend unto an happy place; otherwise
Descend unto miseries; but the Apparition all the while, never said one word
about Christ, which was the main subject of Mr. Eliot's Ministry. The Sachim
received such an impression from the Apparition, that he dealt justly with all
men, except in the bloody Tragadies to Cruelties he afterward committed on the
English in our Wars; he kept the Sabbath Day like a Fast, frequently attending
in our Congregations; he would not meddle with any Rum though usually his
Countrymen, had rather dy^ than undergo such a piece of Self-denial; tha^
Liquor has merely Enchanted them. At last, an^ not long since this Demon
appeared again unt^ this Pagan, requ ring him to kill himself an^ assuring him
that he should Revive in a day o^ two, never to die any more. He thereupon
diverse times attempted it, but his Friends ver^ carefully preven ed it; however
at length (...) found a fair opportunity, for this fowl Busines^ and Hanged
himself; you may be sure, without his expected Resurrection. But it is easy to
s^ what a stumbling block was here laid before the miserable Indians.

(f) The Indian-Churches at Mashippaug, and elsewhere.
THe same spirit which acted Mr. Eliot, quickly Inspired others elsewhere, to
prosecute the work of rescuing the poor Indians out of their worse than
Egyptian-Darkness, in which Evil Angels had been so long preying upon them. One
of these was the Godly and Gracious Richard Bourn, who soon saw a great effect
of his Holy Labors. In the 1666. Mr. Eliot accompanied by the Honorable
Governor, and several Magistrates and Ministers of Plymouth-Colony, procured a
vast Assembly at Mashippaug; and there a good number of Indians, made
confessions touching the knowledge and belief, and Regeneration of their Souls,
with such ander^tanding and affection as was extremely grateful to the pious
Auditory. Yet such was the strictness of the good people in this Affair, that
before they would countenance the advanaement of these Indians unto
Church Fellowship, they ordered their Confessions to be written and sent unto
all the Churches in the Colony, for their Approbation; but so approved they
were, that afterward the Messengers of all the Churches giving their pr^sence
and consent, they became a Church, and chose Mr. Bourn to be their Pastor; who
was then by Mr. Eliot and Mr. Cotton Ordained unto that Office over them. From
hence Mr. Eliot and Mr. Cotton went over to an Island called Martha's Vineyard,
where God had so succeeded the honest Labors of some, and particularly of the
Mayhew's, as that a Church was gathered.

This Church, after Fasting and Prayer, chose one Hiacoomes to be their Pastor,
John Tockinosh, an able and a discreet Christian to be their Teacher; Joshua
Mummeecheegs and John Nanaso to be ruling Elders; and these were then Ordained
by Mr. Eliot and Mr. Cotton thereunto. Distance of Habitation, caused this one
Church by mutual agreement afterward to become tw^; the Pastor and one Ruling
Elder taking one part, and the Teacher and one Ruling Elder, another, and at
N^ntucket another adjacent Island was another Church of Indians quickly
gathered, who chose an Indian, John Gib, to be their Minister. These Churches
are so exact in their Admission, and so solemn in their Discipline, and so
^^rlons in their Communion, that some of the Christian English in the
Neighborhood, which would have been loath to have mixed with them in a civil
Relation, yet have gladly done it in a Sacred One

It Is needless for me to repeat what my Father has written about the other
Indian Congregations; only there having been made mention of one Hi^cooms, I am
willing to annex a Passage or two concerning that memorable Indian. That Indian
was a very great Instrument of bringing his Pagan and wretched Neighbors, to a
saving acquaintance with our Lord Jesus Christ; and God gave him the Honor,
not only of so doing much for some, but also of suffering much from others, of
those unhappy Salvages. Once particularly, this Hiacoomes received a cruel blow
from an Indian Prince, which i^ some English had not been there, might have
killed him, for his Praying unto God. And afterward he gave this account of
his Trial in it; said he, I have two hands; I had one Hand for Injuries, and
the other for God; while I did receive wrong with the one, the other laid the
greater hold on God.

Moreover, the Powawes did use to hector and abuse the Praying Indians, at such
a rate, as terrified others from joining with them; but once when those Witches
were bragging, that they could Kill all the Praying Indians, if they would;
Hiacoomes replied, Let all the Powawes in the Island come together, I Will venture
my self in the midst, of them; let them use all their witchcrafts; with the
help of God, I Will tread upon them all. By this courage, he silenced the P^wawes:
but at the same time also he Heartned the People, at such a rate as was truly
wonderful; nor could any of them ever harm this Eminent Confessor afterward;
nor indeed any Proselyte which had been by his means brought home to God; yea,
it was observed after this, that they rather Killed than Cured all such of the
Heathen as would yet make use of their Enchantments for help against their
Sicknesses.

(g) Of Mr. Eliot's Fellow Laborers in the INDIAN-WORK.
SO little was the Soul of our Eliot infected with any Envy, as that he longed
for nothing more than Fellow Laborers, that might move and shine in the same
Orb with himself; he made his cries both to God and Man, for more Laborers to
be thrust-forth, into the Indian-Harvest; and indeed it was an Harvest of so
few secular Advantages and Encouragements, that it must be nothing less than a
Divine Thrust, which could make any to Labor in it. He saw the Answer of his
prayers, in the Generous and vigorous Attempts made by several other most
worthy preachers of the Gospel, to Gospellize our perishing Indians. At the
writing of my Fathers letter there were Four; but the Number of them increases
apace among us. At Martha's Vineyard, the old Mr. Mayhew, and several of his
Sons, or Grandsons have done very worthily for the Souls of the Indians; there
were fifteen years ago, by computation, about fifteen hundred Seals of their
Ministry upon that one Island. In Connecticut, the holy and acute Mr. Fitch,
has made noble Essays toward the Conversion of the Indians, but, I think, the
Prince he has to deal withal, being an obstinate Infidel gives unhappy Remora's
to the Successes of his Ministry. And godly Mr. Pierson, has in that Colony,
deserved well, if I mistake not, upon the same account. In Massachusetts we see
at this day, the pious Mr. Daniel Gookin, the gracious Mr. Peter Thatcher, the
well-accomplished and industrious Mr. Guindal Rawson, all of them hard at work,
to turn these Poor Creatures from darkness unto light, and from Satan unto God.
In Plymouth, we have the most Active Mr. Samuel Treat laying out himself to
save this Generation; and there is one Mr. Tupper, who uses his laudable
Endeavors for the instruction of them.

It Is my Relation to him, that causes me to defer unto the last place, the
mention of Mr. John Cotton, who addresses the Indians in their own Language
with an admirable Dexterity, and has done more than a little Service for them.
He hired an Indian, after the rate of twelve pence per day for fifty days, to
teach him the Indian Tongue; but his knavish Tutor having received his whole
Pay too soon, ran away before twenty days were out; however, in this time he
had profited so fat, that he could quickly Preach unto the Natives, and he has
ever-since being doing much for God among them. Having told my Reader, that the
S^cond-Edition of the Indian Bible was wholly o^ his Correction and Amendment;
because it (...) not proper for one to say much of him, I shall only and this
Remarkable Story. Mr. Cotton, accompanied by the Governor and Major General,
and sundry Persons of Quality, made a Journey to a Nation of Indians in the
Neighborhood, with a free Offer of the Words whereby they might be Saved. The
Prince took time to consider of it, and according to the true English of ^aking
Time in such cases, at length he told them, He did not accept the Tender which
they made him. They then took their leaves of him, not without first giving him
this plain and short Admoni^ion, If God have any mercy for your miserable
people, He will quickly find a way to take (...) out of the way. 'Twas
presently after this, that this Prince going forth to a Battle against another
Nation of Indians, was killed in the Fight; and the young Prince being in his
Minority, the Government fell into the Hands of Protectors, which favored the
Interest of the Gospel. Mr. Cotton being advised of it, speedily and
prosperously Renewed the Tidings of an Eternal Savior to the Salvages, who
have ever since attended upon his Ministry; and the young Sachim, after he came
to Age, expressed his Approbation of the Christian Religion; especially, when a
while-since, he lay a Dying of a tedious Distemper, and would keep Reading of
Mr. Baxter's Call to the V^converted, with floods of Tears in his Eyes, while
he had any strength to do it.

Such as these are the persons, whom our Eliot left Engaged in the Indian-work,
when he departed from his Employment unto his Recompense. And these Gentlemen
are so indefatigable in their Labors among the Indians, as that the most
aequal Judges must acknowledge them worthy of much greater Salaries than they
are generously contented with. But one may see then, who inspired that
clamorous (though contemptible) Persecutor of this Country, who very zealously
Addressed the A. B. of Canterbury, that these Ministers might be deprived of
their Little Stipends, and that the said Stipends might go to maintain that
Worship among us, which the Plantation was Erected on purpose for the peaceable
Avoiding of.

(h) The sacred and solemn Exercises performed in the Indian Congregations.
MY Fathers Account of the Exercises performed in the Indian-Congregations,
will tell us what a Blessed Fruit our Eliot saw of his Labors, before he went
unto those Rewards which God had Reserved in the Heavens for him. Some of the
Indians quickly Built for themselves, good and large Meeting Houses after the
English Mode, In which also after the English Mode, they attended the Things of
the Kingdom of Heaven. And some of the English were helpful to them, upon this
account; among whom I ought particul^rly to mention that Learned, Pious, and
Charitab^e Gentleman, the Worshipful Samuel S^^^^. E^^; who at his own charge
built a Meeting house for one of the Indian Congregations, and gave those
Indians cause to pray for him under that ch^racter, He loves Our Nation, for
he has built as a Synagogue.

It only remains that I give a touch or two upon the Worship which is attended
in the Synagogues of the Indians. And first, the very Name of Praying Indians
will assure us that Prayer is one of their Devotions; be sure, they could no^
be our Eliot's Disciples if it were not so^. But how do they Pray? We are told,
it is Without a Form, because from the Hearts; which is as I remember,
^ertullians Expression concerning the the prayers in the Assemblies of the
Primitive Christians; namely, ^^^e ^honi^ore quia de pectore. It is evident,
that the Primitive Christians had no stated Liturgies among them; that no Forms
of Prayers were in their time imposed upon the Ministers of the Gospel; that
even about the platform of prayer given us by our Lord, it was the opinion of
Austin himself, not-withstanding the Advances made in his Age toward what we
count Su^e^stitious, that our Lord therein ^aug^^ not what Words we should use
in prayer, but what Things we should pray for. And whatever S^^^^^ the
profanity of our days has abused that P^^ra^ and Thing withal, Gr^g^ry
N^zia^zen in his day^ counted it the Honor of his Father^ public^ ^ra^ers,
That he had them from, and made the^ (...) the Holy Spirit. Our Indians
accordingly and, that if they study the Words of God, and their own Sins and
Wants and W^es, they shall ^^on come to that Attainment, Behold they pray. They
can pray with much Pertinence and Enlargement; and would much wonder at it; i^
they should hear of an English Clergy, that should Read their prayers out of a
Book, when they should pour out their Souls before the God of Heaven.

Their Preaching has much of Eliot, and therefore you may be sure, much of
Scripture, but perhaps more of the Christian than of the Scholar in it. I know
not how to describe it better, than by reciting the Heads of a Sermon, ^ttered
by an Indian, on a Day of H^^^^ (...) kept by them, at a time when great R^i^^
^^d given much Damage to their Fruits and Field^, it was on this wise.

A little I shall say, according to that little I k^o^.

Genesis 8.20, 21. And Noah built an Altar, unto Jehovah, and be took of every
clean Beast, and of every clea^ (...) and offered burnt-offerings on the Altar.
And the Lord smelled a sweet savor, and the Lord said in his heart, I will not
again Curse (...) ^^^^^nd.

^n that Noah Sacrificed, he showed himself Thankful; in that Noah worshipped,
he show himself Godly. In that he offered Clean beasts, he showed that God is
an Holy God. And all that come to god, must be pure and clean. Know, that we
must by Repentance, purge our selves; which is the work we are to do this Day.

Noah Sacrificed, and so Worshipped. This was the manner of old time. But what
Sacrifices have we now to offer? I shall answer by that in Psalm. 4.5. Offer to
God the Sacrifice of Righteousness, and put your Trust in the Lord. These are
the true Spiritual Sacrifices which God requires at our hands, the Sacrifices
of Righteousness; that is, we must look to our hearts and ways, that they be
Righteous; and then we shall be acceptable to God when we Worship him. But if
we be unrighteous, unholy, ungodly, we shall not be accepted; our Sacrifices
will be stark naught. Again, We are to put our Trust in the Lord. Who else is
there for us to trust in? We must believe in the Word of God; if we doubt of
God, or doubt of his Word, our Sacrifices are little worth; but if we trust
steadfastly in God, our Sacrifices will be good.

Once more, what Sacrifices must we offer. My Answer is, we must offer such as
Abraham offered. And what a Sacrifice was that? we are told in Genesis 22.12. Now
I know that thou fear me, seeing thou have not with hel^ thy Son, thy only
Son from me. It seems, he had but one dearly beloved Son, and he offered that
Son to God; and so God said, I know thou fear me! Behold, a Sacrifice in
Deed and in Truth such an one must we offer. Only, God requires not us to
Sacrifice our Sons, but our Sins; our dearest Sins. God calls us this day to
part with all our Sins, though never so beloved; and we must not withold any of
them from him. If we will not part with All, the Sacrifice is not right. Let us
part with such Sins as we love best, and it will be a good Sacrifice!

God smelt a sweet savor in Noah's Sacrifice; and so will God receive our
Sacrifices, when we Worship him aright. But how did God manifest his Acceptance
of Noah's Offering: 'twas by promising to Drown the world no more, but give us
Fruitful Seasons. God has chastised us of late, as if he would utterly Drown
us; and he has Drowned and Spoiled and Ruined a great deal of our hay, and
threatens, to kill our Cattle. It Is for this that we Fast and Pray this Day.
Let us then Offer a clean and pure Sacrifice, as Noah did; so God will smell a
favor of Rest, and he will withold the Rain, and Bless us with such Fruitful
Seasons as we are desiring of him.

Thus preached an Indian called Nish^kkon, above thirty years ago; and since
that I suppose, they have grown a little further into the New-English way of
preaching: you may have i^ their sermons, a Ku^kooton^wehtea^nk that is, a
Doctrine, Nahto^to^wch^^aonk, or, an Answer, a, Wi^chea^euonk, or, a Reason,
with an Ouworeank, or, an, U^^ for the close of all.

As for Holidays, you may take it for granted, our Eliot would not persuade his
Indians to any Statted ones. Even the Christmas-Festival it self, he knew to be
a stranger unto the Apostolical Times; that the exquisite Vossius himself
acknowledges, 'twas not Celebrated in the first or second Century: and that
there is a Truth in the words of the great Chemnuius, Anniversarium Diem
Natales Christi, celebratum fuisse, apud ve^^stissimos nunquam legitur. He knew
that if the Day of our Lords Nativity were to be observed, it should not be in
December: that many Churches for diverse Ages kept it not in December, but in
January; that Chrysostom himself, about four hundred years after our Savior,
excuses the Novelty of the December season for it, and confesses it had not
been kept above ten years at Constantinople: No, that it should be rather in
September, in which Month the Jews kept the Feast that was a Type of our Lords
Incarnation; and Solomon also ^rought the Ark into the Temple; for our Lord wa^
thirty years, old when he entered upon his public Ministry; and he continued in
it three years and an half; Now his Death was in March, and it is easy then to
calculate when his Birth ought to be. He knew, that indeed God had hid this Day
as he did the body of Moses, to prevent Idolatry; but that Antichrist had chose
this day, to accommodate the Pagans in their Licencious and their Debauched
S^turn^lia; and that a Tertullian would not stick to say, Shall we Christians
who have nothing to do with the Festivals of the Jews, which were once of
Divine Institution, embrace the Saturnalia, of the Heathen? How do the Gentiles
shame us, who are more true to their Religion, than we are to ours? None of
them will observe the Lord's Day, for fear lest they should be Christians; and
shall not we then by observing their Festivals, fear lest we be made Ethnicks?
In fine, it was his opinion, That for us to have stated Holy Days which are not
appointed by the Lord Jesus Christ, is a deep Reflection upon the Wisdom of
that glorious Lord; and he brought up his Indians, in the principles which the
old Waldenses had about such unwarrantable Holydays.

Nevertheless, he taught them to set apart their Days both for Fasting and
Prayer, and for Feasting and Praise, when there should be Extraordinary
Occasions for them; and they perform the duties of these Days with a very
laborious Piety. One party of the Indians long since of their own Accord, kept
a Day of Supplication, together, wherein one of them discoursed upon Psalm,
66.7. He Rules by his power for ever, His Eyes behold the Nations, let not the
Rebellious exalt themselves. And when one asked them afterward, what was the
Reason of their keeping such a day, they replied, It was to obtain five mercies
of God.

First, That God would slay the Rebellion of their hearts. Next, that they
might love God and one another. Th^rdly, that they might withstand the
Temptations of wicked men, so that they might not be drawn back, from God
Fourthly, that they might be Obedient unto the counsils and commands of their
Rulers. Fifthly, that they might have their sins done away by the Redemption of
Jesus Christ; And lastly, that they might walk in the good ways of the Lord. I
must here embrace my opportunity to tell the world, that our Cautious Eliot,
was far from the opinion of those who have thought it not only warrantable, but
also commendable to Adopt some Heathenish Usages into the Worship of God, for
the more easy and speedy gaining of the Heathen to that Worship. The policy of
treating the Paegan Rites as the Jews were to do Captives, before they married
them, to shave their Hair, and pare their Nails, our Eliot counted as
ridiculous as pernicious. He knew that the Idolatries and Abominations of
Popery, were founded, in thi^ way of Prosely^ing the barbarous Nations, which
made their Descent upon the Roman Empire and he looked upon the like methods
which the Protestants have used, that they might ingratiate themselves with the
Papists, and that our Separation from them should become the less dangerous and
sensible, to be the most sensible and dangerous wound of the Reformation.
Wherefore, as no less a man than Dr. Henry Moor says about our Compliances with
the Papists, which are a sort of Pagans, Their Conversion and Salvation being
not to be compassed by needless Symbolizing with them, in any thing, I conceive
our best policy is studiously to imitate them in nothing; but for all
indifferent things, to think rather the worse of them for their using of them.
As no person of Honor, would willingly go in the known Garb of i^famous
persons. Whatsoever we Court them in, they do but turn it to our scorn and
contemp^, and are the more hardened in their own wickedness. To act upon this
principle, is the design and glory of New England! And our Eliot was of this
persuasion, when he brought his Indians to a pure, plain, Scripture Worship. He
would not gratify them with a Samaritan sort of blended, mixed Worship; and he
imagined, as we^l he might, that the Apostle ^aul's first Epistle to the
C^rinthians had enough in it, for-ever to deter us all from such Unchristian
and unhappy ^emporizing.

(I) A Comparison between what the New-Englanders have done for the Conversion
of the Indians, and what has been done elsewhere by the Roman Catholics.
IT is to be confessed, That the Roman Catholics have a Clergy so very
Numerous, and so little Encumbred, and are Masters of such prodigious
Ecclesiastical Revenues, as renders it very easy for them to exceed the
Protestants in their Endeavors to Christianize the Pagan Salvages. Nor would I
Reproach, but rather Applaud their Industry in this matter, wishing that we
were all touched with an Emulation of it. Nevertheless, while I commend their
Industry, they do by their Clamours against the Reformed Churches upon this
account, oblige me to tax diverse very scandalous things in the Missions which
they make pro propaganda side throughout the world; and therewithal to compare
what has been done by that little Handful of Reformed Churches in this Country,
which has in diverse Regards out-dyie the furthest Efforts of popery.

The Seize which with Gods help we have carried up our Indi^ns unto, are
the chief Honor and Glory of our Labors with them. The Reader will smile
perhaps, when I tell him, that by an odd accident there are lately fallen into
my hands, the Manuscripts of a Jesuit, whom the French Employed as a
Missionary among the Western Indians; in which Papers there are, both a
Catechism containing the principles which those Heathen are to be instructed
in; and Cases of Conscience, referring to their Conversations. The Catechism
which is in the ^roquoise Language (a Language remarkable for this, that there
is not so much as one Labi^l in it) with a Translation annexed, has one
Chapter, about Heaven, and another about Hell, wherein are such Thickskull'd
passages as these.

Q. How is the Soil made in Heaven?

A. it is a very fair Soil; they want neither for Meats nor Cloths; it is but
Wishing and we have them.

Q. Are they employed in Heaven?

A. No, they do nothing; the fields yield Corn, Beans, Pumpkins, and the like,
without any Tillage.

Q what sort of trees are there?

A. Always Green-Full, and Flourishing.

Q. Have they in Heaven the same Sun, the same wind, the same Thunder that we
have here?

A. No, the Sun ever shines; it is always fair weather.

Q. But how their Fruits?

A. In this one quality they exceed ours; that they are never wasted; you have
no sooner plucked one, but you see another presently hanging in its Room. And
after this rate goes on the Catechism concerning Heaven. Concerning Hell it
thus discourses.

Q What sort of a Soil is that of Hell?

A. A Very wretched Soil; it is a fiery pit, in the Center of the Earth.

Q. Have they any light in Hell?

A. No. It Is always Dark; there is always Smoke there; their eyes are always
in pain with it; they can see nothing but the Devils.

Q. What shaped things are the Devils?

A. Very ill shaped things; they go about with Vizards on; and they terrify men.

Q. What do they Eat in Hell?

A. They are always Hangry; but the Damned feed upon ho^^ Ashes and S^rpents
there.

Q W^^^ ^ver have they to D^ink?

A. Horrid water; nothing but melted lead.

Q. Don't they Die in Hell?

A. N^; yet they eat one another, every day; But ano^, God rest^res and renewes
the Man that was eaten; as a cropped Plant, in a little time repull^la^es.

It seems, they have not thought this Divinity too Gr^ss for the Barbariams.
But I shall mak^ no Reflections on it; only add one or two Cases of C^^science,
from their Directory,

It Is one of their weighty cases, Whether a Christian be bound to pay his Whore
her Hire or no? To this Father Bruias answers, Tho he be bound in Justice to do
it, yet inasmuch as the Barbarians [and you must suppose their Whores to be
such!] Use to keep no Faith in such matters, the Christians may choose whether
they will k^ep any too. But Father Pierron with a most profound Learning
answers, He is not bound unto it all; inasmuch as no man thinks himself bound
to pay a Witch, that has Enchanted him; and this business is pretty much a kin
to that. Another of their d fficult Cases, is, Whether an indian stealing an
Hatchet from a Dutchman, be bound to make Restitution? And it is very
conscientiously determined. That if the Dutchman be one that has used any Trade
with other Indians, the Thief is not bound unto any Restitution; for it is
certain, he gains more by such a Trade than the value of many Hatchets in a
year.

I Will tire my Reader with no more of this wretched stuff. But let him
understand that the proselyted indians of New England have been Instructed at a
more Noble Rate; we have helped them to the sincere milk of the word; we have
given them the whole Bible in their own Language; we have laid before them such
a Cree^ as the primitive Believers had, with such Explications as we embark our
own Souls upon the Assurance of. And God ha^ blessed our education of these
poor creatures in such a measure, that they can Pray and Preach to b^tter
edification (give me leave to say it) than multitudes of the Romish Clergymen.
We could have Baptized many Troops of Indians, if we would have used no other
measures with them, than the Roman Catholics did upon theirs at Maryland,
Where they Baptized a great crew of Indians, in some New shirts, bestowed upon
them to encourage them thereunto; but the Indians in a week or two, not knowing
how to wash their shirts, when they were grown foul, came and made a motion,
that the Roman Catholics would give more shirts to them, or else they would
Renounce their Baptism. No, it is a Thorough-paced Christianity without which we
have not imagined our Indians Christianized.

Nor have we been acted with a Roman Catholic Avarice and Falsity and Cruelty
in prosecuting of our conversions; it is the Spirit of an ELIOT, that has all
along directed us. It Is a Specimen of the Popish Avarice that their
Missionaries are very rarely employed but where Bever and Silver and vast
Riches are to be thereby gained; their Ministry is but a fort of Engine, to
enrich Europaeans with the Treasures of the Indies; thus one escaped from
Captivity among the Spaniards, told me, that the Spanish Friars had carried
their Gospel into the spacious Country of California, but finding the Indians
there to be extremely poor, they q^^ckly gave over the work, because forsooth
S^^^^ poor Nation was not worth Conve^ting. Whereas the New-Englanders could
expect nothing from their Indians. We are to Feed them and ^^^ath them, rather
than receive any thing from them, when we bring them home to God. Again, the
popish Falsi^y disposes them to so much Lege^demain in their Applications as is
very disagreeable to the Spirit and Progress of the Gospel. My Worthy Friend,
Myn^eer Daille, who has been sedulous and successful in his Ministry among the
Maqua'^, assures me, that a French predicator, having been attempting to bring
over those ^ndians unto the Interest (not of our Savior, so much as) of
Canada, at last, for a cure of their Infidelity, told them, he would give them
a sign of God's Displeasure at them for it; The Sun should such a day be put
out. This terrified them at a sad rate, and with great admiration and
expectation, they told the Dutch of what was to come to pass; the Dutch replied
This was no more than every Child among them could fo^etel; they all knew there
would then be an Eclipse of the Sun; but (said they) speak to Monsieur, that he
would get the Sun extinguished a day before, or a day after what he spoke of,
and if he can do that, bel^e^e him. When the Indians thus understood what a
Trick the Frenchman would have put upon them, they became irreconcileably
prejudiced, against all his offers; nor have the French been since able to ga^n
much upon that considerable people. The New-Englanders have used no such
Stratag^ms and Kn^veries; it is the pure light of truth, which is all that has
been used for the affecting of the rude people, whom 'twas easy to have cheated
into our Profession. Much less have we used that Popish Cruelty, which the
Natives of Americ^, have by some other people been treated with. Even a Bishop
of their own, has Published, very Tragical Histories of the Spanish Cruelties
upon the Indians of this Western World. Such were those Cruelties, that the
I^d^ans at length declared, They had rather go to Hell with their Ancestors,
than to the same Heaven which the Spaniards pretended unto; it is indeed
impossible to reckon up, the various and exquisi e Barbaritie^ with which these
execrable Spaniards murdered in less than fifty years no less than fifty
millions of the Indians; it seems this was their way of bringing them into the
Sheepfold of our merciful Jesus! But on the other side, the good people of
New England have carried it with so much tenderness toward the ^awny Creatures
among whom we live, that they would not own so much as one foot of Land in the
Country, without a fair Purchase and Con^ nt from the Natives that laid claim
unto it; albeit we had a Royal Charter from the King of Great Britain, to
Protect us in our settlement upon this Continent I suppose, 'twas in revenge
upon us for this Conscientiousness, that the late oppressors of New England,
acknowledged no than to have any Title at all unto one Foot of Land in all our
Colony. But we did and we so, think, notwithstanding the Banters of those
^ories, that the Indians had not by their Paganism so forfeited all Right unto
any of their P^ssessions, that the first pretended Christians that could, might
Violently and yet Honestly sieze upon them. Instead of this, the people of New
England, knowing that some of the English were sufficiently coveteous and
encroaching, and that the Indians in streights are easily prevailed upon, to
sell their lands, made a Law, That none should purchase, or so much as Receive
any land of the Indians, without the Allowance of the Court. Yea, and some
lands which were peculiarly convenient for the Indians, our people who were
mo^e careful of them than they were of themselves, made a Law That they should
never be bought out of their hands. I suppose after this it would surprise
mank^nd, if they should hear such wonderful Crea^ures as our late Secretary
Randolph affirming, This ba^barous people were never civilly treated, by the
late Government, who made it their business to encroach upon their Lands, and
by degrees to drive them out of all. But, how many other Laws we made in favor
of the Indians, it is not easy to reckon up. It Was one of our Laws, That for the
further encouragement of the hopeful work among them, for the Civilizing and
Christianizing of them, any Indian that should be brought unto Civility, and
come to live orderly in any English Plantation, should have such Allotments,
among the English, as the English had themselves. And, that if a competent
number of them, should so come on to civility, as to be capable of a Township,
the General Court should grant them Lands for a Plantation as they do unto the
English. Although we had already bought up their Claims unto our Lands. We
likewise had our Laws, That if any of our Cattle did any damage to their Corn,
we should make them ample satisfaction; and that we should give them all manner
of Assistance, in Fencing of their Fields. And because the Indians are
excessively given unto the vice of Drunkenness, which was a vice unknown to
them, until the English brought Strong-drink in their way, we have had a severe
Law against all selling or giving any Intoxicating Liquors to them. It were
well, if this Law were more severely Executed?

By this time I hope, I have stopped the calumnious Exclamations of the Roman
Catholics against the Churches of the Reformation, for neglecting to
Evangelize the Natives of the Indies. But let me take this occasion to address
the Christian Indians of my own Country, into some of whose Hands, it is likely,
this little Book may come.

Behold, ye Indians, what love, what care, what cost, has been used by the
English here, for the Salvation of your precious and immortal Souls. It is not
because we have expected any Temporal Advantage from you, that we have been
thus concerned for your good; No, it is God that has caused us to desire his
Glory in your Salvation; and our hearts have bled with Pity over you, when we
have seen how horribly the Devil Oppressed you in this, and Destroyed you in
another world. It is much that has been done for you; we have put you into a
way to be happy both on Earth while you live, and in Heaven when you Die. What
can you think will become of you, if you slight all these Glorious offers!
methinks you should say to your-selves, Vttoh woh kittinne peh quoh humunan
mishanantamog ne mohsag wadchaniltuonk! You all believe that your Teacher
ELIOT, was a Good and a Brave Man, and you would count it your Blessedness to
be forever with him. Nevertheless, I am to tell you, that if you don't become
Real, and Thorough and Holy Ch^istians, you shall never have a comfortable
sight of him any more. You know how he has Fed you, and Clothed you, as well
as Taught you; you know how his Bowels yerned over you, even as though you had
been his Children, when he saw any affl^ctions come upon you; but if he find
you among the wicked, in the Day of Judgment, which he so often warned you of,
he will then be a Dreadful Witness against you, and when the Lord Jesus passes
that sentence on you, Depart ye Cursed into Everlasting Fire with the Devil and
his Angels, even your own ELIOT will then say, Amen, unto it all. Now, to deal
plainly with you, there are two Vices, which many of you are too prone unto,
and which are utterly inconsistent with a True Christianity. One of those
Vices, is that of Idleness. If you had a Disposition to follow an Honest
Calling, what should hinder you from growing as Considerable in your Estates,
as many of your English Neighbors whereas, you are now poor, mean, ragged,
starved, contemptible and miserable; and instead of being able, as your English
Neighbors do, to support the ordinances of God, you are beholden to them, not
only for maintaining of those Blessed ordinances among you, but for many other
kindnesses. And have you indeed forgot the Commandment of God which has been so
often laid before you, Six Days shall thou Labor! for shame, apply your selves
to such Labor as may bring you into more Handsome Circumstances. But the other
of those Vices, is that of Drunkenness. There are godly English Neighbors, of
whom you should learn to Pray; but there are some of you that learn to Drink,
of other, profane, debauched English Neighbors. Poor Creatures, it is by this
Iniquity that Satan still keeps Possession of many Souls among you, as much as
if you were still in all your woeful Heathenism; and how often have you been
told, Drunkards shall not inherit the Kingdom of God? I beseech you to be
sensible of the mischiefs to which this thing exposes you, and never dream of
escaping the Vengeance of Eternal Fire, if you indulge your selves in this A
ccu^sed Thing. I have done, when I have wish d, That the Gospel of the Lord
Jesus may always Run and be Glorified among you!

The CONCLUSION. Or, ELIOT Expiring.
BY this time, I have doubtless made my Readers loath to have me tell what now
remains of this little History; doubtless they are wishing that this John might
have Tarried until the Second Coming of our Lord. But, alas All-Devouring Death
at last snatched him from us, and slighted all those Lamentations of ours, My
Father, My Father, the Chariots of Israel, and the Horsemen there f!

When he was become a sort of Miles Emeritu^, and began to draw near ^^s End,
he grew still more Heavenly, more Savoury, more Divine, and Scented more of the
spicy Country, at which he was ready to put a shore. As the Historian observes
of Liberius. That when his Life and Strength were going from him, his Vice ^et
remained with him; on the contrary, the Grace of this Excellent Man rather
increased than abated, when every thing else was dying with him. It Is too usual
with Old men, that when they are past work, they are least sensible of their
inabilities and incapacities, and can scarce endure to see another succeeding
them in any part of their Office. But our Eliot was of a Temper quite contrary
thereunto; for finding many Months before his Expiration, That he had not
strength enough to Edify his Congregation with public Prayers, and Sermons, he
importuned his people with some impatience to ^all another Minister; professing
himself, unable to Die with Comfort, until he could see a ^ood Successor
ordained, settled, fixed among them. For this cause, he also cried mightily
unto the Lord Jesus, our Ascended Lord, that he would give such a Gift unto
Roxbury, and he sometimes called his whole Town together to join with him in a
East for such a blessing. As the return of their Supplications, our Lord
quickly bestowed upon them, a person young in years, but old in Discretion,
Gravity, and Experience; and one whom the Church of Roxbury hopes to find, A
Pastor after God's own Heart.

It was Mr. Nehemiah Walter, who being by the unanimous Vote and Choice of the
Church there, become the Pastor of Roxbury, immediately found the Venerable
Eliot Embracing and Cherishing of him, with the tender Affections of a Father.
The good Old Man like Old Aaron as it were disrobed himself, with an
unspeakable satisfaction, when he beheld his garments put upon a son so dear
unto him. After this, he for a year or two before his Translation, could scarce
be persuaded unto any public Service, but humbly pleaded, what none but he
would ever have said, It would be a wrong to the Souls of the people, for him
to do any thing among them, when they were supplied so much to their Advantage
otherwise. If I mistake not, the Last that even he Preached was on a Public
East; when he fed his people with a very distinct, and useful, Exposition upon
the Eighty Third Psalm; and he concluded with an Apology, begging his Hearers
to pa^don the poorness, and meanness, and b^okenness, (as he called it) of his
Meditations; but added he, My dear Brother here, will by'nd by mend all.

But although he thus dismissed himself as one so near to the Age of Ninety,
might well have done, from his public Labors; yet he would not give over his
Endeavors, in a more pri^ate Sphaere, to Do good unto all. He had always been
an Enemy to Idleness; any one that should look into the little Diary that he
kept in his Almanalks, would see that there was with him, No day without a
Line; he was troubled when he saw how much Time was devoured by that slavery to
Tobacco, which too many debase themselves unto, and now he grew old, he was
desirous that his work should hold pace with his Life; the less Time he saw
left, the less was he willing to have lost. He imagined that he could now do
nothing to any purpose in any Service for God; and sometimes he would say with
^n Air peculiar to himself, I wonder for what the Lord Jesus Christ lets me
live; he knows that ro^^ I can do nothing for him! And yet he could ^ot forbear
Essaying to Do something for his dearest Lord; wheref^re, thought he, What
shall I do? And he then co^ceived, that though the English could not be benefi ed
by any Gifts which he now fancied himself to have only the Ruins of, yet who
can ^ell but the Negro's might! He had long lamented it with a bleeding and a
burning passion, that the English used their N^gro's but as their Horses or
their Oxen, and that so little care was taken about their prec^ous and immortal
Souls; he look d upon it as a prodigy, that any wearing the Name of Christians,
should so much have the Heart of Devils in them, as to prevent and hinder the
Instruction of the poor Blackanu^res, and confine the Souls of their miserable
Slaves to a destroying ignorance, merely for fear of thereby loosing the
benefit of their Vassalage; but now he made a mo^^on to the English within two
or three miles of him that at such a time and place they would send their
Negro's once a week unto him: for he would then Catechize them, and Enlighten
them to the utmost of his power in the Things of their Everlasting Peace;
however, he did not live to make much progress in this Undertaking.

At length, when he was able to do L^^le without doors, he tried then to do
something within; and one thing was this. A young Boy in the Ne^ghbourhood, had
in his infancy fallen into a fire, so as to burn himself into a perfect
Blindness; but this Boy being now grown to some Bigness, the good old man took
him home to his house, with some intentions to make a scholar of him. He first
informed him of and from the Scripture, in which the Boy so profited, that in a
little time he could, even Repeat many whole Chapters Verbatim, and if any
other in Reading missed a word, he would mind them of it; yea, and an ordinary
piece of latin wa^ become easy to the lad; but having his own Eye^ clos d by
Death, he could no longer help the poor Child against the want of ^is.

Thus, As the Aged Polycarp could say, These Eighty Six years have I se^ved my
Lord Jesus Christ; and he has been such a good Master in me all this while,
that I will not now forsake h m Such a Polycarp was our Eliot; he had been so
many years engaged in the sweet ser^ice of his dear Jesus, that he could not
now give it over: 'twas his Ambition, and his privilege, to bring forth Fruit
in old Age; and what veneration the Church of Smyrna paid unto that Angel of
theirs, we were upon the like Accounts willing to give unto this Man of God.

While he was, thus making his Retreat out of this evil world, his Discourses
from time to time ran upon, The Coming of the Lord Jesus Christ; it was the
Theme which he still had Recourse unto, and we were sure to have something of
this, whatever other Subject he were upon. On this he talk d, of this he
prayed, for this he longed, and especially when any bad News arrived, his usual
reflection thereupon would be, Behold, some of the Clouds, in which we must
look for the Coming of the Son of Man. At last, his Lord, for whom he had been
long wishing, Lord, come! I have been a great while ready for thy Coming! at
last, I say, his Lord came, and fetched him away into the Joy of his Lord.

He fell into some Languishments, attended with a Fever, which in a few days
brought him into the Pangs (may I say? or Joys) of Death, and while he lay in
these, Mr. Walter coming to him, he said unto him, brother, ^hou art welcome to
my very Soul. Pray, Retire to thy Study for me, and give me leave to ^e gone;
meaning that he should not, by Petitions to Heaven for his Life, detain him
^here. It was in these Languishments, that speaking about the work of the
Gospel among the Ind ans, he did after this Heavenly manner express himself,
There is a Cloud (said he) a dark cloud upon the w^rk of the Gospel among the
poor Indians. The Lord Revive and prosper that work, and grant it may live when
I am Dead. It is a work, which I have been Doing much and long about. But what
was the word I spoke last? I Recall that word, My Doings! Alas, they have been
poor and small and lean Doings, and I Will be the man that shall throw the first
stone at them all.

It has been observed, that they who have spoke many considerable things in
their lives, usually speak few at their deaths. But it was otherwise with our
Eliot, who after much Speech of and for God in his Lifetime, uttered some
things little short of Oracles on his Deathbed; which, it is a thousand pities,
they were not more exactly regarded and recorded. Those Authors that have taken
the pains to Collect, A^^p^th^gmata Morientium, have not therein been
unserviceable to the Living; but the Apophtheg^ms of a Dying Eliot must have
had in them a grace and a strain truly extraordinary; and indeed the vulgar
Error of the signal sweetness in the Song of a Dying Swan, was a very Truth in
our Expiring Eliot; his last Breath smelt strong of Heaven, and was Articled
into none but very gracious Notes; one of the last whereof, was, Welcome Joy!
and at last it went away calling upon the slanders by, to, Pray, pray, pray!
which was the Thing in which so vast a portion of it, had been before Employed.

This was the peace, in the end of this Perfect and upright man; thus was there
another Star fetched away to be placed among the Rest that the third Heaven is
now enriched with. He had o^^e, I think, a pleasant Fear, that the old saints
of h^^ Aq^aintance, especially those two dearest (...) ^b^uts of h^s, Cotton,
of Boston, and Mather, of D^^^^^^er, which were got safe to Heaven before him,
would suspect him to be gone the w^o^g way, because he staid so long behind
them. But they are now together with a blessed J^^^s, beholding of his Glory,
and celebrating the High Praises of Him that has call d them into his
mavelous light. Whether Heaven was any more Heaven to him, because of his
finding there, so many Saints with whom he once had his Delicious and
Caelestial Intimacies, yea, and so many Saints which had been the seals of his
own Ministry, in this lower world, I cannot say; but it would be Heaven enough
unto him, to go unto that Jesus, whom he had loved, preached, served, and in
whom he had been long Assured, there does All Fullness awell. In that Heaven I
now leave him: but not without Grynaeus's pathetical Exclamations, [O beatum
illum diem!] Blessed will be the Day, O blessed the Day of our Arrival to the
glorious Assembly of Spirits, which this great Saint is now rejoicing with!

Bereaved New England, where are thy tears, at this Ill-boding Funeral? We had
a Tradition among us, That the Country could never perish, as long as Eliot was
alive. Put in^^ whose Hands must this Hippo fall, now the A^stin of it is taken
away? Our Elisha is gone, and now who must next year invade the Lan^? The Jews
have a saying, Quando Luminaria patiuntur Eclipsin, malum signum est mund^; But
I am sure, it is a dismal Eclipse that has now befallen our New-English World. I
confess, many of the Ancients, fell into the vanity, of esteeming the Reliq^es
of the De^d Saints, to be the ^owers and Ramparts of the places that enjoyed
them; and the dead Bodies of two Apostles in the City, made the Poet cry out, A
Facie Hostili duo propugnacula praesunt.

If the Dust of dead Saints could give us any protection, we are not without
it; here is a Spot of American Soil that will afford a rich Crop of it, at the
Resurrection of the Just. Poor New England has been as Glastenbury of old was
called, A Burying-place of Saints. But we cannot see a more terrible
Prognostic, than Tombs filling apace with such Bones, as those of the Renowned
Eliot's; the whole Building of this Country trembles at the Fall of such a
Pillar.

For many Months before, he died, he would often cheerfully tell us, That he
was shortly going to Heaven and that he would carry a deal of good News thither
with him; he said, He would carry Tidings to the Old-Founders of New England,
which were now in Glory, that Church-work was yet carried on among us: that the
Number of our Churches was continually increasing: and that the Churches were
still kept as big as they were, by the daily Additions of those that shall be
saved. But the going of such as he from us, will apace diminish the occasions
of such happy Tidings.

What shall we now say? Our Eliot himself used most affectionately to bewayl
the Death of all Useful Men; yet if one brought him the notice of such a thing,
with any Despondencies, or said, O Sir, such an one is Dead, what shall we, do?
he would answer, Well, but God lives, Christ lives, the Old Savior of
New England yet lives, and He will Reign till all his Enemies are made his
Footstool. This, and only this, consideration have we to relieve us; and let it
be accompanied with our Addresses to the God of the Spirits of all Flesh, That
there may be Timothies raised up in the room of our Departed Paul's; and that
when our Moses's are gone, the Spirit which which was in those brave men, may
be put upon the surviving Elders of our Israel.

The last thing, that ever our Eliot put off, was, The care of all the
Churches, which with a most Apostolical and Evangelical Temper he was
continually solicitous about. When the Churches of New England were under a
very uncomfortable prospect, by the advantage which men that sought the Ruin,
of those golden and holy and Reformed Societies, had obtained against them. God
put it into the heart of o^e well-known in these Churches, to take a Voyage
into England, that he might by his Mediations at Whitehal, di^ert the Storms
that were impending over us. It Is not easy to express what Affection our Aged
Eliot prosecuted this Undertaking with; and what Tha^k^giving he rendered unto
God for any hopeful Successes of it. But because one of the last Times, and for
ought I know, The Last, of his ever setting Pe^ to Paper in the world, was upon
this occasion; I shall transcribe a short Letter, which was wri^ten by the
shaking hand, that had heretofore by writing deserved so well from the Church
of God, but was now taking its leave of writing for-ever. It was written to the
person that was Engaging for us, and thus it Ra^.

Reverend and Beloved, Mr. Increase Mather.
I cannot write. Read Neh 2.10. When Sanballat. the Horonite, and Tob^jah the
Servant, the Ammonite, heard of it; it grieved them exceedingly, that there was
come a man to seek the Welfare of the Children of Israel.

Let thy blessed Soul, feed full and fat upon this and other Scriptures. All
other things I leave to other men; and rest,

Your Loving Brother, John Eliot


These two or three lines manifest the Care of the Churches which breathed in
this great old man, as long as he had a Breath to draw in the world And since
he has left few like him for a Comprehe^sive and Universal Regard unto the
prosperity of all the Flocks in this Wilderness, we ^a^e little now to comfort
us in the loss of one so like a Patriarch among us, but only this, ^^at our
poor Churches, it may be hoped, have ^till some Interest in the Cares of our
Lord Jesus Christ, Who walks in the midst of the G^lden Ca^dlesticks. Lord!
make our Churches and keep them, yet Golden Candlesticks! Amen.

BUt I have not obtained the end of this Histo^y, nor may I let this H^sto y
come to an end, until I do with some Importunity bespeak the endeavors of good
men every where, to labor in that Harvest which the Blessed FLIO^ justly
counted worthy of his utmost pains and cares. It was the confession of
^hemist^cle^, that the victorie^ of M^lti^^e^ would not let him sleep in quie
ness; may those of our Eliot raise a like emutation in those that have now seen
the life of this evangelical He^^! When one Robert Ba^ly man^ years ago
published a Book, wherein several G^oss Lie^ by wh ch the name of that JOHN
COTTON, who was known to be one of the Holiest Men then alive, was most
Injuriously made odious unto the Churches abroad, were accompanied with some
Reflections upon poor New England, whereof this was one, The way of their
Churches has most exceedingly hindered the conversion of the poor Pagans: of
all that ever crossed the American seas they are noted as most neglectful of
the work of conversion. We have now seen those Aspersions and Calumnies
abundantly wiped away. But let that which has been the Vindication of New
England, be also the Aemulation of the world: for shame, let not poor little
New England, be the only Protestant country that shall do any Notable thing for
the propagation of the Faith, unto those Dark corners of the Earth which are
full of cruel Habitations. But the Addresses of so mean a person as my self, are
like to prevail but little abroad with men of Learning and Figure in the world.
However, I shall presume to utter my Wishes in the sight of my Readers; and it
is possible that the Great God who despises not the prayer of the poor, may by
the Influences of his Holy Spirit, upon the Hearts of some whose Ey^s are upon
these lines, give a Blessed Answer thereunto.

Wherefore, May the people of New E^gland, who have seen so sensible a
Difference between the estates of those that sell Drink, and of those that
preach Truth, unto the miserable salvages among them, as that even this alone
might inspire them, yet from a nobler consideration than that of their own
outward prosperity thereby advanced, be encouraged still to prosecute, first
the Civilizing, and then the Christianizing of the Barbarians, in their
Neighborhood; and may the New-Englanders be so far Politic as well as
Religions, as particularly to make a Mission of the Gospel unto the mighty
Nations of the Western Indi^ns, whom the French have been of late so
studiously, but so unsuccessfully Tampering with; lest those horrid Pagans, who
lately (as it is credibly affirmed) had such a measure of Devilism and Insolence
in them, as to shoot a Volley of great and small S^ot against the Heavens, in
Revenge upon, The Man in the Heavens, as the^ called our Lord, whom they
counted the Author of the heavy Calamities which newly have distressed them; be
found spared by our Long-suffering Lord, [who then indeed presently ^ore the
Ground asunder, with immediate and horrible Thunders from Heaven round about
them, but killed them not (...) for a Scourge to Us, that have not ^s^d our
advantages to make a vertu^us people of them. If a King of the West Saxons long
since ascribed all the Disasters on any of their Affa^rs, to Negligencies in
this point, meth^nks the New-Englanders may not count it unreasonable in this
way to seek their own prosperity. Shall we do what we can that our Lord Jesus
may bestow upon Ame^ic^, which may more justly be called Columba, that
Salutation, O my D^ve!

May the several Plantations, that live upon the Labors of their Negroes, no
more be guilty of such a prodigious wickedness, as to deride, neglect, and
oppose all due means of bringing their poor Negroes unto our Lord; but may the
Masters of whom God will one day require the Souls of the Slaves committed unto
them, see to it, that like Abraham, they have Catechized Servants; and not
imagine that the Almighty God made so many thousands of Reasonable creatures
for nothing, but only to serve the Lusts of Epic^res, or the gains of
Mammonists; lest the God of Heaven out of mere Pity, if not Justice, unth those
unhappy Black, be provoked unto a vengeance which may not without Horror be
thought upon. Lord, when shall we see Ethiopians ^ead thy Scriptures with
Understanding!

May the E^glish Nation do what may be done, that the Welsh may not be
destroyed for the lack of Knowledge, lest our indisposition to do for their
Souls, bring upon us all those Judgments of Heaven, which Gild^s their
Countryman, once ^old them, that the^ suffered for their dis^^^ards unto ou^;
and may the ^^sandous Massacres of the English by the Irish, awaken the E^glish
to consider, whether they have done enough to reclaim the Irish, from the
Popish ^igottries and Abominations, with which they have been intoxicated.

May the several F^ctories and Companies, whose Concerns ly in Asia, Africa, or
America, be persuaded, as Jacob once, and before him his Grandfather Abraham,
was, That they always owe unto God certain Proportions of their Poss^ssions, by
the honest payments of which little Quit-rents, they would certainly secure and
enlarge their Enjoyment of the Principal; but that they are under a very
particular obligation to Communicate of our Spiritual Things, unto those
Heathen, by whose Carnal Things they are Enriched: And may they therefore make
it it their study, to employ some able and pious Ministers, for the instruction
of those Infidels with whom they have to deal, and honorably support such
Ministers in that Employment.

May the poor Greeks, Armentans, Muscovites, and others, in the Eastern
Countries, wearing the Name of Christians, that have little Preaching and no
Printing, and few Bibles, or good Books, now at last be furnished with Bibles,
Orthodox Catechisms, and Pra^tical Treatises by the Charity of England; and may
our Presses provide good stores of good Books for them, in their own Tongues,
to be scattered among them. Who knows what convulsions might be hastened upon
the whole Mohammedan World by such an extensive charity!

May sufficient Numbers of great, wise, rich, learned, and godly men in the
three kingdoms, procure well-composed Socie^ies, by whose united counsels, the
Noble Design of Evangelizing the world, may be more effectually carried on; and
if some generous persons will of their own Accord combine for such
consultations, who can tell, but like some other Celebrated Societies
heretofore formed from such small Beginnings, they may soon have that
countenance of Authority, which may produce very glorious Effects, and give
opportunity to gather vast Contributions from all well disposed people, to
Assist and Advance this progress of Christianity. God forbid, that popery
should expend upon cheating, more than ten times what we do upon Saving, the
Immortal Souls of men.

Lastly, May many worthy men, who find their circumstances will allow of it,
get the Language of some Nations that are not yet brought home to God; and wait
upon the Divine Providence, for Gods Leading them to, and Owning them in, their
Apostolical undertakings. When they Remember what Ruffinus relates concerning
the conversion of the Iberians, and what Socrates, with other Authors, relates
concerning, the conversion wrought by occasion of Frumentius and Aedesius, in
the Inner India, all as it were by Accident, surely it will make them Try, wha^
may be done by Design for such things now in our Days! Thus, let them see,
whether while we at home in the midst of wearisome Temptations, are Angling
with Rods, which now and then catch one Soul for our Lord, they shall not be
Fishing with Nets, which will bring in many thousands of those, concerning whom
with unspeakable Joy in the Day of the Lord, they may say, Behold, I and the
Children which God has given me! Let them see, whether, supposing they should
prosper no farther than to Preach the Gospel of the Kingdom in all the World
for a witness unto all Nations, yet the End which is then to come, will not
bring to them the more happy Lot, wherein they shall Stand, that are found so
Doing.

Let no man be discouraged by the Difficulties, which the Devil will be ready
to clog such Attempts against his Kingdom with; for I will take leave so to
Translate the words of the wise man, in Prove. 27.4. what is able to stand
before ZEAL? I am well satisfied, that if men had the Wisdom, To discern the
Signs of the Times, they would be all Hands at Work, to spread the Name of our
JESUS into all the Corners of the Earth. Grant it, O my God; and Lord Jesus,
Come Quickly.

FINIS.
ERRATA
PAge 26. line. 7. for. of. r. as. p. 48. l. 19. f. Ministry. r. Magistracy. p.
58. l. 3. r. Second. p. 77. l. 22. r. Corporation. p. 87. l. 16. r. Reflection.
p. 120. l. 1. f. Answer r. Question; [and add.] Sampooaonk, or an Answer.


