THE CASE of ALLEGIANCE CONSIDERED

Let this be Printed.

James Fraser.

March 21. 8 8/9.

THE CASE OF ALLEGIANCE IN OUR Present Circumstances CONSIDERED. In a LETTER
from a Minister in the City, to a Minister in the Country.

Romans 4.22. Happy is he that condemns not himself in that thing which he
allows. LONDON: Printed for Ric. Chiswell at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's
Churchyard. MDCLXXXIX.

THE CASE OF ALLEGIANCE CONSIDERED.
Reverend Sir.
YOU having thought fit to consult my Judgment about the lawfulness of
transferring our Allegiance from the late to the present KING; I shall not
mispend time in blaming the ill choice of so incompetent a Casuist. for so
important a Case; but according to the Laws of that Friendship which have been
for some time observed between us, I shall endeavor to approve my readiness,
if not my ability in serving you:

I must not dissent from you, in professing a very tender and awful regard of
Conscience, whose Authority I acknowledge to be sacred and inviolable, and in
the neglect of which I expect no peace in my own mind, nor any confidence
toward God: and I think it necessary to add, That we ought to take as much care
to inform our Consciences, as to follow them; that we provide them all possible
helps and advantages; that we place Truths in the fairest light, and view them
with a steady unprejudiced Eye: And we who are Ministers are more especially
concerned to do so, who being appointed Guides, not only to our selves, but
also to others, must beware of the double guilt of misleading our Flock, by
going our selves astray before them.

You may believe me, Sir, as far as I can know my self, that I have no
Antimonarchical Principles, or secret disgust to the Person of the late King,
to alienate my mind from him: Neither am I conscious of any angry resentments
of former Sufferings, or of any discontent with my present Station, or of any
ambitious design, or hope of a future advancement, to bend my Inclinations to a
concurrence with the present Revolution; for I solemnly protest, That if the
late KING would have thought fit to continue his Government over us, though
with many tolerable Inconveniences to the Public, and though with any
intolerable Prejudices to my private Interest, I would never have retracted my
Reverence and Submission to his Authority, nor have desisted to intercede with
Heaven for blessings on his Person and Government. Whatever change therefore it
made on my mind, it did not, I assure you, proceed from any design or choice of
my own, but was necessarily induced from a change without, and from those new
Circumstances into which the late King unexpectedly cast us.

It is indeed very difficult, as you complain, to determine the present Case
with a satisfactory clearness and certitude, because it is complicated of a
great variety of things, some of which are foreign to our faculty, and which
for the most part require a great niceness of thought to apprehend and
distinguish them; because also we are yet scarce got out of the amazement into
which so great a Revolution has surpised us, and must have time to recollect
and compose our thoughts, ere we can consider so exactly, or deliberate so
steddily as such an Affair deserves; but chiefly because we have of late years
imbibed some false Maxims and Notions, which unhappily entangle our
Consciences, and prejudice our minds against that truth, which it is now become
our interest to discover and acknowledge; and have had those Notions inculcated
upon us with so much force and importunity, that through a slavish fear of
those who have been a long time practicing upon us, we have almost lost our
liberty of thinking freely, and judging impartially of these matters. Yet these
difficulties are not insuperable to an honest inquisitive mind; they may indeed
prompt us to excuse heartily the Errors of others, and to seek more earnestly
for Wisdom, to him that has promised to give it to those that lack, without
upbraiding; but should rather animate than discourage our industry in the
researches of a Truth wherein our Consciences are so much concerned.

These things being premised, I will now set close to my Work; and upon a
general view of the Design before me, I find it necessary for me to do these
three things.

1. To discover and remove some false Principles about Government and
Obedience, whence the obscurities and difficulties in the present Case do
chiefly arise. 2. To resolve the chief difficulties in the Case propounded. 3.
To prove that Resolution to be consistent with all the Obligations that can
affect a good Conscience.
1. It will be necessary in the first place to detect and discard those false
principles of Government and Obedience which have been in this last Age too
earnestly obtruded, and too easily entertained among us; and which are as a
false biass on our minds to mislead their Considerations, and betray them into
Error.

And if we find such Principles do rather inslave than oblige our Consciences,
and are as inconsistent with Truth, as they are with the present Revolution, we
must take the honest courage, to break off those bands, and assert our Liberty.
Of this kind are chiefly these three.

1. That a Monarchical form of Government, and the appropriation of it to a
particular Person or Family, is jure Divino, or by a Divine Right. How boldly
this Principle has been asserted by some men, you and I cannot be ignorant;
upon which so great a stress has been laid, that to alter the Government in
the State, has been thought as lewd an impiety as to alter either of the Holy
Sacraments in the Church; to divert the Succession, as unlawful as to pervert
the very Course of Nature; and to oppose a King, tho is the most illegal
extravagancies, or barbarous outrages, to be no less than fighting against God.
If indeed such a Divine Right did appear, it must be acknowledged in disputable
and inviolable, whatever sad consequences attend it* but upon examination we
shall find that God has no where instituted such a Right, but some men have
with too bold a fraud, made use of his Name to advance and support their
unreasonable pretensions. If by such a Divine Right, no more were intended than
God's permission and allowance, it would have no Opponents; for we know of no
Law that does forbid a Monarchical form of Government, or exclude any
particular person or family from the Administration of it: But then the
pretense so interpreted, will not be sufficient to render an alteration in the
Government or Succession, a sin against God, as the assertors of this notion
have sometimes pretended. They therefore who plead this Argument, must be
thought to assert, That God has by some Law or Constitution appointed Monarchy
to be the specific form of Civil Government; and that the Crown should be
entailed on such particular persons succeeding in the same Family, whereby the
one cannot be changed, or the other debarred without transgressing a Divine
Institution. This being a matter of great importance, and of common continual
concernment to mankind, we may reasonably expect, that if God has made any
such Law, it is somewhere promulg'd to the World with sufficient evidence and
certainty; but tho many have been for some years most sollicitously seeking
after it, yet they are not agreed among themselves in the discovery, nor can
direct us where we may certainly meet with it. I know but of two sort of Laws
which God has given to mankind, Either Moral, impressed on the human Nature;
or Positive, revealed in the Holy Scriptures; but the jus divinum in dispute is
a stranger to both. God has indeed by both, instituted Government, or Civil
Authority for the welfare and security of men in their Civil Societies; He has
also commanded, that Superiors govern justly and mercifully, and that Inferiors
honor them with duty and submission: But I no where find that God has
commanded all Nations, or ours in particular, to be under that form of
Government, which in contradistinction to other forms is called Monarchy; or
under some particular Person or Family in contradistinction to all others. The
Law of Nature does indeed erect a Monarchy in Families, over those who are
naturally descended from him that is to Govern; but there being not the same
natural reason in our Civil Societies, there is not the same Law of Nature to
prescribe the same Government: And if some plead a likeness, or analogy
between them, That can serve only for a rhetorical illustration, but not for
any Logical proof, such as the present case requires. From the Holy Scriptures
we learn that God did once institute a Monarchy for the people of Israel, and
appointed particularly that David should be their King, and also entailed the
Crown upon his Posterity; but as God had particular Reasons for that
institution, respecting the Messiah, so we have no Reason to think that God
intended by that institution, to oblige any other Nation but the Jews only. In
the New Testament we find Civil Government supposed, and the moral Duties to be
discharged both by superiors and inferiors, described and enforced, beyond what
they are in any other institutions; but we no where find Christ and his
Apostles prescribing the particular form of Civil Government, or preferring
Monarchy, or condemning an Aristocratic or Democratic state; and much less
determining the particular persons or families on whom the Regal Dignity shall
descend. Some indeed have inferred from St. Paul's assertions, Romans 13.1. that
the particular forms of Government, and the particular persons which administer
it, are by a Divine Institution; but however they countenance this mistake from
our English translation, which says, There is no power but of God, the powers
that are, are ordained of God; yet the Text is incapable of such a sense, if we
read and render it exactly according to the Original.

St. Paul's words are (...), which in an exact Translation would run thus;
There is no Authority, if not of God; and the Authorities which are (of God's
Institution) are ordered under God. The plain Doctrine of which Text can be
only this, That no man can have an Authority over other men, who are his
Fellow Creatures, except it be derived to him from God, who is the Lord of all;
and that whatever Power is derived to any Superiors over Inferiors, it must be
subordinated to God, from whom it was derived: And as the Apostle does infer
from the former Assertion, That Every soul should be subject to, and not
resist, this Authority, even for Conscience Sake, because derived from God; so
he infers from the latter, That the Superior, who uses this Authority, must
administer it as the Minister of God, for the good of men, in protecting
Virtue, and discouraging Vice, because his Authority is subordinated to God,
the Supreme and Absolute Lord of all Mankind.

And that the Apostle does speak of Authority according to its general nature
and institution, and not the particular persons by whom, or forms in which it
was then exercised, is evident from the excellent properties and ends of this
Authority which he enumerates; which do belong indeed to that Authority which
God has instituted, but cannot certainly be ascribed to the Government of Nero
the present, and the worst of Emperors. And to make this more plain and
unquestionable, it may be observed, that as Saint Paul, speaking of Authority
in the general, calls it (...)the Ordinance of God; so Saint Peter speaking of
the persons by whom this Authority is administered, calls them (...), the
Ornance of man, 1 Pet. 2.13, 14.
whether it be the King, as supreme, or inferior Magistrates commissioned by
him.

After all, I am ready to acknowledge, that the Law of God does secure Princes,
yea, and the meanest of their Subjects in the quiet possession of those Rights
which they have justly acquired; but the Rights themselves are not founded on a
Divine but Humane Constitution; for tho the Law of God does prohibit us to
defraud a private person of any part of his just possessions, yet we do not
think that any Law of God did antecedently entitle him to such a possession, or
does necessarily intail it on his Family; but that his Right is grounded on the
Laws and Constitutions of the Country in which he lives: So, tho Kings have the
Law of God to maintain and protect them in the use of that Authority to which
they have a just Right; yet that Right is not to be measured by any Law of God,
but the Constitutions of the Realm, and may be acquired or alienated without
committing any sin against God, as they who assert a Jus Divinum would pretend.

2. Another false principle to be dismissed, is a wide mistake of the Nature of
that Government under which we live, which asserts the English Monarchy to be
absolute and unlimited, at least that in its Original and Essential
Constitution it is so, and cannot be otherwise. We cannot but reflect on the
ill design, or ill conduct of some who in their Discourses on this Subject,
have transcribed out of their common places all the great things which any
Princes have asserted to themselves, or have been ascribed to them by ambitions
flatterers, or have been acquired by them in overreaching Compacts, or by a
violent force; and have, without any restriction or exception, applied them to
the Monarch of our Island, as if there could be but one sort of Government in
the world, or that ours did eminently include all the Prerogatives that can be
conceived in speculation, or can be found to be ascribed to any King or Emperor
in any Part, or Age of the World.

Upon this Principle they have exalted the English Monarch into as Absolute and
Arbitrary a Sovereign, as any Emperor of Rome or Constantineple; they make his
Will the sole spring of our Government, from which it is originally derived,
and into which it must be ultimately resolved: they allow to an English
Parliament no more power than to give some inauthoritative Advice, which the
King may use or neglect as he thinks fit. They think a Coronation Oath,
whatever it may be with respect to God, yet with respect to the People, is only
a customary Ceremony, or insignificant Formality. They suppose all legal
limitations of the Government to be but the King's arbitrary and temporary
Condescentions, which he may retract without doing any Injury to the People;
and, in a word, that all our Laws are entirely dependent on His Pleasure for
their Being, Continuance, and Influence; but his Will is in all Cases
unaccountable and irresistible. Such Maxims as these quite alter the Frame of
our English Government, raise up our King into a Tyrant, and depress his
Subjects into Slaves, and serve only to render the King odious, and his People
miserable; and therefore, as no wise Man can forbear wishing that they may not
be true, so upon enquiry we shall find that they have been advanced either by
the Fondness of some, who frame Schemes of Government in their own imagination;
or by the Ignorance of others, who are deceived with the sound of the
aequivocal Name of King, or by the Craft of those who make a Trade of advancing
the Prerogative, in order to their own Advancement. Indeed if the preceding
Principle had proved true, That Monarchy is a Divine Institution, it would be
necessary for us to grant, that no other Form of Government could be mixed with
it, or That be restrained by any Limitations, because it cannot be lawful for
Man to adulterate or infringe the Ordinance of God: But seeing the Jus Divinum
does not appear, we have reason to suppose that our English Government is built
on the Topical Constitutions of this Country, and may differ from the
Government of other Countries, as much as our Tempers, Interests, and
Circumstances do. For, if the Supreme Governor of the World has not thought
fit to prescribe One Form of Government to be everywhere observed, he has
permitted to every Nation a Liberty of framing to themselves such a
Constitution as may be most useful and agreeable; and as it is inconceivable
that all Nations should conspire in the same Platform of Governments; so it is
most unreasonable to seek in Judea, Italy, or France, for the Measures or
Properties of the English Government, which was made, and is therefore to be
found only at Home, and should be described rather from its own Laws and
Constitutions, than any fine Notions we can conceive of what it might or should
be. And if we contemplate the Government it self, we may easily discover what
its essential Forms and Properties are; for surely a Government that has been
publicly transacted through so many Ages, and has made so great a Figure in
the world, cannot remain an imperceptible Secret, or an unintelligible Mystery;
and I cannot forbear suspecting those, who disguise it with so many
Uncertainties and Obscurities, that they design to mislead us into a mistake of
that which they will not allow us to understand. A little skill in our English
History will suffice to inform us, That the Saxons and English, from whom this
Nation is chiefly descended, did first introduce the Form of our English
Government, and that it was the same they had been inured to in Germany; where,
as Tacitus observes, Regibus nec infinita aut libera potestas: Kings had not an
Absolute or Unlimited Power. Tacit. de morib. Germ. Sect. 3, and 5.
And from the ancient Records of those early Times we are assured, That the
Consent of the People in a Convention or Parliament, did always concur to the
making of Laws; and also their Consent in a Jury of Peers was always admitted
in the Execution of Them: Whence the People of England have been always
acknowledged to be Freemen. And tho we read that the Saxons were subdued by
the Danes, yet we find not that their Government was changed, but that, after a
short Interruption, the Government and Country returned entirely into the Hands
of the Saxons. The Duke of Normandy, whom we call the Conqueror, was such only
with respect to Harold, who usurped the Crown, but not with respect to the
Kingdom, which he claimed as Successor to King Edward, to whom he was related,
by whom he was adopted, and from whom he had received a solemn Promise of the
next Reversion; and accordingly we find, that tho be made some external Changes
in the Government, yet he made no essential Alteration in the Form of it; and
the same kind of Government has been transmitted by succeeding Kings to the
present Age, with some accidental Improvements, as our Ancestors grew wiser by
Experience, or the Necessities and interests of the Nation did require. Now,
inasmuch as our English Government was at first transplanted out of another
Country, and has been ripened into a Perfection by several degrees through a
long tract of Time, it would be very fanciful to suppose one solemn time when
the Original Compact between the King and People was first made, or to ask
after a Book in which it is in a certain Form recorded; that Compact being
nothing else than a tacit Agreement between the King and Subjects to observe
such common Usages and Practices, as by an immemorial Prescription are become
the Common Law of our Government. And to understand these, so far as our
present Case requires, there it no necessity that should read over all the
Records in the Tower, or all the Volumes of our English History, there being
several ancient Forms and Customs among us, which fall under easy Observation,
that are sufficient to inform us of the Nature of our English Government. For
when at a Coronation we see a King presented to the People, and their Consent
solemnly asked and given, what can we reasonably inser from thence, but that
anciently Kings were advanced to their Thrones by the Consent and Agreement of
the People? When we hear the King solemnly Promise and Swear to maintain to the
People their Rights and Liberties, to conserve the Laws, and cause them to be
observed; must we not conclude from thence, that there are Rights and Liberties
reserved to the People; that the Will of the King is limited by the Law of the
Realm; and that he is bound by His Oath to conserve the Laws, as we are by Ours
to observe them? When we are taught to call the King our Leige-Sovereign, and
our selves his Leige-Subjects; do not those Terms import, that he is bound to
protect Us in All our Rights, as we are bound to obey Him in All his Laws? When
we read in the Preamble of every Statute, That it is enacted not only by the
Authority of the King's most Excellent Majesty, but also by the Authority of
the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and of the Commons assembled in Parliamen; is
it not very evident from hence, that the Parliament has a share in the
Legislative Power, which is an eminent Branch of the Supreme Authority in this
Kingdom? From these, and other such easy Observations, any impartial
unprejudiced person will certainly conclude, that our English Government,
according to its Essential Constitution, is a mixture of Three Forms of
Government; for he observes a Monarchy in the King, an Aristocracy in the
Peers, and a Democracy in the Commons; all which share it that Part of the
Sovereignty which consists in making Laws. And though our Government be called
a Monarchy, because That Kind is predominant in the Constitution, according to
the known Rule, That the Denomination is to be taken from the Excelling Part,
the King having not only a share in the Nomothetick Power, but also the whole
Executive Power committed to Him; yet we cannot but conclude, from the
foregoing Observations, That our Monarchy is not Absolute and Unlimited; that
the Law is the stated Rule and Measure of our Government; and that the Law
cannot be made, altered, or annulled, by the sole Pleasure of the King: but as
it is the first determinate Rule by which the King is to Govern, and the People
to Obey, so it is to be made or changed only by the Consent of Both in a
Parliament. I might confirm all this, by transcribing out of Books several
Testimonies which occur in the Declarations of Parliaments, in the Writings of
Judges, and others Learned in the Law: but as these would make a Letter too
tedious, so they are unnecessary to an unprejudiced Considerer, and by others
would be suspected of partiality to the People of whom they are a part. I shall
therefore only add the Testimony of King Charles the I. who of all men had most
reason to study, understand, and assert the Rights of the English Monarchy. He
freely declares, in his Answer to the Nineteen Propositions, p. 96. That there
being Three Kinds of Government among Men. Absolute Monarchy, Arislocracy, and
Democracy; and all these having their particular Conveniences and
Inconveniences: the Experience and Wisdom of our Ancestors has so molded This
out of a mixture of These, as to give to this Kingdom (as far as Human Prudence
can provide) the Conveniences of all Three, without the Inconveniences of any
One. He also, in the same Answer, affirms, That in this Kingdom the Laws are
jointly made by a King, by a House of Peers, and by a House of Commons. He
likewise affirms in his Declaration from Newmarket, That the Law is the Measure
of his Power. And in another Declaration to the Ministers and Freeholders of
the County of York, he acknowledges, "That his Prerogatives are built upon the
Law of the Land.

From these and other such Passages which frequently occur in the Writings of
the King, who so earnestly disputed for the Rights of the Crown, we may be
abundantly convinced that the English Monarchy is not unmixt, or unlimited; and
cannot therefore enough admire the lewd presumption of others, who have dared
to attempt a change in our English Government, who prefer the extremes of
Tyranny and Slavery to the just temperament of our English Constitution; who
have labored to tempt our Kings into an affectation of absolute and arbitrary
Power, and have miserably overlay'd the Consciences of their Fellow Subjects
with a boundless unlimited dread of a boundless unlimited Power.

3. There are also great mistakes about the measures of our Obedience and
Submission, which are necessary to be removed before our Consciences can make a
free and impartial determination of the Case before us. We have been told it
often, and with great earnestness, that we are bound in Conscience to yield an
active Obedience to the King in all cases not countermanded by God, and to
resist him in no case whatsoever. If indeed the two foregoing Errors had stood
the proof, this would have followed by necessary consequence: for if a Monarch
be jure Divino, he must be absolute; and if he be so, there is no case, not
excepted by God, in which we must not obey him, and none at all in which we may
resist him; but then we may make this advantage from the connection which these
Errors have one to another, That if one of them be refuted, the rest much
necessarily fall with it: and if according to the English Principles premised,
our Government be founded on the Constitutions of this Country, and according
to those Constitutions be mixed and limited, then there may be some cases in
which it may be lawful for us not to obey the King, and not unlawful to resist
him.

For tho it may be true, that we are bound to obey actively whatever is
commanded by the Legislative Power of the Kingdom, and is not repugnant to any
Law of God; yet we cannot assert so much with respect to the King only, because
he having not the whole Legislative Power, an Act of his private Will is
destitute of that Authority which can derive an obligation upon Conscience:
although therefore a King may require things not inconsistent with the Law of God,
yet if they are beyond that Authority which the Constitutions of England have
assigned to him, his Subjects are not bound in conscience to obey those
Commands; and tho in some cases they may comply by a voluntary Concession, yet
they are obliged to condemn and withstand such proceedings if they increase so
far as to threaten a fatal subversion of the Government. But how can we defend
our selves against any exorbitant Acts of the King's private Will, if disarmed
and fettered by the Doctrines of passive Obedience and Nonresistance? what may
not a King do, and a People suffer, if no defense may be used? I do not here
forget to consider what submission God has required to that Supreme Authority
which he has instituted, or what honor and reverence we are to pay to those
Governors who sustain and administer it; nor how impatient men ordinarily are
of the yoke of Government, and how apt to enlarge their liberty into
licentiousness; nor how pernicious disorder and confusion must needs be to any
Society; and therefore I use the utmost Caution I can to steer aright amidst
the Rocks on the one hand, and the Sands on the other, that I may not make
shipwreck of a good Conscience. I therefore premise and sincerely acknowledge,
as I have learned from St. Paul, that Every soul must be subject to the Supreme
Authority which God has instituted, and that if he resist, he is worthy of
condemnation: and according to S. Jude, that we must not despise dominions, or
speak evil of dignities; and that those untameable Spirits which are impatient
of Government, are like wild Beasts made to be destroyed. I have also learned
from S. Peter, to submit to every ordinance of men for the Lord's sake, whether
to the King as supreme, or to Governors sent by him, so as not to disobey or
resist them in the use of that Authority which the Constitutions of the Kingdom
have assigned to them. I have from the same Apostle learned farther to be
subject with all fear, not only to the good and gentle, but also to the
froward: so that if a King in the administration of his Government should be
too sparnig in his Rewards, and over severe in his Justice; if too hard to be
pleased, and as hard to be propitiated, I must be contented; if he injure me in
my private interests, I must rather submit than oppose a private to a public
good; or if the public Affairs of the Kingdom sustain any detriment or
mischief from his Maladministration, yet if it be such as will consist with
the being of the Government and the Safety of the People, it should rather be
born patiently, than redressed by a violent opposition. I acknowledge also that
in all cases not certain and notorious, the Subject ought to presume the Right
to be rather on his Prince's side than on his own and never to think any
oppressions intolerable till they are evidently such, or to call for a violent
redress, till they appear otherwise irremediable. I must acknowledge also that
I can see no Right the Subject has from the Law of God or Man, to use any
other resistance against a King than what is defensive, or to proceed
judicially against him, or to inflict any punishment on his Person for any
defaults of Government, because there can be no Authority in our Kingdom
superior to that with which the King is invested. Yet after all these
concessions it must be confessed that the Regal Power being in its Constitution
limited, and in its Exercise liable to be abused, there may such cases happen
wherein a defensive resistance may be not only lawful, but a necessary Duty.
And if we may not lie for God, much less may we do it in flattery to any Man;
and if Subjects may not be defrauded of their Estates, no more should they be
of their Liberties, to prevent their abuse of them. Wherefore to speak out
plainly, and honestly in a case wherein Conscience is so much concerned, I must
add, that we are not bound in Conscience to yield Passive Obedience to the King
any farther than that Regal Authority extends, which the Constitutions of this
Kingdom have invested him with; and that those Constitutions do not empower him
to treat his Subjects according to his own private Will, but according to the
public rule of the Law; and by consequence, whatever grievance is without or
contrary to Law, the Subject is not bound in Conscience to bear it, with
respect to the King who had no authority to impose it, though he may be
sometimes, with respect to the public Peace; and if Officers be appointed by
the King to oppress his Subjects contrary to Law, their Commissions being
illegal, must be without authority: and therefore the Subject is not bound in
Conscience to submit to them, but may resist their injust assaults, if he
cannot otherwise evade them, and do not disturb the Public Peace by the
defense of his private Interests. And if we may suppose a case so sad, as that
a King through ill counsel or some strong temptation should be changed from a
Father into the Enemy of his Country; and should with an immovable obstinacy
engage himself in such illegal designs, as plainly and inevitably tend to the
Subversion of the Government and the Destruction of the People; his Subjects in
such unhappy circumstances will be excusable before God, if they use so much*
defensive resistance as he has made necessary for preserving the Government
and themselves: For if in Nature a People is presupposed to Government, and
Rulers are intended by God for the welfare of a People, and not a People for
the pleasure of their Rulers, it will be most reasonable to infer, that when
the End and the Means become inconsistent, the End should be preferred, and
those Means prevented or rejected, which would destroy the End they should
promote.

But these things are so easily anticipated by the common sense and reason of
mankind, that there needs no long discourse about them; and they are indeed too
irksom to an ingenuous mind to dwell long upon them: and though our
extraordinary case at present has made it necessary to say so much, yet I hope
a like case will never happen again, to give occasion to Subjects to consider
so minutely, the limits of the Regal Power, and of their own submission.

2. Having now rescued our Consciences from the prejudices of the foregoing
Errors, we may be capable of making an impartial judgment of the case
propounded, Whether we can with a good Conscience transfer our Allegiance from
the late to the present King? Allegiance in its primary general sense
signifies, being obliged or bound; in its political sense it imports that kind
of relation which refers a Subject to his Prince, and by consequence it
connotes the duties which result from that relation: And taking the word in its
fullest latitude, there will arise these two difficulties to be distinctly
resolved.

1. Whether our Consciences are discharged from Allegiance to the late King?

2. Whether we can with a good Conscience transfer our Allegiance to the
present King, though not the immediate Heir of the Crown?

1. In resolving the former enquiry it will be necessary to premise, that our
Allegiance to James the Second was not to his Person absolutely, but
respectlively, as he sustained the Character of King; and therefore as we owed
no Allegiance to him before he was King, so neither can we owe him any now, if
he cease to be so; and I think it too plain to need any proof, that it is
possible that a person may cease to be King, though he still survive; and that
a relation cease when one of its Terms is lost. If therefore it appears, That
James the Second does cease to be our King, though he be still alive, our
Allegiance to him will be sufficiently discharged; and that he does cease to be
our King, may, I suppose, be evinced from the following Considerations.

1. If James the Second did with an immovable obstinacy engage himself in such
illegal and pernicious designs as were notoriously subversive of the
Government, and destructive of the People, he did thereby cease de jure to be
our King, and our Allegiance to him is by consequence discharged. The Title of
King includes both an Office to be discharged, and an Estate to be enjoyed, but
the latter is an appendant to the former; when therefore he cease to govern
and protect his People according to the Laws of this Kingdom, his Right must so
far cease to that Power, Dignity, or Revenue, which were assigned to him for
that end, except we can imagine some things to have a moral power of
subsisting, when the reason of them is gone. And as the Office of the King is
directed by the public rule of the Law, so the right which any person can have
to the Regal Estate, must be founded on the Constitutions of the Realm; and
these Constitutions must either invest him with an absolute Right irrespective
to his Office, and then he would be an absolute Monarch, which is before
disproved; or else it must be a conditional Right, respecting the Office he is
to discharge, and then the Right in Equity must cease, upon the nonperformance
of the condition: Supposing also that a Person's Right to the Re al Estate be
founded on the Civil Constitutions of our Government, if he will set himself to
subvert those Constitutions, he cannot thereby but Undermine and Destroy his
own Right which was superstructed on them. And if he obstinately refuse to
discharge the Regal Office according to the proper fixed rule of the Law, though
he still usurp the title of King, yet he is become quite another thing, such as
our English Constitutions assign no Authority to, and to which we are not
supposed to owe any Allegiance, and which we cannot recognize without becoming
Accessaries to the most illegal practices, and deriving on our selves the
heinous guilt of contributing to the ruin of the Government and our Selves.

And as such a determination of the Case is most consonant to reason, so it is
most agreeable to the ancient principles and practices of England. By a Law
made in King Edward the Confessor's time, it is declared, Quod nisi fecerit,
nec nomen Regis in eo constabit. Lamb. de priscis Atglorum legibus p. 142.
That if a King does not perform his Office, he shall not retain so much as the
name of a King. We read also that In principio secundi Anni Regni sui cum
incorrigibil s superbi^e and ^^quitiae esset, congregati sunt Proceres and
Populus totius Regni and eun pro^ida deliberatione a Regno unanimi consensu
omnium expellebant. Collect. p. 769. etc.
Sigebert King of the West Saxons, being incorrigibly Proud and Wicked, he was,
in the beginning of the second year of his Reign, by the Nobles, and the People
of the whole Kingdom assembled together, upon mature deli^eration, and by
unanimous consent of them all, driven out of his Kingdom.

Thus also King John having broken his Coronation Oath, and endeavored by many
ways to inslave both the Church and the Realm, after many applications, and a
defensive War waged by the Barons against him, it was at last agreed, that if
he did again return to his former wicked Courses, Inter caetera, de ejus
expresso consensu, ita convenit, ut si idem Johannes ad flagitia prima rediret,
ipsi Barons ab ejus fidelitate recederent, nunquam ad eum postmodum reversuri.
Cum autem ille fecit novissima sua pejora prioribus, illi de communi Regni
Consilio and approbations ipsum Regno indignum judicarunt. Collect. 1868. etc.
Chron. W. Thorn.
the Barons should be for ever released from all Allegiance to him; and when he
afterward relapsed into the same courses, they in a general Assembly with the
approbation of all the Realm, adjudg'd him unworthy to be King.

We find also that King Edward the Second for following Evil Counsel, and
refusing to hearken to good counsel, for his pride arrogance, for breaking his
Coronation Oath, De Consilio and assensu omnium Prae^^torum and Baronum and
totius Comnunitatis Regui amotus est a Recimi^e Regni. Apolog. Adami. de
Orleton Collect. p. 2765.
for wasting his Kingdom, and being found incorrigible and past all hopes of
amendment, was by advice and assent of all the Prelates, Earls and Barons, and
of the whole community of the Kingdom deposed from the Government. Habent ^r
antiquo Statuto, and de facto non long retroaciis temporibus experienter, quod
dolendum est, habito, Si Rex ex maligno consilio quocunquae, vel inepta
contamacia, aut contemptu, seu proterva Voluntate singulari, aut quovismodo
irregulari fe alienaverit a a populo suo, nec voluerit per jura Regni and
Statuta ac landabiles Ordinationes, cum salubri consilio Dominorum and Procerum
Regni, gubernari and regulari, sed capitose in suis insanis consiliis propriam
Voluntatem suam singularem proterve exercere, extunc licitum est iis, cum
communi assensu and consensu Populi Regni, ipsum Regem de ^egali solio
abrogare, and propinquiorum aliquem de stirpe Regia loco ejus in Regni solio
sablimare. H. Knighton Collect. 2681.
I shall add only one instance more of King Richard the Second, to whom his
Parliament sent Messengers to declare to him, among other things, that they
find in an ancient Statute, and it has been done in fact not long ago, that if
the King through any evil counsel, or foolish contumacy, or out of Scorn, of
some petulant wilfulness, or any other irregular way shall alienate himself
from his people, and shall refuse to be governed and guided by the Laws of the
Realm, and the Statutes, and laudable Ordinances thereof, together with the
wholesome advice of the Lords and great Men of his Realm, but persisting
headstrong in his own mad counsels, shall petulantly prosecute his own private
humor, that then it shall be lawful for them with the common assent and
consent of the people of the Realm, to depose that same King from his Regal
Throne, and to set up some other of Royal Family in his place.

The present Case stated.
These Testimonies which I met with in a late Pamphlet, and which I am assured
from an able hand to be faithfully recited, and of an unsuspected credit, I
have abridg'd and trans^rib'd, to confirm that truth on which the Argument is
built, that according to our English Constitutions, a person may forfeit his
Regal Rights, and cease de jure to be King; and that according to the ancient
Statutes and irreprovable Vsages of this Country, the Nobles and Commons of
England may remove such a person from the Government, when necessary to prevent
a general ruin otherwise, inevitable. Now that the late King had brought
matters to so great an extremity, as is in the Argument supposed, is evident
from many instances so recent and notorious, that it was lately acknowledged by
all of us in the lowdest Complaints. We saw him attempting to subvert our
Parliaments, by cortupting their Elections with the meanest arts, and using his
power to pervert or frustrate their counsels. We heard those high strains in
which he claimed an absolute and arbitrary Power, our Laws were trampled on in
illegal dispensations, and the most partial Execution; Some were disseised of
their Freehold without a trial, and levies of Money were made without and
against Law; Our Religion and Church, which are the best of all those interests
which are secured to us by a legal Establishment, were so boldly threatened and
attacked, that we seemed to enjoy them but precariously, and to be in danger of
seeing them speedily ravished from us. And when we consider that the late King
was instigated and conducted in these exorbitant courses by the Jesuits and the
French King who have long since convinced the World, that they dare to
perpetrate any mischief or wickedness that will advance their glory, and
promote their interests: When also we consider that he proceeded in these
courses with so obstinate a resolution, that when his Peers endeavored to
raclaim him by advice, they only thereby lost his favor and all their
Preferments; and when some of his Bishops petitioned him in the humblest
manner, they were answered only with fury and imprisonment: When lastly, we
consider how far he had advanced in this way, that we already began to despair,
and our Enemies to triumph; and if our Glorious Deliverer had not timely
intervened, we might have been, in a few months, past all hopes of Recovery; We
may surely upon these considerations be allowed to conclude, That England could
not be in more danger, or any Prince lie under juster exceptions, or a people
be more disobliged from their Allegiance. There are some who say, that if the
League with France, the Imposture of a young Prince, the Murder of the Earl of
Essex, etc. were clearly proved, they should not be able to contain themselves
from renouncing all Allegiance to him; But though these may perchance be proved
in due time, yet if they never are, there is certainly enough and too much
besides to satisfy any reasonable Man.

2. If James the Second deserted the Kingdom without any necessity but what he
induced on himself, and if he made no provision for the administration of the
Government in his absence, but by taking away the public Seals and cancelling
the Writs of Parliament, designed to obstruct all regular proceedings; and if
also he has put himself into the hands of the French King the greatest Enemy
of our Religion and Country, without whom he cannot return to us, and with whom
he cannot return without apparent ruin to his Kingdom, he does thereby cease
de facto to be our King, and we become discharged from all further Allegiance
to him. I suppose few would haesitate in granting such a conclusion, if the
Late King had by a writing under his hand and Seal solemnly abdicated the
Government; but I know not what mighty force there is in a form of Words for
renouncing the Government, that it may not be as effectually performed by a
proper and notorious fact; or that a King may not as well renounce his Crown by
doing it, as by saying it; and it is the thing it self and not the way of
expressing it, which is the ground on which the relation between a King and his
Subjects is dissolved; and therefore if a King does actually desert his People,
his Government and their Obedience must thereupon actually cease. You would
perchance easily allow the argument, if the King had withdrawn deliberately and
of choice, but it is said that he was rather hurried out of his Kingdom, by
force and fear. It will be therefore necessary to relate to you the History of
that transaction, which according to the truest account that I can meet with,
is this: When the King went hence the first time, the Prince and his Army were
at a great distance, and a Treaty between them was pretended, but he left the
City before his Commissioners could return with an Answer to his Demands; and
it is certain that the Treaty was but a delusive Pretense, and that his
Departure was resolved on some Days before; for he himself declared to a Person
of Credit, that the Queen had obtained from him a Solemn Oath upon the
Sacrament, on the Sunday, that if the went away for France on Monday, he would
not fail to follow her on Tuesday: Which he accordingly attempted, and we are
very well assured, that tho his Subjects used some Force to hinder his Flight,
yet they used none to compel him to it. When he left this City the second time,
he received a Message from the Prince, which desired him to withdraw some few
Miles from London, lest the Army coming thither, and Whitehall being thronged
with Papists, some Disorders might thence arise, not consistent with the
Public Peace or the Kings Safety; but we are sure that it was altogether of
his own Choice that he went first to Rochester, and thence out of the Kingdom.

If you reply that the late King being deserted by his Subjects, and exposed
naked to the Prince's Power, was brought under a necessity of flying. I must
answer, that that Necessity was not absolute, but conditional: For the Prince
(to whom he lately allowed the Character of being always Just to his Word) had
assured him in his Declaration, that if he would suffer the Grievances of his
People to be redressed in a Free Parliament, his Army should peaceably depart.
And not a few of his Nobles, and others, did earnestly beseech him to comply
with those Terms, and solemnly assure him that in such a Compliance, they would
faithfully adhere to him. If therefore the late King would have returned to the
English Government, he need not have left the Kingdom: but if he chose rather
to depose and banish himself, than acknowledge and correct the Errors of his
Government, or let fall those glorious Projects of advancing Popery and an
Arbitrary Power in England, we have no Reason to think such a wilful Necessity
which he imposed upon himself, a sufficient Excuse for deserting his Kingdom,
but rather to conclude, that if he would rather leave us, than leave off to
oppress us, we are happily released from our Allegiance and Oppression
together. Yet if we should impute his Flight rather to the weakness of his
Fear, than to the obstinacy of his Resolution; I do not see how the same
Conclusion can be avoided. For if he leave off to administer the Government
himself, and rather hinder than promote its Administration by others, the
course of the Government is thereby stopped, and either this Nation must disband
into Confusion, or we are necessitated to seek out and employ some other
Expedient. If you think that he might in short time overcome his Fears, and
return to his People and Government, even this Hope is fatally precluded, by
his making himself a Royal Prisoner to the French King, from whom he can expect
only, to be used and managed as will most contribute to the Designs and
Interests of that Haughty Monarch; insomuch that we cannot conceive his Return
possible, without the Consent and Conduct of Him whom he has made his Patron,
and without the dreadful attendance of a French Army, and the dismal
Consequence of utter Ruin to our Church and Nation. And surely that Prince who
can forsake his People, and abandon them out of his Care, and make it
impossible to return, except as an Enemy to vanquish and destroy them, may very
well be thought to cease de facto to be a King, and his Subjects to owe any
Allegiance to him.

3. It the Lords Spiritual and Temporal and the Commons of England assembled in
the late Convention, have upon mature Deliberation resolved and declared, that
James the 2d has abdicated the Government and vacated the Throne; we may be
satisfactorily confirmed from their Authority and Judgment, that he cease to
be our King, and we to be his Subjects. That they have fully and expressly
asserted so much, I need not prove; and their Testimony is so proper and
anthentick in die present case, that we may with good Reason suffer our selves
to be concluded by it. For the matter of the Enquiry consists of several
ancient Laws and customary Usages of this Kingdom, of which the two Houses are
the most competent Judges; and they representing the whole Nation, and being by
our Choice commissioned to consider and determine this Case for us, we cannot
with any Modesty or Equity reject their Determination. If also we consider,
that in all Cases of a like Nature, the Nobles and People of England, by their
Representatives, have usually and finally determined them; and that upon the
late King's withdrawing, the chief Power of the Nation could reside no where
rather than in the two Houses, it seems according to our English Constitutions,
to be the Duty of private Men to submit to such a public Judgment. And indeed,
if such a solemn Assembly of the three Estates of the Kingdom, after a long and
serious Consultation upon the Case, shall not be thought sufficient to
determine it, I wonder who can, or may do it? For as particular Persons are
less capable of making so exact a Judgment, so if every one should undertake to
decide it, we must be reduced thereby into a helpless state of utter Confusion.

Secondly, The other Difficulty in the present Case to be considered, is,
Whether we may lawfully transfer our Allegiance to the present King, he being
not the next immediate Heir? I may here presuppose that our present King is
acknowledged by the World to be so eminently endued with all Royal Virtues and
Abilities, and to have obliged the Gratitude of this Nation with so glorious
and happy a Deliverance; that every wise and good Man among us cannot but be
ready to address an hearty Allegiance to him, if it can appear lawful for him
to do so; and where the Heart is so well inclined, it will not be difficult to
convince the Judgment, if we consider these few Particulars.

1. That according to our English Constitutions it is not necessary that the
next immediate Heir should succeed. For if we review in History the ancient
Vsages and Practices of our Country, which are the Common Law of our
Government, we shall find, that, tho the Crown has been usually appropriated
to the Royal Family, and in that Latitude is said to be Hereditary; yet it has
very frequently passed over the next Heir to some other Branch of the Family,
which was thought more capable of promoting the public Ends of the Government
in its present Circumstances: And we find no public Censure ever passed upon
such a King, or his Authority and Government in the least disabled thereby. And
to make this matter unquestionably evident to any Man who is not far gone in
the Conceit, that the Inheritance or Succession of the Crown is Jure divine, I
add that the Kings of England have been allowed by die whole Legislative Power
of this Nation to dispose of the Crown by their Nomination, which, as it may
suppose that they would not give it out of the Royal Family, so it must suppose
that it was not necessary it should descend to the immediate Heir; for he being
determined by Nature, could receive no Advantage from such a Nomination. Thus
particularly it was allowed to Henry the Eighth, and he, according to the
Statute in that behalf, settled the Crown on his Son Edward, and the Remainder
on his Daughters Mary and Elizabeth, both which could not be Heir: And we find
it also enacted in the 13th of Eliz. that whoever should maintain in her Time
that she and her. Parliament might not limit the Descent of the Crown, should
incur the Guilt of High Treason, and after her Life, the Forfeiture of his
Goods. From which Authentic Testimonies we cannot conclude less, than that it
is not necessary that the neat immediate Heir should always succeed.

2. Let us consider that our Allegiance being removed from the late King, it
must be referred to some other Person, and we can think of none for whose sake
we may justly deny it to the present King. The pretended Prince of Wales lying
under such a general and vehement suspicion of being an Impostor, and being at
present under the Conduct and disposal of the King of France, we see in him
more Reasons to dissuade than invite our Allegiance. Our present Queen, who is
the next immediate Heir, is not pretermitted; and tho she has a Consort in the
Royal Dignity, yet he is such as was by Marriage become out with her, and who
was admitted to the Partnership, not without her Advice and Consent. And the
King himself being a Branch of the Royal Family, not far removed in the
Succession, and who by the late glorious Enterprise has retrieved the Right of
both the Royal Sisters, and secured the Government it self from Subversion, it
cannot but seem very indecent and unjust to overlook him in our Allegiance. If,
lastly, we consider that the Protestant Interest in Christendom, and the Civil
Interests of our own Nation, and of some of our best Neighbors are at present
in most imminent and extraordinary Danger, which in Human Probability is not to
be avoided but by the Prowess and Conduct of this Illustrious Prince, whom God
has by a Special Providence raised up among us; we cannot but conclude, that
the Series of Providence, and the Necessity of Affairs, have determined our
Allegiance to His Majesty; and that they seem to be unreasonably nice, who can
sacrifice such great Interests to an empty Formality.

3. The great Council of the Nation having actually invested our King with the
Royal Dignity, he has thereby a Right to our Allegiance, and according to the
Laws of this Realm, we become punishable in refusing it, and are indemnified in
performing it, although his antecedent Title to the Crown may not be such as to
exclude all Exception. So great to Article of State as this can be fit to be
decided only by the Wisdom of the Nation in the most Solemn Assembly; and when
so decided, ought to be submitted to by all private Persons, or all Settlement
must be an impracticable thing: and if our Laws should not be executed
according to such an authentic Determination, the Government seems to be at a
stop, beyond all hopes of reviving into Motion. I wish that they who pretend or
perplex their Consciences about such Affairs, would consider seriously whether
they are proper or capable Judges of such Matters, and whether their
Consciences may, not be better conducted by the Resolution of such as are;
whether they behave themselves as becomes private Persons, who oppose their
Sentiments ^o the public Judgment, or whether any Government can subsist if
such a Presumption be not restrained? For my own part I am verily persuaded,
that in all Civil Cases, decided by their proper Judges, my Conscience ought to
acquiesce, and if I may be thereby misled into any Error, it will be without
Guilt before God. And I am also informed that by a Statute made 11 Hen. 7. we
are legally indemnified in paying our Allegiance to the King in being; it we
continue faithful therein, however infirm his Title may afterward appear; and
therefore I cannot see what Danger can affright us from our Allegiance, or with
what Safety we can refuse it.

Thirdly, I have now given you my Resolution of the chief Difficulties in the
Case propounded, and the Reasons on which it is built; and I can think of
nothing more requisite to your Satisfaction, except to show how this Resolution
does consist with all the Obligations which may affect a good Conscience in the
present Case; which are, I suppose, chiefly these three, viz. the Prescriptions
of that Holy Religion we profess; the Solemn Oaths we have taken, or the
Declaration we have subscribed; and the avowed Principles and Doctrines of this
Church in whose Communion we live.

1. As to the first. The Rule of our Religion being the Holy Scriptures,
nothing can be inconsistent with one, which is not repugnant to the other; and
according to the best of my Understanding, the principles I have proceeded
upon, do not disagree with any Sacred Text, rightly interpreted. The first King
of Israel we meet with in the Old Testament is Saul, who was advanced to the
Throne as well by God's Institution, as the Peoples Election, and who was
according to the Peoples desire, an absolute Monarch, like the other Kings in
those Eastern Countries: But this, thanks be to God, is not our Case, who live
under a mixed Government, and a Monarchy limited by the fundamental
Constitutions of this Realm. And yet I cannot but observe how David (who is
usually prescribed as an eminent Pattern of Loyalty) thought it lawful to raise
a band of Soldiers for a defensive Resistance against the unjust Persecutions
of Saul, tho an absolute Prince; and surely we may conclude a minori ad majus,
that such a defensive Resistance cannot be less lawful, when apparently
necessary to preserve a whole People from imminent Ruin. I remember our Lord's
determination, that his Kingdom is not of this World: and as I think We rightly
infer from thence, that there is no secular Force belonging to his Kingdom for
enlarging it is Borders, or securing its Intereslts; so I can see nothing in
these words to hinder, but that when any of the Kingdoms of this World is
become the Kingdom of Christ, by incorporating his Religion among its civil
Constitutions, then we may use any Expedients for the defense of our Religion
which we might use in defending any other Privilodges of our Civil
Establishment. Our Lord has taught us, to render unto Caesar the things that
are Caesar 's; and his Apostle, that we must render to all Men their Dues,
Tribute to whom Tribute is due, Custom to whom Custom, Fear to whom Fear, and
Honor to whom Honor; but they have lest us to the Constitutions of our
Country to determine, what the things of Caesar are, what Custom and Tribute is
due, and when to be paid. I have already had occasion to consider the Doctrine
of St. Paul and St. Peter concerning our duty of Submission to the Supreme
Authority, and to those who administer it; And upon the general review of the
whole, he seems to me to do the part of a good Christian as well as of a good
Englishman, who has on his Mind an awful regard: for the Supreme Authority
which is op divine Institution, who will not refuse an Active Obedience to the
Laws of our Legislators, if consistent with the Laws of God; who can readily
submit to the King, and to those that are commissioned by him, in the Execution
of those Laws; who pays the highest Civil Honor to the King as the Supreme
Magistrate of the Kingdom; who makes the most candid and honorable
Constructions he can of all his Princes Actions; who can quietly submit to any
acts of Government, tho they seem very unjust and grievous to his private
Interestes; and who never thinks a defensive Resistance lawful but when
apparently necessary to save a Kingdom from utter Ruin. He that can do all
this, is a good Proficient in his Religion, for he will find it not very easy
to Flesh and Blood to go so far. But they who are not content with any Notion
of Religion which will not expose to ruin the Kingdom that embraces it, do but
traduces our holy Religion, and expose it to the Contempt and Hatred of the
World.

2. Let us next consider how the Resolution. I have given, will consist with
the Oaths we have taken, and the Declaration we have Subscribed. You will here
give me leave to premise that the Forms we have sworn or subscribed, are not to
be taken carelessly according to the mere sound of words, but are to be
understood according to the Sense which they plainly express, and which appears
to be intended by our Superiors in impasing them. And if we consider our Oaths
and Declaration according to this Rule, we shall discover that they have
brought upon us no new degree of Allegiance or Subjection, which was not always
due according to the ancient Fundamental Constitutions of this Kingdom; that we
have hereby lost none of our English Rights and Liberties; nor the King
enlarged his Prerogative beyond what it always was and ought to be; and
therefore if according to the ancient Constitutions of this Kingdom, the
Government is mixed and the Monarchy limited, so it continues. If the Freemen of
England were before these Oaths bound to no Active or Passive Obedience beyond
what the Law of the Land prescribes, they arc bound to no more since; and if it
was formerly lawful for the People of England in an extreme necessity, to
remove a King whose Government was became inconsistent with the Publick-Weal,
and to set up another by whom the public Interest may be secured, it is as
lawful still notwithstanding these Oaths we have taken, or the Declaration we
have subscribed. And to evince this more satisfactorily, let us descend to
Particulars.

1. The Oath of Supremacy prescribed 1 Eliz. does plainly appear from the
Preamble and Body of the Act, and from all the parts of the Oath it self, to be
intended only for asserting to the Queen a Supremacy over Ecclesiastical
Persons, and in Ecclesiastical Causes, in opposition to the pretentions of the
Pope and Court of Rome. When therefore it speaks of bearing Faith and true
Allegiance to the Queen, and her Heirs, and lawful Sucessors, it is in
oppolition to all Foreign Jurisdictions, Powers, Superiorities and Authorities;
and when it speaks of our assisting and defending her Jurisdiction,
Preheminencies and Authorities, it is only of such as have been granted or
belonging, or united and annexed to the Imperial Crown of this Realm: And that
no new Power was hereby given to the Queen is evident, for when she was
informed that this was by some pretended, she caused a Paper to be printed,
called An Admonition to simple Men deceived by the Malicious, in which she
declares, That she would have all her loving Subjects understand, that nothing
was, is, or shall be meant, or intended by the same Oath, to have any other
Duty, Allegiance or Bond required by the same Oath, than was acknowledged to be
due to Hen. 8. and Ed. 6. -- and that her Majesty neither does nor ever will
challenge any other Authority than what was challenged and lately used by the
said Noble King of Famous Memory, which is and was of ancient Times due to the
Imperial Crown of this Realm; that is, under God to have the Sovereignty and
Rule over all manner of Persons born within these Realms, Dominions and
Countries, of what Estate either Ecclesiastical or Temporal soever they be; so
as no other Foreign Power shall or ought to have any Superiority over them. And
to render this Exposition of the Queen more Authentic, we find it confirmed by
an Act of Parliament 5 Eliz. wherein is this Proviso; Provided also, That the
Oath expressed in the said Act, made in the said First Year, shall be taken and
expounded in such Form, as is set forth in an Admonition annexed to the Queen's
Majesty's Injunctions, published in the First Year of her Majesty's Reign; That
is to say, to confess and acknowledge in her Majesty, her Heirs and Successors,
none other Authority than that was challenged and lately used by the Noble King
Hen. 8. and Edw. 6. as in the said Admonition more plainly may appear. I think
we may be abundantly satisfied from so express a Testimony both of the Queen
and Parliament, that the Oath of Supremacy has asserted no new Power to the
Crown, nor derived any new Allegiance on the Subject, but has only engaged him
to pay that Fealty, which an Englishman did always owe to his Prince; and if
that be all, it does no way contradict the Positions above asserted.

2. The Oath of Allegiance appointed by an Act. 3. Jacob. 1. does manifestly
appear in the Body of the Act, and of the Oath it self, to be intended, not for
making any new kind or degree of Allegiance, but only for asserting the old
Allegiance of an Englishman against the novel Doctrines and Pradices, of the
Pope or Court of Rome, which pretended to a power of Excommunicating and
Deposing Kings, and of releasing Subjects from their Allegiance, and of
bestowing this Kingdom on some other Prince ac the Popes pleasure. And that
this Oath was intended only to assert our Allegiance in opposition to such
Popish pretenses, is evident from hence, that the Oath was at first appointed,
and for some years was required, only of known or suspeted Papists. And an Act
of Parliament following 7o. Jac. I. declares concerning this Oath, that it is
limited and prescribed, tending only to the Declaration of such Duty, as every
true and well assected Subject, not only by bond of Allegiance, but also by the
Commandment of Almighty God, ought to bear to the King his Heirs and
Successors. We find also that King James does professedly assert and defend no
more in his Apology for this Oath, and in the Act of Parliament just before
cited, that Apology is approved and commended: And it being in that very Act
required that this Oath should be Administered not only to Papists, but also to
all others his Majesty's Subjects, we cannot conceive that our Legislators
understood, or intended it in any other, than that limited and prescribed sense
they had before acknowledged. From hence therefore we may infer, that this Oath
does secure the King against all Popish pretensions, but not against the
English constitutions; and that the Allegiance we have sworn is no more than
was antecedently necessary from those constotutions, and by consequence that if
according to those Constitutions a King may be removed from the Govemment, and
his people be released from their Allegiance, so they may be still,
notwithstanding any thing expressed, or intended in the Form of this Oath. But
now if some among us (which I fear is the case of many) do mistake the matter
of this Oath, and think they have Sworn to another kind, or higher degree of
Allegiance than our Legislators intended, they cannot but thereby inthral their
Consciences with great perplexities; and can no other way find Ease, than by
stating the Obligation of their Oath, according to the intention of those
Superiors who imposed it; and this may relieve them, for I suppose that though a
Man may through mistake suppose his Obligation to be greater than it is, yet that
a promissory Oath does really oblige him no farther, than the party by whom the
form or his Oath was prescribed, and he to whom it was made, may be reasonably
supposed to intend and require. Thus for instance, if a Man thinks he has
sworn Allegiance to the person of him that is King, so as to be bound to him,
whether he Administer the English Government, or set up another quite contrary
to it; or that it obliges him to obey the Acts of a Kings private Will, though
without and contrary to Law; or that his Allegiance is not termi nable but by
death, although the person to whom he Swore, may long before cease de jure, or de
facto to be King; and to mention only one case more, which I observe to be
somewhat common, if any thinks, he has sworn such an Allegiance to the Kings
Heirs, and lawful Successors, as obliges him in Conscience to find out who is
the next immediate Heir, to assist him in acquiring the Crown, and to pay
subjection to him and to no other; although the great Council, or the whole
Legislative power of the Nation should see reasonto determine otherwise; In
these and other such Cases, it is plain that our Consciences are entangled, not
with the real Obligations which are upon them, but with our mistakes about
them; that we conceit an Allegiance which our Ancestors never knew, and our
English Constitutions do not require or allow.

3. The Declaration we have subscribed according to the Act in 14 C. 2. is in
these Words, That it is not lawful upon any pretense whatsoever to take Arms
against the King; and that I do abhor that traitorous position, of taking Arms
by his Authority against his Person, or against those that are Commissioned by
him. Which Declaration may be considered, in the present case, either as it
expresses our own judgment, or as it expresses the judgment of our
Legislators, who required it. As it is our Declaration, it can only import,
that when we subscribed it, our judgment was really such, as we then thought
this form of words did properly express, but we did not hereby declare that we
should never change that judgment, if convinced by sufficent Arguments, and
therefore cannot be? bound in Conscience never to think, or act contrary to
that Declaration. But an Argument from this Declaration is of more force as it
pleads the judgment and determination of our Legislators, which will therefore
deserve to be more attentively considered. I acknowledge that this Form was
intended, in direct opposition to the Rebellious principles and practices of
the times immediately preceding, and must conclude that according to the
judgment of this Parliament, King Charles the I. did never de jure fall from
his Regal Right, and that consequently the War his Subjects waged against him
was a Rebellion, and the positions on which they proceeded were traitorous; and
that it is not lawful upon pretense of his Authority, or any other pretense
whatsoever to take Arms against his person, who continues to be de jure King:
In all which the Parliament does declare no defensive Resistance to be
unlawful, which was not always so, nor condemn any positions which are not in
themselves antecedently traitorous; and whoever thinks that they intended more,
must suppose that that Parliament altered the Constitutions of our English
Government, and did by apparent consequence, expose the Nation to utter
Destruction. And if any of us in subscribing the Declaration, had any other
apprehensions of it; we may, and I think we should renounce and condemn them.

3. Let us in the last place consider how this resolution will agree with the
received Principles and Doctrines of the Church of England. We need not, I
know, profess so high a regard for our Church, as to think any doctrine upon
her sole Authority, to be a Sufficient rule of our Faith or Conscience; and yet
it cannot misbecome us to pay so great a deference to he Judgment, as never to
depart from it without great regret. But upon second thoughts I find we shall
be under no necessity of doing so; for tho there have been for some time, a
party among us who have appropriated to themselves the Church of England
exclusive of their brethren; yet if we extend her Arms wide enough to embrace
all her genuine children since the Reformation, we shall find enough on our
side to justify our doctrines to be consistent with her principles. Her
Homilies no where, that I know of, assert the Errors I have here condemned, or
condemn any of the positions I have here asserted. The Homilies of Obedience
teach us to Submit to lawful Authority and to know our bounden duties to common
Authority, but they teach us no loyalty, beside or contrary to law. The
Homilies. against Rebellion are particularly designed against the Papists,
whose Rebellion was the occasion upon which they were written, and tho they
teach us not to resist our Prince if his Government be legal, however contrary
to our Religion or any other interests, yet they no where forbid, a defensive
resistance against illegal oppressions which threaten an inevitable ruin to our
Country; Hom. of Obed. page 75.
for they describe the Rebellion they condemn to be no other then, resisting or
withstanding common Authority. And that the principles of loyalty which
obtained in the Church at that time were no other then I have been now
asserting, we may easily satisfy our selves from that form of Prayer they are
charged with by the Parliament, in Queen Mary's reign, that God would turn her
heart from Idolatry to the true Faith, or else shorten her days and take her
quickly out of the way: Sr. Simon D'-Ewes journall p. 207.
Also from tne Reasons which the Bishops presented to Queen Elizabeth to prove
that she ought to take away the life of Mary Queen of Scots because an Enemy to
their Religion and Country, tho the next Heiress of the Crown; as Constantine
did of Licinius his fellow Emperor because he was an Enemy of the Empire and
of the Christan Religion; And to such as might object against their Reasons and
advice they thus reply, If our danger be joined with the danger of our
Gracious Sovereign and natural Country, we see not how we can be accounted
godly Bishops or faithful Subjects if in common peril we should not cry out and
give warning: Or on the other hand how they can be thought to have true hearts
toward God and toward their Prince and Country that will mislike our so doing,
and seek thereby to discredit us.

We may also know their principles in the present case from the Subsidies which
the C^ergy gave to the Queen in several Convocations in the fifth, thirty
fifth, and forty third years of her Reign, for her maintaining and assisting
the Scotch, French, and Dutch in their defense of their Liberties and Religion
against the injust oppressions of their Princes, as may be collected out of the
preambles of those Subsidy Acts. And if it were not too tedious, this might be
fully attested out of the writings of such Bishops as were most eminent in
those times.

Bishop Jewel speaking of Luther, Def. of Apol. p. 16.
Melancthon etc. has these words They do not teach the people to rebel against
their Prince, but only to defend themselves by all lawful means against
oppression; as did David against King Saul, and so do the Nobles in France at
this day. They seek not to kill, but to save their own lives, as they have
openly protested by public writing to the world. Bishop Bilson in his book of
the true difference between Christian subjection and Unchristan Rebellion,
dedicated to Queen Elizaheth, P. 520. Edit. 1585.
thus gives his Judgment concerning that defensive Resistance which the
Hugonots used against the injust oppressions of their King. I will not, Says
he, rashly pronounce all that resist to be Rebels: Cases may fall out in
Christian Kingdoms, where the people may plead their Right against the Prince
and not be charged with Rebellion. As for example, if a Prince should go about
to subject his Kingdom to a foreign Realm, or change the form of the
Comonwealth from Empire to Tyranny, or neglect the Laws established by common
consent of Prince and People, to execute his own pleasure: In these and other
cases, which might be named, if the Nobles and Commons join together to defend
their Ancient and accustomed Liberty, Regiment and Laws, they may not well be
counted Rebels. In the next Reign, In hoc causa eorum a Veteris Ecclesiae
ratione distinguenda est etc. Them. Anti. c. 17. p. 91. etc.
we have the judgment of Abbot Bishop of Salisbury, that the Case of the
Primitive Christians and of us differs in this, that they had no legal Right
for their Religion, but were subject to the mere pleasure of the Government.
And while it was so, Christians did suffer themselves to be killed, and killed
none in their own defense; but when under Constantine the Emperor they had the
Laws on their side, [Non tam caedebantur quam caedebant] they did not so much
yield up themselves to be killed, as allow themselves to kill others in their
just defense. Such were the principles of the Church of England in the Reign of
Queen Elizabeth, and King James; but indeed in the next Reign, when Popish and
French Councils found admission at our Court, then arose together the New
Principles of superconformity in the Church, and of Super Loyalty in the State;
which like a preternatural ferment, have ever since disturbed the peace of
both, and must be again cast out, if we ever recover a true English Temper, or
a peaceful settlement. If then we frame our Character of the Church of England
from the first and purest half of her Age, before she was secretly practiced
upon, by the Arts of her subtle Adversary, we shall easily discover, that her
principles of Conformity and Loyalty are far more moderate and intelligible
than those, which since that time, have been most industriously and impetuously
recommended under her Venerable Name. And I wish that every one who professes
an Honorable and kind regard for our Church, would no longer ascribe to her
such Principles and Doctrines, which she for many years was ignorant of;
wherewith the Church has given great advantage to her Enemies, and received
nothing but Scorn and Contempts, and by which she may oblige the present
Government to treat her with less kindness, than she might otherwise expect.
But I forget that I am writing a Letter, and how much pardon I already need for
running it into so great a length; but I thought it better to give you so long
a trouble in reading, than to leave any trouble on your mind unremoved: I
beseech you to excuse heartily the mistakes I may have committed; and to accept
the Services of

Reverend Sir London March 1688/9 Your Affectionate Brother and Faithful
Friend, etc.

Books Lately Printed for RIC. CHISWELL.
AN Explication of the Catechism of the Church of England, Viz. The Creed,
Lords Prayer, Ten Commandments, and the Sacraments. in IV. Volumes Fol. by
Gabr. Towerson, D. D.

The Fifteen Notes of the Church, as laid down by Cardinal Bellarmin, examined
and confuted by several Hands with a Table to the whole. 4to.

Reflections upon the Books of the Holy Scripture in order to establish the
Truth of the Christian Religion, in Two Parts, Oct. By Mr. Alix:

The TEXTS which the Papists cite out of the Bible for Proof of the Points of
their Religion Examined, and showed to be alleged without Ground. In twenty
five distinct Discourses, by several Hands, Viz. Popery not founded in
Scripture, The Introduction. TEXTS concerning the Obscurity of Holy Scriptures.
-- Of the insufficiency of Scripture, and necessity of Tradition. -- Of the
Supremacy of St. Peter, and the Pope, over the whole Church. In two parts. --
Of Infallibility. -- Of the Worship of Angels and Saints departed, In two
Parts. -- Of the Worship of Images and Relics. -- Of the Seven Sacraments,
and the Efficacy of them: In two Parts. -- Of the Sacrifice of the Mass: In two
Parts. -- Of Transubstantiation, -- Of Auricular Confession. -- Of
Satisfactions: In two parts. -- Of Purgatory: In two Parts. -- Of Prayer in an
unknown Tongue: In two Parts. -- Of Coelibacy of Priests, and Vows of
Continence: In two parts. -- Of the Visibility of the Church. -- Of Merit of
Good Works. Two Tables to the whole will shortly be published.

A Continuation of the state of the Controversy between the Church of England
and the Church of Rome, being a full account of the Books that have been of
late written on both sides. By William Wake M. A. 4to.

Dr. Patricks Parable of the Pilgrim. The Sixth Edition corrected.

-- A Private Prayer to be used in difficult Times. 8to.

-- Exposition of the Ten Commandments: 8to.

-- His Sermon before the Prince of Orange, 20. January 1688.

-- A Sermon before the Queen at Whitehall, March 1. 1688.

Books lately Published by Dr. Gilbert Burnet.
A Collection of Tracts and Discourses, written after the Discovery of the
Popish Plot, from the years 1678, to 1685. To which is added a Letter written
to Dr. Burnet, giving an Account of Cardinal ^ools Secret Powers. The History
of the Powder Treason, with a Vindication of the Proceedings thereupon. An
Impartial Consideration of the Five Jesuits dying Speeches, who were Executed
for the Popish Plot, 1679.

A Vindication of the Ordinations of the Church of England: In which is
demonstrated, that all the Essentials of Ordination, according to the Practice
of the Primitive and Greek Churches are still retained in our Church.

Reflections on the Relation of the English Reformation lately printed at
Oxford, in two Parts. 4to.

Animadversions on the Reflections upon Dr. BVRNET's Travels. 80,

Reflections on a Paper, entitled his Majesty's Reasons for withdrawing himself
from Rochester.

An Enquiry into the present State of Affairs, and imparticular, whether we owe
Allegiance to the King in these Circumstances? And whether we are bound to
Treat with Him, and call Him back or no?

A Sermon Preached in St. James's Chapel before the Prince of Orange 23d.
December 1688.

A Sermon Preached before the House of Commons 31 January 1688 being the
Thanksgiving day for the deliverance of this Kingdom from Popery and Arbitrary
Power.

His Eighteen Papers relating to the Affairs of Church and State, during the
the Reign of King James the Second. Seventeen whereof were written in Holland,
and first Printed there; the other at Exeter, soon after the Prince of Orange's
Landing in England.

A Letter to Mr. Thevenot. Containing a Censure of Mr. Le Grand's History of
King Henry the Eighth's Divorce. To which is added, a Censure of Mr. de Meaux^s
History of the Variations of the Protestant Churches. Together with some
further Reflections on Mr. Le Grand. 1689.

Scriptorum Ecclesiasticorum Historia Literaria a Christo nato usque ad
Saeculum XIV. Facili Meth^do digesta. Qua de Vita illorum ac Rebus gestis, de
Secta, Dogmatibus, Elogio, Stylo; de Scriptis genuinis, dubiis, supposititiis,
ineditis, deperditis, Fragmentis; deque variis Operum Editionibus perspicue
agitur. Accedunt Scriptores Gentiles, Christian Religionis Oppugnatores; and
cujusvis Saeculi Breviarium. Inseruntur suis locis Veterum aliquot Opuscula and
Fragmenta, turn Graeca, tum Latina hactenus inedita. Praemissa denique
Prolegomena, quibus plurima ad Antiquitatis Ecclesiasticae studium spectantia
traduntur. Opus Indicibus necessariis instructum. Autore GVILIELMO CAVE, SS.
Theol. Profes. Canonico Windesoriensi. Accedit ab Alia Manu Appendix ab ineunte
Saeculo XIV. ad Annum usque MDXVII. Fol. 1689.

ADVERTISEMENT.
Whereas a Book, Entitled. FASCICULUS RERUM EXPETENDARUM ET FUGIENDARUM, with
a large Additional APPENDIX, was promised by Richard Chiswell the Undertaker to
be finished in Michaelmas Term last; This is to give Notice. That by reason of
the Sickness of the Printer, and some necessary Avocations of the Publisher, it
has been retarded: But, for the Satisfaction of Subscribers, the Book will be
forty or fifty Sheets more than was promised in the Proposals, which will cost
the Undertaker 100 l. extraordinary, yet, in Consideration thereof, he will not
expect one penny above the first Subscription price; only craves their patience
till the Book can be done, which is now going on with all possible speed, and
so soon as finished Notice shall be given in the Gazette. In the mean time
there being some few of the Impression not yet subscribed for, such Gentlemen
as please to take the Benefit thereof may be admitted Subscribers, and may have
Printed Proposals for sending for, at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's
Chuch-Yard, or at most Booksellers Shops in City or Country.


