A DISCOURSE OF FRIENDSHIP, PREACHED at the Wiltshire-Feast, IN St. Mary
Le-Bow-Church December the 1st. 1684.

By Samuel Masters B. D. Preacher to the Hospital and Precinct of Bridwell in
London.

6 Eccles. 14, 15, 16. A faithful Friend is a strong defense, and he that has
found such an one, has found a Treasure.

Nothing does Countervail a faithful Friend, and his excellency is in valuable.

A faithful Friend is the Medicine of Life, and they that fear the Lord shall
find him.

LONDON, Printed by T. B. for Marm. Foster and Awnsham Churchill, and are to be
sold at the Black Swan at Amen-Corner. MDCLXXXV.

To the WORTHY STEWARDS OF THE Wiltshire-Feast, Mr. John Eyles Mr. Richard
Holford Mr. Paul Methwen Mr. William Gardener Mr. Henry Lamb Mr. Thomas Phipp.
Mr. John Slater Mr. John Rutland Mr. John wait Mr. Edward Smith
AND To the rest of my Countrymen of WILTSHIRE.
SIRS,
WHen I was first desired, by some of you, to publish this Discourse, I took it
but for a customary Complement of respect, to which I intended to make no
farther answer, than my thankful acknowledgment; but the same request being
since reinforced by some others, who might plead, that Friendship which the
Sermon recommends, I was obliged to comply; many Arg^ments occurred to diswade
we, b^t I tho^ght of this one for my encouragement, that in crossing my own
humor so much to gratify my Friends, I should give one instance of practicing
what I Preached, and perchance gain the reputation of being one who would on
all good occasions approve himself

Your Faithful Friend, and humble Servant SAMVEL MASTERS.

A DISCOURSE OF FRIENDSHIP, etc.
Proverbs 17.17. A true Friend will love at all times, and a Brother is born
for Adversity.


WHen I consider that Nature designed us to be Friends, by making us
Countrymen, and that the chief design of our present meeting is to enlarge and
indear our mutual Friendships; I cannot think of a Subject, which may yield a
more suitable Entertainment than the excellent Virtue of Friendship, which tho
seldom discoursed of from the Pulpit, is yet no inconsiderable Part of our
Religion; and though very rare to be met with in the World, is certainly a very
great advantage, delight and ornament of human conversation.

In pursuance of this design, I here present you the fair and lively
Pourtraicture of a true Friend, drawn by the most skilful hand, in this divine
Aphorism of the Text, wherein we may observe,

1. The Essential Form or Principle of a Friend, which is Love, a true Friend
will love.

2. His genuine Features or Properties which are chiefly these Two. 1. An
immutable constancy of affection, He will love at all times. 2. A generous
Faithfulness in the most needful time of trouble, He is a Brother born for
adversity.


In the following discourse I shall endeavor to draw a true Copy from this
original, but more large, that its beauties may be more displayed to your view;
and that I may not miss in the principal strokes, I shall keep within the lines
of the Text.

1. I shall describe that love which constitutes a true Friend. 2. I shall
represent those admirable Properties of an immutable constancy of affection and
a generous faithfulness in a time of adversity, which complete and adorn him.
3. I shall review the draught in some useful reflections.
1. I begin to describe that Love, which frames and constitutes a true friend.
It must be premised, that I do not here consider a Friend in that large Sense,
wherein the vulgar apply the Name to any Neighbor or Acquaintance, that is not
an Enemy; but in the strictest Sense, as he is denominated such from that
particular virtue, which we properly call by the Name of Friendship; and of
this I design to discourse rather according to the Principles of our Religion,
than the mean and imperfect Notions of the ancient Moralists. That this
friendship is a genuine Offspring of Love, is too evident to need a proof; and
what kind or sort of love it is, which properly assumes the form and name of
Friendship, we shall easily discover, by observing some of those modifications
whereby the great and eminent grace of Christian Charity, brancheth it self
into a great variety of particular Virtues, and among the rest into this of
Friendship: Such are the various objects about which it is conversant; the
different degrees to which it is advanced, and the several good Offices in
which it is employed: In a distinct view of these we shall discern, how love is
shaped and determined into the Specific form of Friendship.

1. We observe that Love takes up various forms and names, from the various
object to which it is addressed, as the Sea takes different Names from the
several shoars it salutes. Thus Love, as it looks upward to Superiors is piety
to a Parent, duty to a Governor, and gratitude to a Benefactor; as it looks
downward on Inferiors, it becoms mercy to an Offender, charity to the Indigent,
and pity to the Distressed; as it looks round about on equals, we call it
kindness; and if among these it meets with any fitly qualified to reciprocate
the Offices of kindness, it becomes Friendship.

The principal qualification which fits a Person to become an Object of
Friendship, is moral goodness, especially, that he be competently endued with
probity and integrity, with true wisdom and courage, with ingenuity and
Modesty, with meekness and humility, with a large Soul and a tender Heart, with
a pleasant Temper and a cheerful Spirit; for if these dispositions be wanting,
either we shall not love, or our love must be called by some other name than
friendship. Yet this is not all, for there will be farther requisite such a
combination of external Circumstances, as may fit a Person for maintaining an
actual intercourse of Friendship. For tho we cannot but love and honor every
virtuous Man we see and hear of, yet we contract our Friendships only with
those who are placed within the Sphere of our acquaintance, who are most like
us in age, temper and condition of Life; who may be most nearly adapted to us
as a second self, and with whom we may have the most frequent, intimate, and
delightful, as well as the most useful conversation.

It may be necessary to add, that tho Friendship does thus contract our Love to
a few select Objects, yet it will no way impair or hinder the great Duty of
Christian Charity, or make any Schisms or Factions among Christian Brethren;
for Christian Charity can, like the Sun, shine on all Mankind, tho it strike on
some with a more direct and warmer Ray; or like a well-drawn Picture, it can
cast a look on all about it, not overlooking an Enemy or a Stranger, tho it may
have a peculiar aspect for a Friend, who is situated in the fitted Place and
distance to it. The great Apostle supposes a different communication of Love,
in that advice, 6 Gal. 10.
As we have opportunity let us do good to all men, especially to those who are
of the household of Faith. And with parity of reason we may determine, that we
may be differently affected toward our? Brethren of the same household, as they
differently excel in Christian Virtues, and as Circumstances conspire to make
us a fitter opportunity for maintaining an Intercourse of Friendship with them.

We observe also that Love asumes different shapes from the different degrees
to which it is advanced; and thus that Love which in a remiss degree is but
ordinary kindness and common civility, is by higher degrees exalted up into the
fervor of Friendship. The Love of Friendship cannot but be thus intensely
great, it being founded on true Virtue; which is the most excellent kind of
goodness, and the highest incentive of Love; it being also contracted to a few,
and mutually reflected, all which will conspire to increase its ardors. And we
can suppose nothing less sufficient to transform friends into so near a
likeness, to incline them to one another with so passionate an affection, to
yield them so delightful a complacency in their mutual Society, or to engage
them in so many hazards and hardships in serving each others Interests. The
Philosophy of the Ancients describes this Love of Friendship in such
transcendent heights, as if it could not only mingle the concernments of
Friends in a common Interest, but also unite their Souls into one Person. And
the account we have of it from the Holy Scriptures will little abate the
Hyperbole; Solomon brings a Friend as near as a Brother in the Text; and
elsewhere tells us, 18 Pr. 24.
that he will stick closer than a Brother. David professes that Jonathans
friendship to him was wonderful, 2 Samuel 2.26. 13 Deu. 6.
passing the love of Women. And God himself, in cautioning Israel against the
enticements of those who were like to have the highest ascendent over them
places a Friend in the highest rank, above a Brother, or Son, or Daughter, or
the Wife of the Bosom, and calls him, a Friend which is even as thy own Soul.
41 Is. 8. 33 Ex. 11.
And hence it is, that God expresses his singular love to Abraham and Moses,
by calling them Friends; and by the same Name also, the incomprehensible height
of our Blessed Saviors love to his Church, is sometimes expressed in the
Canticles and in the New Testament, 5. Cant. 1, 15. John 14, 15.


And I may add, tho our blessed Lord has, by a new Commandment, advanced the
common love of Christians, so far above all that was practiced among Jews or
Gentiles, as to become the distinguishing Character of all his Disciples; yet
still we must allow Christian friendship to superadd as much to Christian love,
as common friendship used to do to the love of Nature. If therefore St. Peter
exhorts all Christians to have fervent Charity among themselves, how intensely
great must be the love of Christain Friends?

3. We observe farther, 1 Pet. 4. S.
that Love takes up various Names from the variety of good Offices, in which it
is employed; for as it bears injuries, we call it Meekness, and as it forgives
them we call it Mercy; as it pitties the distressed we call it Compassion, and
as it relievs them we call it Charity; and when beside all other Offices, it
attends to the intimate privacies and peculiar concernments of a Friend, we
call it Friendship. The power of Friendship is equal to its love, and as this
includs all inferior degrees, and exceeds them too, so will that perform all
common kindnesses, and outdo them also. It would be strange indeed, if that
Love which can show mercy to an Enemy, pity to a Stranger, and kindness to a
Neighbor, should not be ready to do as much and more for a Friend.

True friendship is the most officious thing in the World, it will disdain no
Offices as too mean, decline none as too difficult; it will not only take, but
seek all opportunities of doing good, and reward it self with the delights and
pleasures of such kind employments. It makes but one exception to this general
rule, that it be put on no Services inconsistent with that Virtue, on which its
very life and being depends. It will engage a Man to do any thing for his
Friend, but to commit a sin; to follow him into any danger, but into no Vice.
And therefore, when Pericles desired his Friend to bear a false Testimony for
him, and he consented to serve him (...) He is justly censured by the Moralist,
for coming too near the Altar. And in a like case the Orator censures the ill
conduct of those, who were betrayed by their Friendships, into Factions and
Conspiracies against the Commonwealth.

But beside all other common Offices of Love, Friendship has its own proper
Province, within which it performs some peculiar Offices, which are
impracticable to any other love.

Every Man is conscious of some concernments which lie deepest and closest to
him, which are too great for his own thoughts to manage, which yet fall under
the cognizance of no Relation or Society but this of Friendship. He may have
some secreets too big for his own Bosom, which he can no where lodge with
safety, but in the breast of a Friend; He may have some designs fit only to be
entrusted to the sincerest Friendship; He may have some Infirmities, which he
dare not expose to any severer eye than that of a Friend, He may have some
inward wounds, which can bear no air or touch, but the softest breath and
gentlest hand of a Friend; He may need such caution or advice, such comfort or
assistance, as none could, or would give but a faithful Friend.

In such cases Friendship discovers its own proper excellency and usefulness,
in providing a safe Closet for our choicest secrets, a Sovereign balm for our
deepest wounds, in resolving our doubts, correcting our errors, advising our
affairs, communicating in our most secret joys to double them, and in our most
silent sorrows to lessen them, and performing all this with such propensness
and sincerity, that even self-love could hardly equal it. Such kind Offices Job
expected of his Friends, but in vain, when he cried out, To him that is
afflisted pity should be showed him of his Friends; 6. Job. 14. 19 Job 21.
Have pity upon me, have pity upon me, O my Friends! For the Hand of God has
touched me. Such also our wise man asserts in several Proverbs, Faithful are
the wounds of a Friend: 27. Prove. 6.9.17.
As Ointment and Perfumes rejoice the Heart, so does the sweetness of a Man's
Friend by hearty Counsel, As Iron sharpneth Iron, so a Man sharpneth the
Countenance of his Friend. Thus far I have described a Friend by that principle
of Love, which constitutes him such; and that his inward frame might be more
exposed to your view, I have described his love also, by the select Objects to
which it is addressed, the eminent degrees to which it is exalted, and the most
useful Offices in which it is employed.

2. I proceed to represent those admirable properties of a true Friend, which
complete and adorn him; they are chiefly these two mentioned in the Text: An
immutable constancy of affection, and a generous faithfulness in a time of
Adversity.

1. A true Friend is immutably constant in his affections, He will love always
or at all times. The contract of Friendship is so solemn and sacred, that a
Friend may not violate it, if he would, and so useful and pleasant, that he
would not, if he might, break this Bond asunder, or cast away this Cord of Love
from him.

The slight friendships of the vulgar are indeed mutable and uncertain, as that
fickle humor or fortune is, on which they depend: but that friendship which is
built on solid Virtue, conducted with true Wisdom, and fixed in the strongest
inclinations or Love, cannot but be permanent and pepetual. Such a friendship
is seated too deep to be at all varied with that variety of Circumstances,
which happen without, for as a change of Fortune, like a change of Garments,
will make no alteration in the Man, so neither will it in the Friend; and he
who did not at first love his Friend for the sake of his good fortune, will not
afterward plead the want of it, for a forfeiture or discharge of his
Friendship. If therefore one Friend be advanced in prosperity, he will reach
out a kind Hand to raise up the other to him, or stoop himself down to his
level, but he will never think himself too great for that friendship, which is
it self the greatest thing in the world. Likewise, if a worthy Friend fall into
disgrace or distress, though this may vary the Offices of Friendship, yet it
will not its nature; it may excite pity and compassion, but no slight or
contempt, it will rather by irritation heighten the love of Friendship, than
abate or extinguish it.

It is true, that the external Circumstances, which at first invited a
Friendship, may afterward so vary, as to incommode and interrupt its
intercourse, by long distance, frequent absence, different affairs, etc. But
these things are too slight to dissolve that Bond, which even the stroke of
death can scarce cut asunder. Sometimes also Friendship may mistake its object,
and address to a Person, who afterward proves unworthy and incapable of the
Correspondence; in which case a friend is compared by Plutarch, to one who has
taken unwholsom food into his Stomach, which he can neither cast up without
pain, nor retain without danger; and though in such a case, a friend may
lawfully Sue out a Divorse, yet his ingenuity will dispose him rather decently
to untie, than roughly to break asunder the Bond of his friendship. It must be
confessed also, that the best and wisest friends are but Men, subject to many
surprises and infirmities, which may too much impair and obstruct their
friendships; who yet; if true friends can be very ingenious in excusing, very
patient in bearing, and very ready in forgiving the faults one of another; and
if their friendships be of the right kind, they will be able, not only to
endure these discouragements, but also to survive them with advagtage; like
Trees, which after a shaking wind take the deeper root; or like skillful
Music, which can improve the greatest discords into the most graceful and
delightful Harmony. And though Solomon informs us farther, that there are
froward Men who will sow strife, 16. Pr. 28.
and whisperers who will separate chief friends; by whose accursed practices
the Devil endeavors to destroy the greatest good and delight of Mankind; yet
they do not easily or often prevail, for true friendship will not be soon
tinctured with jealousy, nor lightly yield up a Friend to the malice of a
detractor, but first or last, the truth of friendship will triumph over the
falsehood of the calumny. After all these vain attempts, to vanquish the
constancy of a true friendship, we cannot suspect that it will tire or wear out
with length of time. So little is it subject to decay, that like our most
generous liquors, it will gain strength and sweetness by Age. A friend, like a
garment, becomes more fit and suitable by daily use: And that Cement of Love,
which time has seasoned and approved, is the strongest and most durable.
Wherefore our wise Man advises us by no means, to forsake an approved Friend,
especially not a Fathers Friend, for the older he is, always the better. 27 Pr.
10.


2. The other property of a true friend, is his generous faithfulness in the
most needful time of trouble; he is a Brother born for adversity. A true friend
is, by many excellent qualities, so fitly framed and provided for a season of
adversity, that he is not only able to endure it, but he will stick the closer,
under the adverse assaults of Fortune; and by a generous antiperistasis, his
love will increase under the discouragements of adversity. It was a true
observation which Sylla made to Pompey, That more did adore the Rising than the
Setting Sun. And Solomon made the like observation, That wealth makes many
Friends, 19. Prove. 4.7.
but the Poor is separated from his Neighbor. All the Brethren of the Poor do
hate him, how much more do his Friends go far from him; he pursues them with
words, yet they are wanting to him, There are Friends enough to be found, who
are born for prosperity, who will feed on our plenty, and share in our joys;
but it is the most deplorable fate of adversity, that when it puts us under the
greatest need of friends, it often put them farthest from us. While prosperity
shines on a Man, crowds of vulgar insects will flutter about him, to bask in
its heat, and suck the warm influences of its rays; but those friends are too
excellent to be many, who can stand firm, and stick close to us, amidst the
storms and tempests of adversity. The wiseman tells us, that he who is become a
Brother in the bonds of friendship, will stick closer than he who is so, only
in the bonds of Nature; and therefore he advises us, in the day of our
Calamity, 27. Pr. 10.
to go rather to a Friend, than to the House of a Brother, for better is such a
Neighbor, whom friendship has made near, than a Brother, who in his
affections is farther off. It is the peculiar honor of a true friend, that no
interest can bribe him, nor dangers affright him; that he has courage enough
to make any attempt, and fortitude enough to bear any hardships for an avowed
friend. Give me a friend, says Seneca, for whom I may die, whom I may follow
into banishment, De amicum pro quo mari possim, quem in exitum sequar, cujus me
morti opponam and impendam. 15. John 13.
for the rescue of whose Life I may expose my own. And our Blessed Savior
supposes the love of friendship to be so generous, that a Man may, even, lay
down his life for a Friend. And surely, that love which is stronger than Death,
will never boggle at petty misfortunes. No, Solomon tells us, That many waters
cannot quench Love, 8. Cant. 7.
neither can the Floods drown it, and lesser sprinklings will but inflame it.
True Friendship, like that Virtue on which it is founded, will grow brighter
and stronger, by the conflicts of adversity, and increase its Love as fire does
its heat, by the sharpness of the season. To see a worthy Friend bowing under
the weight of an unjust oppression, will strangely inspirit a true generous
friendship; it will force modesty to speak in vindication of his innocence, and
humility to contend for his just praises, it will arm the timorous in his
defense, and instruct the rudest Tongue into an eloquent advocate, such is the
admirable force of friendship, that it will raise a Man in the Service of a
Friend above what he could or would do for himself, yea, oftentimes to postpone
his own interests to those of a Friend, and expose himself to shield a Friend
from an approaching danger. Such a friend was Jonathan to David, whom neither
the hatred of a Father, nor the flattery of a crown could corrupt, who would
not yield up his friend, though Saul with armed fury, stormed the bosom which
entertained him, nor would let go his friendship, tho he knew it would cost him
the reversion of a Kingdom; but with an unshaken resolution he persisted to
plead David's cause, tho to the prejudice of his own, to advance his praise,
though to his own diminution, and to secure his friend, though with the hazard
of himself. Happy is the Man who is strengthened with such an alliance, and
provided of so useful a support for an evil day; who is secure of a faithful
Friend to adhere to him, when all others forsake him, to condole with him, when
others insult over him, to plead his cause amidst the loudest calumnies, and
solicit his interests when most desperate and deplorable.

Having now finished the draught I designed, tho with a much ruder Pencil than
it deserved, let us stand a while and review it in some useful reflections.

1. If the face of a true friend be truly represented in this Text, then the
reverse and opposite of this must needs be false and counterfeit. I should not
have made this reflection, but that I observe how the many (...) (as Plutarch
calls the false Images and Counterfeits of friendship) do reflect no small
disgrace on this excellent Virtue. Such are the Mercenary friendships of the
vulgar, who choose their friends as they do their cattle, the strongest for
labor, or the fattest for sale, who keep or part with their friends, as will
make most for their interest; whose friendship is nothing else but traffic and
commerce.

Such also are the vain friendships of fond Amorists, which spend themselves in
soft dalliances and imaginary delights; which can no more engage a wise and
generous mind, than Sampson could be fettered with the ropes and withs of his
Daliah. Nay, some have not been afraid to profane the sacred name of
friendship, by ascribing it to the good Fellowship of Debauchery, to
combibations of Fraud and Violence, or to conspiracies of Faction and Treason:
Such are indeed, like Simeon and Levi, Brethren in iniquity, 49. Genesis 5.6.
But oh my Soul, come not thou into their secrets, unto their assembly mine
Honor be not thou united. But the most common and dangerous imposter in
friendship is the Flatterer, who like Jacob, appears in the dress of a Brother,
and with a smooth voice supplants and betrays him; all whose officious
Addresses are no better than the crafty arts of a Fowler, to allure and decoy a
friend into a prey. But time will discover the false friend, at least in a
sharp season of adversity, his disguises of friendship will drop off, like
withered Leaves at the approach of Winter.

2. If so much be necessary to constitute and complete a true friend, we see
reason enough why true friendship is so great a rarity in the world, some have
thought it matter of complaint and wonder, that so excellent and useful a
virtue, should scarcely be met with any where, but in the notional rules of
Philosophy, or the feigned examples of some imaginary Hystory: But it is not to
be thought strange, that what is most excellent and very difficult, should be
scarce and uncommon in the World. A virtuous friendship must needs be rare,
when Virtue it self is so. They are but few, whose Souls are refined with
purity, adorned with modesty, supplee with meekness, sweetened with kindness and
enlarged with goodness; which might render them capable of entertaining so
great a virtue. The most we may observe, are too selfish to love any besides
themselves, too rugged in their tempers to admit of so close an union, too vain
and humorsome to be constant, and too mean and abject of spirit to endure a
trial of adversity: And hence it comes to pass, that a true Friend is as
greatly admired, and as rarely seen among us, as the Stoics wise man was among
the Philosophers of old. Yet, if the virtues of our Religion were as much in
practice, as they might and should be, friendships would easily result of
themselves; were every one but fit to be a Friend, nobody could be long without
one. But alas! in our days, Christian Charity is not only withered in these
upper Branches, but decays at the very root, and so little can we endure the
strictest bond of friendship, that even the largest bond of peace can scarce
contain us.

3. Let us once more reflect on a true Friend, to behold in him that excellency
of worth, and those endearing properties which may justly recommend him to our
embrace and imitation. How many and how eminent are the virtues which meet in
the composition of a true Friend? To how many and important uses will a true
friendship serve? It is the ornament of our prosperity, and the relief of our
adversity, it sweetens our sorrows and our joys too, and is the most delightful
solace of our lives: In a word, true friendship is the highest improvement of
humanity, and the greatest advance of Christian Charity we are capable of, in
our present State. What greater virtue could I recommend, or what greater
happiness could I wish to you my dear Countrymen? than such a mutual
friendship, as would render our conversations wholesome and secure, fruitful and
pleasant as that good Country is, to which we are related. But who did ever
dispraise friendship? or would refuse a faithful Friend? It were well if every
one were as willing to be a friend as to have one, and would be content to
correspond by that rule of equity. The wise Man gives, 18. Pr. 24.
That he who has friends must show himself friendly. And yet it would become a
Christian to do somewhat more, to importune others with the first addresses of
his Love, and court them, if possible, into a League of friendship. Seneca
thought every good Man ought to have a friend to exercise his friendship, ne
tam magna Virtus jaceret, lest so great a Virtue should be neglected and lost
in the world. It will much more concern us who are Christians, to make and
cherish amongst us the truest friendship, because it is the most eminent pitch
of that Charity, which is the most eminent grace of our Religion. Some have
been vainly prejudiced against friendship, as if it were a foreign Virtue
transplanted from the Schools of Philosophy; but surely our holy institutions
which require our love to an Enemy and a Stranger, cannot be supposed to
disregard a Friend; our religion which qualifies Persons with the highest
at^^inments of Divine goodness, which ^ssists out friendships with the mighty
aid ^f that Holy Spirit, who is the true God of love, which honors it with so
many encomiums, and encourages it with such great rewards, can do more ^^an
all the morality of the Ancients to ^eed and promote the noblest friendships.
The Holy Jesus the Author of ^ur Religion had his beloved Disciple, ^^d
expressed a particular friendship to ^^zarus and his Sisters. The Primitive
Christians did so abound in their friendships, that they seemed to have no
other and of love among them; insomuch ^^at the Heathens suspected them to ^^ry
Philtrums and Charms about ^^em, to beget such strong Indearments (...)
Affection. And, to add no more, ^^e have reason to conceive one part of ^e
glorious happyness of Heaven, to ^^nsist in the most refined and exalted
friendships of Angels and Saints mad^ perfect above, where the poorest Laz^rus
rests in the Bosom of the greatest ^brabam, and all closely unite in the sam^
harmony of Love and Praise. God gra^^ that we may so imitate their holy
friendships here, that we may be admitted t^ their blessed Society hereafter,
throu^^ the merits of our Blessed Savior, t^^ greatest and best of Friends, to
who^ with the Almighty Father, and the ^ternal Spirits of Grace, be Glory a^^
Honor; Praise and Thanksgiving, no^ and ever, Amen.

THE END.

