A SERMON BEFORE THE PROVINCIAL SYNOD AT ANTRIM. Preached June 1. School.

BY Mr. JOHN MAC-BRIDE, Minister of Belfast.

Published at the Desire of some Persons then Present.

Printed in the Year MDCXCVIII.

Acts XV. 25, 26. It seemed good unto us, being Assembled with one Accord, to
send Chosen Men unto you, with our beloved Barnabas and Paul:

Men that have hazarded their Lives for the Name of our LORD JESUS CHRIST.


AS the Church of Christ, since Militant on Earth, has not wanted Foreign
Adversaries, who have taken crafty Counsels to cut off the Name of Israel from
being a Nation; so it has had Intestine Enemies, to its Doctrine, Worship, and
Government; some privily bringing in Damnable Heresies, to overthrow the Faith
once delivered to the Saints, others corrupting its pure Worship, with
Superstition and Idolatry; and some Imperious and Ungovernable Men, subverting
its orderly Government, by Tyranny and Anarchy. By any of which, though a Form of
Godliness may be kept, it is Power is denied. But we have been faithfully
forewarned, that such Offenses must come, that such as are approved may be
made manifest: Yet He on whose Shoulders the Government of his Church is laid,
has well and wisely provided proper Remedies against all these Evils, Watchmen
and Rulers; who by their mutual Care and Counsels, assisted by His Word and
Spirit, are put in a Capacity to defend this Church: Whereof we have a pregnant
Instance in this Scripture; in which we may see a wise and holy Assembly of
Church-Rulers by joint Counsels and Authority, Deliberating about, and
Determining of Ways and Means, necessary to preserve the Purity of Doctrine and
Worship, as well as the Unity and Peace of the Church: All which were in
manifest hazard, while some Men coming down from Judea to Antioch, taught the
Disciples, That unless they were Circumcised, and kept the Law of Moses, they
could not be Saved. Whether Cyrinthus was the Ringleader of this Party, as
Epiphanius and Hierom report, I determine not; but it is evident from Verse. 5.
that they were Pharisees. The first course taken to remove this Evil, we find
was Disputing, managed by Paul and Barnabas, to convince these Gainsayers, but
to little effect. And therefore secondly, The Church of Antioch determined to
send Paul and Barnabas, with certain others, to the Apostles and Elders who
were at Jerusalem; where appears an Appeal from an Inferior, to a Superior
Judicatory, in a Case not determined by the Inferior. Thirdly, We have an
Account of the Constitution of this Assembly, consisting of Apostles and
Elders, both these resident at Jerusalem, and such as were delegated from
Antioch, Verse. 6. Fourthly, The Method used to find out and determine this
Controverted Truth, was, A Deliberate free and full debating the matter, and
Reasoning from Scripture. Fifthly, After this a clear and final Decision of the
Controversy; the Apostle James, as Moderator of the Assembly, summing up the
Debate, and giving his Sentence, to which all consented. Sixthly, We have here
the Synod's Method to make this its Decision effectual; where, 1. It is
Enacted, That a Letter be written from the Synod, informing those Churches to
which it was sent, with their final Determination and Judgment. 2. It is
Enacted, That some Persons be Commissionated to carry, publish, and require
Submission to this Decree.

The Words read, contain (1.) An Account of the Authority giving this
Commission, or Employing those Persons to Execute this Act, viz. the Apostles,
Elders, and Brethren, assembled with one accord. (2.) The Persons
commissionated, to wit, chosen Men, with Paul and Barnabas. (3.) The ground of
sending, It seemed good to us. (4.) The Character and Recommendation of the
Persons sent, which was their Credentials; 1. They were Chosen Men: 2. Men who
had hazarded their Lives for the Name of Christ. From which words, thus
Explained, this Proposition may be rationally deduced.

Doctr. When the Necessity or Benefit of the Church requires, it is the Duty of
those whom Christ has clothed with Authority to Rule it, to Assemble with one
Accord, and make such Acts as may contribute to preserve the Purity and Peace
of those Churches over which the Holy Ghost has made them Overseers.

That the Apostles and Elders did Assemble, is here Evident; that they did it
as their Duty, from the pressing Necessities of the Church over which they were
set to watch, is also evident; both its Truth and Peace being in hazard: The
presence and concurrence of the Holy Ghost granted them, the Remarkable Success
by GOD's Blessing bestowed on those their Endeavors, shows us that they had a
Call thereunto, and acted in obedience to GOD in it.

But that this may more fully appear to be, not only their Duty, but the Duty
of all their ordinary Successors, I shall first prove, secondly consider what
Assembly this was, for kind and quality, and then show of what use it is to us.

1. I take it for granted, that the Church of Christ is and ought to be an
Orderly Society of Reasonable Men and Women, and under Laws and Government, and
therefore is it called a Kingdom, whereof Christ is the King and Lawgiver,
having Men (...) Authority under Him, enabled to put in Execution His Laws; ^^s
called a Family, Ephesians. 3.15. whereof He is the Everlasting Father, Isa. 9.6. a
City compactly built; all which show that it consists of Persons Governing and
Governed: For no sooner do we hear of any Public Worship, but we have it in a
Society; Cain and Abel meeting to offer Sacrifice, and bringing them to be
offered by Adam, the then High Priest of his Family, Genesis 4. Those who will
have Public Worship Instituted, Genesis 4.16. must understand Assemblies of
distinct Families associating; for no doubt Adam and his House did before this
jointly worship the LORD, and Nature's Light has instructed all Nations who
have any Worship, to perform it in Public Assemblies.

2. It appears that under the Old Testament, GOD did require such as He had
Authorized to Rule his Church, to Assemble for that End, as appears from Exodus
24.1. where the LORD said to Moses, Come up unto the LORD, thou and Aaron,
Nadab and Abihu, and Seventy of the Elders of Israel; all which convened to be
Witnesses of, and concur with the Congregation in their solemn Engaging in
Covenant with the LORD; as also to be Witnesses of GOD's Glorious Manifesting
Himself to Moses, and giving him Authority, Verse. 10. and particularly to Judge
and Determine in the Matters of Debate among that People, as appears from Verse.
14. That GOD constituted such Assemblies, Rulers for ordinary, appears from
Deuteronomy. 17.8, 9. where, in all Cases too difficult for their Inferior
Judicatories, the People are commanded to go to that Place which GOD should
choose to set His Name there, to enquire of the Priests, Levites and Judges, in
those Days, and are Commanded also to be Determined by their Sentence. Seeing
then the People were bound to Attend, it is evident the Priests, Levites, etc.
were obliged to Assemble, to hear, examine and determine such Matters as should
come before them: This same is clear from Deuteronomy. 19.16, 17, 18. These Assemblies
were Revived by good King Jehoshaphat, according the LORD's Appointment, 2 Chronicles. 19.8, 9, 10, 11. Moreover in Jerusalem did Jehoshaphat set of the
Levites and the Priests, and of the Chief of the Fathers of Israel, for the
Judgment of the LORD, and for Controversies, when they returned to Jerusalem,
and charged them, Thus shall ye do in the fear of the LORD, and with a perfect
Heart. In Ezra's Time, the Elders were appointed to meet at certain times, to
determine the matter about Unlawful Marriages, Ezra 10.14. From all which is
evident, 1. That as the Israelites were the Church of GOD, so they had Rulers
Assembled for their Government. 2. That these were Church Officers, Priests and
Levites. 3. That the Matters they were concerned in, were properly
Ecclesiastical, as Matters of the LORD, distinct from the Matters of the King,
2 Chronicles. 19. 4. The Laws by which they were to Judge. were Divine, Deuteronomy. 17.11.
5. The End of such Assemblies was the Preservation of GOD's Ordinances in their
Purity, the Maintaining and Promoting of Peace and Holiess.

2. But it is further to be considered, That this Law, by virtue whereof they
Assembled, was not a meet Positive or Temporary Law, peculiar to that Church
only, but a Law which Natures Light directs, and obliges us to observe; so it
was neither Ceremonial nor Judicial, unless in some Circumstances: For the
Light of Nature being nothing else but the Dictate of Right Reason, discovering
the Good or Evil of Men's Actions, according to their Agreement or Repugnancy to
it; whatever is founded on, or harmoniously agrees with Right Reason, must be
according to the Light and Law of Nature; which plainly teaches us, 1. That no
Humane Society, Civil or Ecclesiastic, can subsist without Order and
Government; Ordo est Anima rerum, says the Philosopher, Order is the Soul of
things: And when there was no King in Israel, then every Man did what was right
in his own Eyes: Then did the Danites set up Idolatry, Judge. 18. Then did the
Benjamites practice and patronize barbarous and inhumane Uncleanness, Judge. 19.
for which Divine Vengeance pursued all. 2. The same Light of Nature teaches us,
That no Society can be preserved without Laws Made and Executed by those on
whom the Government lies. Thus, all Humane Societies are Regulated by Laws
proper and convenient for them; and if any thing be from the Light and Law of
Nature, Laws, Lawgivers, and Law-Executors are. 3. Right Reason dictates
agreeable to the Revealed Word of GOD, Prove. 11.14. That where there is no
Counsel the People fall, but in the multitude of Counselors there is Safety;
so has GOD planted in the Natural Body Ears and Eyes to Inform and Direct, for
the Preservation of the Whole, and these He has joined together conveniently.
And so the Seers has He set in His Church, jointly to employ their Skill and
Gifts, for Prevention of those Evils which might hurt the Flocks over whom they
are Overseers. 4. Natural Light informs us, That as Equals can have no Empire
over one another, so Societies consisting of Equals, the Lesser Number in all
matters of Controversy and Difference, ought to yield to, and be determined by
the Greater or major part; according to that Maxim, Pars Major Jus habet
Universitatis, The Greatest Part has the Power of the Whole; And Civilians
accordingly teach, That refertur ad singulos quod public fit per majorum
partem; It relates to All, what is done Publicly by the Greater Part; for
otherwise Debates and Controversies would be endless; and it is Irrational,
that a Lesser Number of Equals should overrule or determine the Greater. 5. The
same Light dictates, That in a Society consisting of many Particular Societies,
a Subordination of Power is Necessary, by which an Injured Party has the Right
of Appeal, from the Lower to the Superior; which Appeal is an Application from
an Inferior, or Incompetent Judge, to a Superior or Competent Judge,
containing a Complaint of Injury done; for considering the Corruption of humane
Nature, Men are apt both to Do and Judge Wrong; and therefore the Learned
Whitaker has declared, That Appeals are of Divine and Natural Right, and that
most necessary in every Society, because of the Ignorance or Iniquity of many
Judges; for if Innocent Persons might not Appeal under an Unjust Sentence,
Honesty and Innocence might be ruined. Yet such Appeals must not be Infinite,
but must Sist somewhere, and have their Ne plus ultra, which is the Supreme
Authority of that Society. Seeing GOD then has so well provided Civil
Societies, with all that is Necessary, for their Safety and Prosperity, shall
we think Him less concerned for the Church which He has purchased with His own
Blood, and to leave it a confused Chaos or Babel, daily liable to many
Diseases, but provided with no Remedies?

3. As GOD has Commanded, the Light and Law of Nature directed and Obliged
Church-Rulers to Assemble for the aforesaid Ends, so this Law of Nature
neither is nor can be Repealed under the New Testament; and therefore in
obedience to it, Ministers stand bound to Assemble for Preservation of CHRIST's
Vineyard: Those who will Assert that this Law is Repealed, must tell by whom,
when, and how it was so: But so far is it from being Repealed, that it is
evident it cannot be; for a Law of Nature being in it self Necessary, Just and
Equitable, what would overturn such a Constitution, must be Contrary, and so
Needless, Unjust and Unequal: Yea, all that ever made such Assembling Needful,
is so still; and where the Reason of a Law (which is Anima Legis) continues,
that Law abides in its full force.

4. But so far has our LORD and Lawgiver been from Abrogating this Law, that
he has under the New Testament Established it, and that by prescribing
Church Assemblies as a Remedy against Offenses given: Matthew. 18.17. enjoining
the Injured to tell the Church; and in case of not hearing the Church, that
such be counted as Heathens or Publicans. I am not ignorant of the great
Division of Thoughts and Tongues about this Text; all that I desire from it, is
what cannot reasonably be denied: 1. That it is not a single Person, or
Church-Virtual as some Papists are pleased to speak, for so the word never was,
nor possibly can be taken, which ever imports an Assembly of Men. 2. This
Church is such as has power to take Cognizance of a Complaint made to them,
and to determine it, and to censure the Contemners and Neglecters of them,
which our LORD would not have Commanded, had he not clothed them with Power to
hear and judge. 3. This cannot be the whole Community of Believers, but a
select Society, and that, 1. Because it is a Church to whom He has given the
Power of Binding and Loosing, Verse. 28. and whose Sentence he will ratify in
Heaven, which Power is apparently given to Church Officers, and not to the
Community, as appears by Matt. 16.19. 2. Nor were the Church of Believers all
to be heard, or could hear, as this Church is required. 3. This Church might
consist of two or three, for to so many is the Promise of hearing Prayer made,
Verse. 19. and of Christ's presence in the midst of them, Verse. 20. which is a
Promise made to Church Officers, as appears from Matthew. 28.20. to encourage
them in their Ministry. 4. Nor is it a Church of Civil Magistrates, as
Erastians teach: For then 1. The Apostle Paul has not only not understood his
Master, but expressly contradicted him; for 1 Cor. 6.1. he discharges all Saints
to carry their Debates before Judges who were their Enemies, such as Heathens
and Infidel Jews were at that time: Nor is it probable that CHRIST would direct
His Disciples in case of private Differences, to Jewish or Roman Magistrates,
His and their professed Enemies. 2. If the Civil Magistrate must be here
understood, Christians had not such a Church for 300 years after Christ, and so
no Remedy in such Cases. 5. The matter appears here to be proper for the
Cognizance of an Ecclesiastical Judicature, not being such a Crime as was
punishable by the Civil Judge, or for which Restitution was to be made, which
is required in case of Injury done; but it was an offense which, though at first
private, became Scandalous by the Persons Impenitence and declared Rejecting
the Admonition of two or three; and if CHRIST would have the Church told in
case of offending a private Brother, and for reconciling them two, can we think
he provided no Remedy for such as by Scandalous Practices offend the whole
Church; or appoint means by which such Offenders may be Reconciled to the
Church? Seeing then there is here a Church Authorized to hear and decide
Differences, verse. 17. clothed with a Power of Binding and Loosing, Verse. 18.
having a Promise of hearing their Prayers, and of His Presence in performing
their Duty, Verse. 19, 20. we have cause to believe that this was a
Church-Assembly of CHRIST's own Appointment.

5. The Apostles ordinary Practice of Assembling as they had occasion, informs
us, That they looked upon it as their Duty, which presupposes a Law; and
therefore they are Patterns to us in such Assemblies: Upon the Apostasy and
Death of Judas, one of the Twelve, after CHRIST's Ascension, we find them
Assembled to Elect and Ordain another Apostle in his room, Acts 1. Again, We
find them Assembled to Ordain Deacons, Act 6. And in Acts 11. we find them
convened and calling the Apostle Peter to an Account for his Converse with the
Gentiles. But here more remarkably the Church-Guides are Assembled to root out
a Heresy, and to prevent a Schism arising in the Church of Antioch.

And this leads me to consider what kind or sort of Assembly this was. That
CHRIST and His Apostles framed the Government of the Christian Church according
to the Model of the Jewish, is generally asserted and believed, and may safely
be allowed, but for this Reason, (neither to preserve the Ceremonial nor
Judicial Laws) but because the Government of that Church, for its substance,
was agreeable to the Light and Law of Nature, and so was Divine and Imitable,
as being Irreversible. Now it is generally held that the Jews had three sorts of
Assemblies or Church-Rulers, and all agreeable to the Light of Nature.

1. As they had their Synagogues or Parochial Congregations for ordinary Moral
Worship, so these Synagogues had their Rulers, Acts 13.15. And it is probable,
as is reported, that in every City where were ten wise Men (as there was
supposed to be in every place where was a Synagogue) that they did all jointly
concur for Ruling the Affairs of the Synagogue, and so made a Parochial
Consistory, which did exercise Discipline on Scandalous Offenders, even to
casting them sometimes out of the Synagogues. Now the common Light of Nature
thus far directed all sorts of smaller Societies, whether Politic or
Ecclesiastic, to compose all particular and more private differences within
themselves, and to decide small and easy Cases by small Judicatories for that
end appointed; according to the Maxim, Frustra fit per plura, etc. It Is in
vain to trouble greater Assemblies, in what can be as conveniently ordered by
lesser ones; So Jethro's Reason taught him to give that good Counsel to Moses,
That certain Inferior Judges might determine smaller Matters, reserving harder
Cases for his own Audience, Exodus 18.22, 26. And this became a Law, Deuteronomy. 17.

2. As there were many Portions called Thousands in Israel, Micah 5.2. so these
Thousands had their Government, and a Consistory composed of Twenty Three, one
of these being in every City, where were one hundred and twenty Families; and
this is that, as many say, which was called by CHRIST the Judgment, Matthew.
5.22. and was made up of Fourteen of the Tribe of Levi, and Seven others of the
Elders of the City; which also appears agreeable to the Light of Nature: For as
particular Persons may stand in need of Government and Order, so particular
Congregations, living contiguously, which as they may be injurious to one
another, so they may be helpful to one another: And where matters occur of
common Concern to the lesser Neighboring Societies, suppose in a larger City,
the same Reason will allow and require the Rulers of that City to associate for
Government, that required those of a Village to meet: And so the Rule will hold
good in this, Quod omnes languit, etc. What is of Common Concernment, ought to
be Treated of by All Concerned; and this is supposed to be called the
Presbytery, Acts 22.5. which was a Society or Assembly distinct from the
Sanhedrim; and such an Assembly of Elders seems to have been at Jerusalem, Acts
11.30. and 21.18.

3. The third sort of Assembly was their Sanhedrim, consisting of Seventy
Elders, with their Nassi or President, which was their Supreme Judicatory. If
some allege, These were Civil Judicatories, they will find themselves mistaken;
for though they did concern themselves in some matters Civil, yet they also had
their Ecclesiastical Judicatories, acting by Divine Laws in matters
Ecclesiastic: For though now it hold true, That Ecclesia est in Reipublica, The
Church is in the Commonwealth, and not the Commonwealth in the Church; yet this
will not hold good of the Jews, who were called to be a Church before they were
framed into a State, and so the State came into the Church, and not the Church
into the State. To accommodate this to our purpose, It Is evident that this
Assembly was neither of the former Two, but an Assembly of the Rulers of two
Presbyteries, to wit, of Jerusalem and Antioch, and so that which we call a
Synod, whose Qualities come next to be considered.

1. It is to be enquired, Whether it was an Extraordinary Assembly, acting by
Extraordinary and Apostolic Call and Authority, or an Ordinary Assembly,
acting by an Ordinary Call, and Ordinary Church Power? To this we say, 1. Though
this Assembly had in it some Men Extraordinary for their Office and Gifts, yet
did they not here meet or act as such, but as Ordinary Church-Rulers, which as
Junius has well observed, so he has sufficiently proved, That the Apostles in
all Constituted Churches, did not act by Extraordinary Apostolic Authority,
but Joint with other Church-Rulers in an Ordinary Power, and submitted to them:
Therefore we find the Apostles, Peter and John, sent from the Church of
Jerusalem, as Missionaries, to Samaria, Acts 8.14. And as we from hence prove
against the Papists, that Peter had no Supremacy over the rest of the Apostles,
because the Senders have Power over them they do send; so their Subjection to
that Church is hence evident: It Is plain also from Peter's subjecting himself
as aforesaid, to the Trial of the Church at Jerusalem: So Paul and Barnabas
were subject to the Church of Antioch, as appears from Acts 13.1. and also from
this same Chapter; which had not been, had they acted by their Apostolic
Extraordinary Authority, wherein they were immediately subject to CHRIST only.
But that this Assembly was Ordinary, is evident, 1. From its Occasion, which is
Ordinary, viz. a Heresy and Schism arising in the Church. 2. Their Call to
this Assembly was Ordinary, the Church of Antioch Determined and Ordered (
Verse. 2.) Paul and Barnabas, with certain others, to repair to Jerusalem; the
Call of the Apostles and Elders at Jerusalem was of the same nature, and
therefore all but Ordinary. 3. Their Constitution was Ordinary, as consisting
not of Extraordinary Officers only, but of Ordinary Elders and Brethren also.
4. These Ordinary Officers act with equal Authority as the Apostles do in this
Synod, the Synodical Act going out in their Name, as well as the Apostles,
Verse. 22, 23. They join with them in censuring the Heretics, verse. 24. Verse.
28. They assert, That it seems good to the Holy Ghost and us, as well as the
Apostles do; and here give Commission to Paul and Barnabas, etc. as well as
they. 5. The manner of their Procedure in determining this Controversy, was
Ordinary; not by Immediate Infallible Inspiration, but by much Disputing and
Reasoning, verse. 7. the several Apostles giving their Judgment according to
Scripture; wherein, though they were not contrary to one another, yet they
differed, and the Sentence of James finally acquiesc'd in; not on account of
Episcopal Authority (as some would have it, who to Exalt a Bishop, would
Degrade an Apostle) but on Account of the strength of his Reasons, and evidence
of Truth from Scripture: And although it be said, verse. 28. It seemed good to the
Holy Ghost, etc. it will neither follow that Oecumenick Councils are
Infallible, as Papists teach, nor that this Acted by an Extraordinary
Apostolic Spirit: For as Whitaker says, Other Councils may in like manner
assert their Decrees seem good to the Holy Ghost, if they shall follow the same
Method and Rule, determine nothing but what is according unto the Revealed Will
of GOD, written in His Word, which are called Words that the Holy Ghost
teaches, 1 Cor. 2.13.

6. Had the Apostles determined this matter by their Extraordinary Infallible
Spirit, what need had the Infallible Spirit in Paul and Barnabas, to appeal to
the Infallible Spirit of the Apostles and Elders at Jerusalem? Was the Spirit
in Paul, etc. an Incompetent Judge, and Inferior to theirs? Nay surely, he
might have as easily determined the matter at Antioch, and saved the Labor of
Traveling to Jerusalem. Whence it is plain they acted by Ordinary Means and
Power, in dependence upon GOD's Spirit promised to His Church, by the best
Rule, His own Word.

A Second Question, Seeing this Assembly was Ordinary, Whether did it act only
by way of Council and Advice, or by Juridical Authority, as an Assembly whose
Authority obliged the Churches subject to them, to Receive and Observe them? To
this we say,

1. That the Authority of this Synod, or of any other, is not Civil, either for
Matter, Manner, or End, nor had it, or has any External Coercive Power to
inflict Punishments Corporal, or Fines and Imprisonments; but as their Power
was Spiritual, so it was to be Executed by Suitable Means. 2. Nor was their
Power (nor is the Power of any Synod) destructive of the Power of Inferior
Church Assemblies, but perfective, and assisting to them: For though a Superior
Assembly should rectify the Mistakes of an Inferior Assembly, this does no
more deprive the Inferior of its Power, than he who would better inform a
mistaken Man, does deprive him of the Power of his Judgment, when he only
helped him to judge better. 3. Their Power, as that of other Assemblies, was
not Arbitrary, to do as they pleased, but Regulated by the Word of GOD; for no
Assemblies have Power but for Edification; and no Foundation for this can be
laid, but the Foundation of the Prophets and Apostles. 4. Yet we Assert, it was
properly and truly clothed with Authority to deliberate and determine in those
matters that were before it, and its Determinations (as those of other Lawful
Assemblies do) did oblige those under their Care and Inspection, Reverently to
Esteem them, and Dutifully to Obey them, as far as agreeable to the Revealed
Will of GOD. And this is plain,

1. Seeing GOD has Commanded Church-Rulers to Assemble, has promised His
Spirit and Presence in their Assemblies, and to Ratify what they Bind or
Loose, it is clear that their Acts ought to be Obeyed, else their Assembling is
in vain; nor could Controversies ever be ended, if none be obliged to stand to
the Determination.

2. All Appeals should be needless, though Nature's Light teach them: Were Synods
only Consultative, they should be only like that which Lawyers call Arbitrium
boni viri, which a Man need not stand to, unless he so please; and therefore
all Power of Arbitration ought to have some Juridical Authority accompanying
it, to make their Determinations obeyed, else we shall be as when there was no
King in Israel, and no effectual Means provided for the Redressing Grievances.

3. Seeing CHRIST requires that such as neglect to hear the Church, be
accounted as Heathens and Publicans, it is plain they have Authority, when such
as disobey are to be punished for such their Disobedience: And its unreasonable
to suppose this peculiar to single Congregations, for then CHRIST should have
had more care of single Persons, than of whole Congregations of Men, if no
Remedy be provided for Debates arising betwixt Congregations, or Offenses done
by one to the other: Yea even single Congregations themselves should have no
Remedy, if one part be Injurious to the other, but they must Divide, and so be
Destroyed, as Instances could be given.

As to the particular Power exercised by this Synod, and may be by others, it
appears to be first that called Dogmatick, which is not a Power to forge new
Articles of Faith, or devise new Matter, or Parts of Divine Worship, but it is
a Power to Explain Matters of Faith, and Rules of Worship, according to GOD's
Word; to discover and declare the contrary Errors or Corruptions: Thus they
detected and declared, and so by the Word of GOD prevented and removed, the
Corruption both of Doctrine and Worship, which those Pharisaical Men were
bringing in, with a burden of Ceremonies; hereby they pacify and strengthen the
Church, by securing to it that Liberty wherewith CHRIST had made it free. 2.
They Exercised that Power called Diatactick, which relates to the External
Order of the Church, in Matters Prudential and Circumstantial, which are to be
determined by the Light of Nature, and those General Rules prescribed in
Scripture; such as (1.) That our great and chief End be GOD's Glory, according
to that 1 Cor. 10.31. (2.) That no Offense be given to Jew or Gentile, or the
Church of GOD, according to Verse. 32. (3.) That all be done for Edification, 1
Cor. 14.26. (4.) And in Decency and Order, according to Verse. 20. By these
Rules are Church Assemblies bound to walk; which if they do, Peace shall be on
them, as on the Israel of GOD. Thus, this Synod decreed to frame their Decision
in a Letter, and to send it by fit Commissioners. 3. They Exercised that Power
called Critic, or Disciplinary, in Censuring those False Teachers as
Subverters of Souls, Men running unsent, and Teaching what they had no Command
for, verse. 24. And so may Assemblies Use and Exercise Censures, provided it be
done with Humility, Moderation, and Compassion; and so shall the Church be
preserved from Heresy and Schism. This being our best Pattern, I come to make
some Application to our selves.

Use 1. Seeing GOD has Commanded, Nature's Light has Directed, CHRIST's
Precept and His Apostles Precedent has Authorized Assemblies of
Church Officers for its Safety and Edification, we may meet in Faith, having
the Authority of GOD for our Motive and Warrant so to do; and therefore may
depend upon His Promised Presence with us, and the hearing of our Prayers,
seeing what we do, is not from a Principle of carnal Policy, but in Obedience
to our Great Master, and for the Service of His Church under our care.

2. We are hence informed, That the want of a Call or Commission to Assemble,
from Secular Power, (we being permitted to meet) does not make our Meeting
Unlawful before GOD, as some may fancy; nor does the want of a Civil Sanction
to our Acts, make them void: For this Assembly had neither, yet was blessed of
the LORD. The Civil Magistrate, we confess, may and ought to call Ministers to
their Work, and protect them in it; yet this is necessary only to the
well-being, but not to the being of such Meetings. The Primitive Church for the
first Three hundred years Enjoyed no such Privilege more than we, yet wanted
not their Assemblies, nor dare we condemn them as Unlawful; and as we have
reason to bless GOD that we are Permitted to meet in Peace, though not Commanded
so to do; let us, as we have hitherto endeavored, so behave our selves, as to
give no just ground of Offense; for sure we can do nothing prejudicial to the
Civil Interest, if we keep within our own Sphere, and pursue the just Ends of
our Meeting, which are the Preservation of Truth and Peace, and promoting
Holiness among our selves, and those over whom the LORD has set us; for
certainly such will be found the best Subjects, who conscientiously mind these
Duties.

3. Seeing GOD has Commanded Ministers to Assemble, when it is necessary, then
such ought to make Conscience of Meeting when called, and not to forsake the
Assembling of themselves together, as the manner of some is. It Is true, such as
GOD has Disabled to come, are hereby Excused; For the LORD Himself has done
it, and who may say, What does He? But those who are able to go about their own
particular Affairs, and yet excuse themselves from attending these our
Assemblies, seem to mind more their own things than the things of CHRIST.

Some indeed despise these Assemblies, as being in their Opinion a Yoke, but we
have cause to bless GOD for this Yoke, which ties us together, binds us to our
Work, and strengthens us in the Performance thereof; for by our Meetings GOD
has been pleased to preserve us in as great Unanimity of Judgment, Unity of
Affection, Uniformity in all our Ministerial Actings, as any such Number of
such Men we know in the like Circumstances with our selves: By these, we have
been helped to mind the same thing, and walk by the same Rule; and by our united
Care and Counsels in our darkest Times and greatest Dangers, have been enabled
both to avoid giving just ground of Offense, and have thereby defended our
selves; our own, and the Public Peace, have been considerably secured by these
means, when it has fared otherwise in other places: And Experience daily tells
us, that the Church shall never be Comely as Jerusalem, Terrible as an Army
with Banners, while every small Company with their several Captains, have sole
Jurisdiction, and no Common Councils kept for War or Peace, no Subordination or
Authority for Exercise of Discipline, Redress of Grievances, or Establishing of
Order. Had some of our Brethren what we Enjoy by these, they would soon be more
Terrible to their Enemies, more Comfortable to their Friends, more Peace should
be in their Palaces, and Prosperity within their private Walls.

4. This also may convince us that CHRIST never Appointed His Church to be
Governed by Sole Jurisdiction of single Persons, for even in case of a private
Offense, He commands to tell the Church, not any single Person, howsoever
dignified; the Promise of His Presence is made at least to Two or Three
gathered in His Name, Matthew. 18.20. As the Apostles with the Knowledge and
Consent of the Church, chose and ordained an Apostle, Acts 1. so they would not
exercise sole Jurisdiction even in the Ordination of Deacons, Acts 6.3, 6. The
Apostles jointly sent Peter and John to Samaria, Acts 8.14. The Apostles and
Brethren in Judea called Peter to Account, in respect of his Carriage to the
Gentiles, Acts 11.1, 2, 18. It was the Church, and not any one Churchman, that
sent Barnabas so far as Antioch, Acts 11.22. Yea, the very matters of Charity
were managed by Common Consent, for the Disciples in Antioch sent to Barnabas
and Paul, and the Elders at Jerusalem; so that there was not so much as sole
Jurisdiction in the Distribution of the Churches Charity, Acts 11.29, 30. Paul
and Barnabas are sent by the Ministers of the Church of Antioch assembled,
Chap. 13. And here it is more evident than to be denied: so that I would gladly
know any Constituted Church within all the New Testament or Old, when
Church-Jurisdiction was exercised by any single Person. And seeing our Laws and
Lawgivers have thought it unreasonable and unsafe, to trust the Legislative
Power in the hands of any single Person, or the Lives, Liberties, Limbs, or
Estates, to any less than a Jury of Twelve Men, then is it reason to consider
of the Safety and Reasonableness of trusting Church Power in the hand of single
Persons, who though they thrust themselves into Civil Assemblies, are seldom
known to assemble as the Apostles and Elders did at Jerusalem.

5. It is the Duty of Christian People under the Care of such Assemblies,
Reverently to Esteem, and Dutifully to Regard their Lawful Constitutions: So
the Churches to which this Decree came, rejoiced for the Consolation they had
thereby, Acts 15.31. As it is a People's Mercy to have Government, so none but
Presumptuous and Self-willed Persons will despise it, and profane Men, whose
Immoralities make them justly obnoxious to their Censures.

6. Having such an Excellent Example as this, let us imitate them in ours, and
particularly in these things:

First, In their Unanimity: They were Assembled with one Accord; they acted
with one Accord, let us do so also. Their Unanimity appeared,

1. In that they were Acted by the same holy Spirit on which they depended,
verse. 28.

2. They walked by the same Rule, Phillip. 4.16. Let us do so also: They had
diverse Apprehensions and Expressions about the Rule, much Disputing and
Debating, not to confound, but to find out Truth, to convince Gainsayers: And
therefore none should be offended at our Debates, when managed with Moderation,
in order to Confirm Truth, or Refute Error, or find out proper Expedients for
our Work: The Matter about which, Persons with whom, and our own Infirmities,
occasion these Debates; We have no Intuitive Knowledge, but only Discussive,
and therefore must dig for Wisdom as for hidden Treasure.

3. Let us with them mind the same thing, Philip. 3.16. The Churches
Preservation and Edification, Truth, Peace, and Pure Gospel Ordinances, was all
they Contended for, and Aimed at; not, as sometimes they had Contended, who
should be Greatest, Mark 9.34. By this Unanimity we shall Beautify and Fortify
our Assembly, gain Respect to our Persons and Acts.

Secondly, Let us imitate them in the Ground and Reason of their Conclusions,
They determined nothing but what seemed Good to the Holy Ghost, as well as
them; and this is best known by the Word of GOD. Let the things be necessary,
Verse. 28. No burdensome Ceremony; this they delivered the Church from, as a
Yoke which neither they nor their Forefathers were able to bear; for rigid
imposing of Things Unnecessary, makes Church-Constitutions Contemptible, and
the Contrivers and Imposers of such needless Burdens, as Imperious and
Tyrannical.

4. Let us with them, what we have on due Deliberation Enacted, Execute with
all prudent Expedition: A Flame was begun in the Church, they presently sent to
quench it: Delays in this kind may prove dangerous.

5. Let every Member of the Assembly, as they did, maintain the Credit and
Authority of the Assembly, by a cheerful Submission and Obedience to its
Appointments. Paul, Barnabas, Judas and Silas, though chief Men, did not decline,
but Reverence the Authority of this Assembly, by undertaking a Toilsome and
hazardous Work. Nature's Light teaches us, that the several Parts of a
Politic Body, as well as the Natural, are to be subject and serviceable to the
Whole, and why not also in Church Assemblies?

6. Let us imitate their Spiritual Prudence, in the choosing and sending Men to
the Work that are fit for it; They sent chosen Men, etc. As GOD has entrusted
us, we cannot be Faithful to Him, or those with whom He has trusted us, unless
we employ fit Persons. And therefore,

1. Let us be careful to lay hands suddenly upon no Man, that we be neither
Partakers with them of their Sins, nor Authors of Plagues to others; but such
as are faithful, able, and apt to teach, let such be chosen at first, 2 Timothy
2.2. We injure the present, and betray the after-Generation, if we do otherwise.

2. Seeing there be diversity of Gifts, we ought to make proper and suitable
Application of those to Places and Work; so is done here, They sent Chosen Men.
Nature has taught every Mechanic not to use his Tools promiscuously: GOD has
instructed the Plowman to Discretion, not to thresh Fitches with a Threshing
Instrument, neither is a Cart-Wheel turned about upon the Cummin; but the
Fitches are beaten out with a Staff, and the Cummin with a Rod, Isa. 28.27, 28.
This comes from the LORD, who is Wonderful in Counsel, and Excellent in
Working. Neither a Man's own Desires or Inclinations, nor partial Respect to
Persons, should guide us in this, but Experience of a just Proportion betwixt
their Gifts and the Work, should direct us: For mis-application of Persons to
Places, has been of very ill consequence to the Church.

7. The choicest Persons in our Assemblies are not to think themselves too good
to serve the Church of CHRIST, but when called, are to go on her Errands
cheerfully, as these Chosen Men here do: Men ought not to seek only Ease,
Honor, and Advantage; but are called to Labor in the Vineyard, and the Great
Shepherd will provide them their Reward.

8. Such Persons may be safely Trusted with the Important Interest of the
Church, who have given proof of their hazarding their Lives for the Name of
CHRIST: Men Denied to Themselves their Ease and Advantage; Men of Courage, who
dare Engage in Difficulties, such Men will have a Native Care for it. Having
therefore the SPIRIT promised to be our Guide, the Word of GOD given to be our
Rule, and so Excellent a Pattern as this Assembly: Let us follow our Guide,
according to the Rule, after so Holy an Example.

FINIS.

