Humiliations followed with Deliverances.

A Brief Discourse On the MATTER and METHOD, Of that HUMILIATION which would be
an Hopeful Symptom of our Deliverance from Calamity.

Accompanied and Accommodated WITH A NARRATIVE Of a Notable Deliverance lately
Received by some English Captives, From the Hands of Cruel Indians. And some
Improvement of that Narrative.

Whereto is added A Narrative of Hannah Swarton, containing a great many
wonderful passages, relating to her Captivity and Deliverance.

Boston in N. E. Printed by B Green, and J. Allen for Samuel Phillips at the
Brick Shop. 1697.

Humiliations, followed with Deliverances.
At Bost^n Lectu^e; 6 d. 3. m. 1697. The Week before a General FAST.
2 Chronicles XII. 7. When the Lord saw, that they Humbled themselves, the Word of
the Lord came unto Shemajah, saying, They have Humbled themselves, I will not
Destroy them, but I will grant them some Deliverance.


WHen the Punishment of S^^rging was used upon a Criminal in Israel, it was the
O der and Usage, that while the Executioner was Laying on his Thirteen (and
therein Forty save one) Blows, with an Instrument, every s^^oke whereof gave
Three Lashes to the Delinq^^nt, there were still present Three Judges, whereof,
while one did Number the Blows, and another kept crying out, Smite him! a
Third Read Three Scriptures, during the Time of the Scourging: and the
Scourging Ended with the Reading of them: The first Scripture was That in Deuteronomy.
28.58. If thou will not observe to do all the words of this Law, that be
written in this Book that thou may Fear this Glorious and ^earful Name, THE
LORD THY GOD; then the Lord will make thy Plagues wonderful. The second
Scripture was That in Deuteronomy. 29 9. Keep therefore the words of this Covenant,
and do them, that you may prosper in all that ye do. The last Scripture was
That in Psalm. 78 38. But He, being full of Compassion, forgave their Iniquity,
and destroyed them not. This was done, partly for the Admoniti^n, partly for
the Consolation of the Chastised Criminal.

Christians, We are all sensible, That the Scourges of Heaven, have long been
Employed upon us, for our Crimes against the Holy and Just and Good Laws of the
Lord our God: Alas, our Plagues have been wonderful! We have been sorely
Lashed, with one Blow after another, for our Delinquencies. Who is there to
Number the Blows? Yea, The Anger of God, is not for all this Turned away, but
His Hand stretched out still! It is but proper, while we are thus under our
Punishment, for us, to have a Text of the Sacred Oracles, agreeable unto our
present State, Read unto us. Behold, an Agreeable Text, now singled out, for
our Entertainment; and I do the rather single it out because the next Week, a
General HUMILIATION is to be attended among us; for which, I cannot easily do a
more Useful Thing, than to give you a Praeparative; while I am speaking unto
the Christians of many Churches, here come together, in One Great Assembly.

In our Context, we sind the People of God, beginning to Forsake the Law of the
Lord: They many ways Transgressed against Him. Sad Calamity overtook them, for
this their Iniquity, and Apostasy; But God blessed the Preaching of His Prophet
Shemajah unto them, under this Calamity to produce a Notable Humiliaiion in
them. The Clauses now before us, represent a blessed Effect of that
Humiliation; a gracious Promise of some Deliverance from Destruction, was, by
that Prophet of the Lord, when they Humbled themselves, brought from the Lord
unto them.

The Truth which Lies plainly before us, is, That when a Sinful People Humble
themselves before the Almighty God, it is an Hopeful and an Happy Symptom, that
He will not utterly Destroy such a People.

Now, The CASE, which this Encouraging Truth, does at this Time Encourage us,
to speak unto, is,

After what manner is the Self-Humiliation of a People that would ^scape a Sore
Destruction, to be Expressed and Excited?

Which to speak yet more pertinently and profitably, is to say.

After what manner are we our selves, O our Dear People, to Humble our selves
before the Lord?

Give your Attention.

I. When we Paenitently Confess our Sins, and much more, when we vigorously
ficform our Sins, we Then do to good purpose Humble our selves, before the God,
against whom we have Sinned. More distinctly;

First, A Paenitent Confession of Sin, is that Self Humiliation which our God
expects from such a people as our selves. Thus, in Luke 18.13, 14. He that
said, God be merciful to me a Sinner, is, He that Humbles himself. Thus, Lev.
26.40, 41. They that Confess their iniquity, and the Iniquity of their Fathers,
have their Uncircumcised Hearts Humbled in their doing so.

Accordingly, First, In our Humiliations, we ought seriously to Confess out
Provocations to the Most Holy God, and the Iniquities that we have done, before
Him who is of purer Eyes than to behold Iniquities. But, what a sad Catalogue
of Provocations, have we to b^ing forth before the Lord.

When we Humble our selves,

I. Let us Humbly Confess, That the People of this Land, in a growing Apostasy
from that Religious Disposition that Signalized the first Planting of these
Colonies, have with multiplied Rebellions against the Almighty, Sinned
exceedingly.

II. Let us Humbly Confess, That the Spirit of this World, has brought an
Epidemical Death, upon the Spirit, and Power of Godliness.

III. Let us Humbly Confess, That the Glorious Gospel of the Lord Jesus Christ,
here Enjoyed, with much Plenty as well as Purity, has not been Thankfully and
Fruitfully Entertained by those that have been Blessed with the Joyful Sound.

IV. Let us Humbly Confess, That the Covenant of Grace Recognized in our
Churches, has been by multitudes not submitted unto; and of them that have
submitted unto it, multitudes have not walked according to the Sacred
Obligations thereof.

V. Let us Humbly Confess, That the Unreasonable Vices of Rash and Vain
Swearing, with Hellish Cursing in the Mouths of many, have rendered them Guilty
Sinners.

VI. Let us Humbly Confess, That a Flood of Excessive Drinking, has begun to
Drown much of Christianity, yea, and of Civility it self, in many places among
us.

VII. Let us Humbly Confess, That some English, by Selling of Strong Drink unto
the Indians, have not only prejudiced among them, the Successes of the Word of
Life, but also been the Faulty and Bloody Occasions of Death unto them.

VIII. Let us Humbly Confess, That a Vanity of Apparel, has been affected by
many persons, who have been so vain, as to Glory in their Shame.

IX. Let us Humbly Confess, That wicked Sorceries have been practiced in the
Land; and yet in the Troubles from the Devils, thereby brought in among us,
those Errors on both Hands were committed, which, Who can understand?

X. Let us Humbly Confess, That the Days of Sacred Rest among us, have been
disturbed with so many Profanation^^ that we may not wonder if we See no Rest.

XI. Let us Humbly Confess, That the woeful Decay of good Family Discipline,
has opened the Flood Gates, for Innumerable, and almost Irremediable Woes, to
break in upon us.

XII. Let us Humbly Confess, That M^gistrates Ministers, and others that have
served the Public, have been but great Sufferers by their Services, and met
with Unrighteous Discouragements.

XIII. Let us Humbly Confess, That the Pyracies, which, it is to be feared, some
who belong to these, have perpetrated in other parts of the World, are
Scandals, that call for much Lamentation.

XIV. Let us Humbly Confess, That we have in former years used Unjustifiable
Hardships, upon some that have Conscientiously Dissented from our persuasions
in Religion.

XV. Let us Humbly Confess, That we have treated one another, very Ill, in the
Various Temptations, Cententions, and Rev^luti^ns, which have been upon us.

XVI Let us Humbly Confess, That the Sins of the most Filthy Uncleanness, have
horribly Defiled the Land.

XVII Let us Humbly Confess, That the Joy of Harvest, has been filled with
Folly, and Lewdness, and Forgotten the Glad Service of God, whom we should have
Served in the Abun^lance of all things.

XVIII Let us Humbly Confess, That much Fraud has been used in the Dealings of
many, and the Spirit of Oppression has made a Cry.

XIX. Let us Humbly Confess, That Falsehood and Slander has been commonly
carrying of Darts through the Land and the Wounded have been many!

XX. And, Let us Humbly Confess, That the Successive and Amazing Judgments of
God upon us, for our thus Trespassing, have not Reclamed us, but we have
prodigiously Gone on still in our Trespasses.

In our Humiliations, Let these things be Reflected on; and with our most
Humble Reflections, Let us do like them, in 1 Samuel 7.6. Gather together, and
Draw water, and pour it out, [in a Shower of Tears] before the Lord, and Fast
on that Day, and say, we have Sinned against the Lord.

But that this our Confession of our Provocations, may be Penitent, we must,
Secondly, Incorporate thereinto, a Confession of what we have Deserved by these
Provoking Evils. Particularly.

We have seen many Troubles: but on our Day of Humiliation, concerning all our
Troubles, Let us Humbly make that Confession, in Ezra 9.13. Thou, our God, best
punished us, less than our Iniquities Deserve.

Have we lost many Thousands of Pounds, by the Disasters of the Sea? Let us
Humbly Confess, our Sins have Deserved, that instead of making one Good Voyage,
we should have been stripped of all the Little that is left unto us.

Has one bad harvest after another, diminished our Ordinary Food? Let us
Humbly Confess, our Sins have Deserved, that the Earth which has been thereby
Defiled, should have yielded us n^thing at all.

Have Bloody, Popish, and Pagan Enemies, made very dreadful Impressions upon
us, and Captived and Butchered multitudes of our Beloved Neighbors? Let us
Humbly Confess, our Sins have Deserved, that we should be all of us, altogether
given up, unto the will of our Enemies, to Serve our Enemies in the want of all
things, and have our Lives continually hanging in Doubt, under their turious
Tyrannies.

Have we been Broken sore in the place of Dragons, and Covered with the Shadow
of Death? Say Humbly before the Lord, with them, in Lam. 3.39. Why should a man
Complain, for the punishment of his Sin?

And yet, we have had Comforts, to mitigate and moderate, our Troubles: In the
midst of wrath, God has Remembered Mercy. Now concerning all our Comforts, on
our Day of Humiliation, Let us Humbly make that Confession, in Lam. 3.22. It is
of the Lords mercies, that we are not Consumed.

Have we not the Tidings of Salvation by our Lord Jesus Christ, Preac'd unto
us, to sweeten the Bread of Adversity, and the Water of Affl^ction, which the
Lord has given us? Let us Humbly Confess, It Is of the Lords Mercies, that this
Country has the Bread of Life, and the Waters of Life, yet continued unto it,
and that it is not become a Region of the Valley of the Shadow of Death.

Are our Poor, though greatly Increased and Afflicted, yet more Comfortably
provided for, than in many other parts of the World? Let us Humbly Confess,
It Is of the Lords Mercies, that we are not all Seattered, and fami^hed, and
peri^hed in our Poverty.

Do we see less of the Distress of Nations, and Perplexity, with the Sea, and
the waves thereof Roaring, than they do in a great part of Europe 8. Let us
Humbly Confess, It Is of the Lords Mercies, that all the Things, which the
fainting Hearts of men any where do fear, coming on the Earth, are not come
upon our selves.

Why do not our Adversaries use the Advantages which they have to Confound us,
but are themselves in such Confusion, that we Endure not an Hundredth part of
the Disturbance from them, which they might give unto us? Humbly say before the
Lord, with him, in Genesis 32.10. We are not worthy of the least of all these
Mercies!

This, This would be the Language of a True Humiliati^n.

But a Second Admoni^ion, must be added unto This. What Signities Confession,
without Reformation? It Is all but Hypocrisy, all but Impiety. We are told in
Prove. 28.13. It Is he that Confesses and Forsaleth, who shall have Mercy.

The Ancients, would well call the Confession of Sin, The Vemit of the Soul.
But now, if we return, and proceed, unto the Commission of the Sins, which we
have by our Confession, as it were Vomited up; what are we, but the Dogs that
Return unto their Vomit? When Sins are Sincerely Confessed, the Repenting
Sinners, will say, as in Hos. 14.8. What have we any more to do with them?

Come then; We have now and then, that which we call, A Day of Humiliation.
But, Sirs, A Day of Reformation; Oh! when shall we see such a Day? When shall
it once be! Behold, an Essential Piece of work, to be attended, when, A Day of
Humiliation, arrives unto us. Let every one of us, Earnestly Enquire with our
selves, What is there, that I am now to Reform in my own Heart and Life, and in
the Family which I belong unto? and importunately implore, the Help of the
Spirit of Grace, to pursue such a Reformation. But then, l^et all that Sustain
any Public Office, whether Civil, or Sacred, further carry on the Enqui^y:
What shall we do to Reform any spreading Evils in the Public? Lei the Pastors
of the Churches, in their severat Charges, Labor Watchfully to prevent, all
growth of Sin in their Vicinities; and the Churches join with their Pastors, in
Sharpening their Discipline against Offenses that may arise, and in preserving
the Liberty, and Purity, which they have heretofore been clothed withal.

And Let Justices, Grand Jury men, Constables, Tythingmen, have their mutual
Consultations, to procure the Executions of Good Laws, and Remember the Oath of
God upon them.

Were such an Humiliation once obtained, Then would our God say, I see, they
have Humbled themselves, I will not utterly Destroy them! The Land of Canaan,
is as much as to say, in English, The Land of the Humbled. Oh! if we were
universally thus Humbled, our Land would soon be a Canaan, for the Rest, the
Peace, the Plenty, which would be therein vouchsafed unto us.

II. The Exercises of a Sacred Fast have a particular and peculiar Character of
Humiliation in them, and we are to Humble our selves with Fasting before the
Lord. Thus the Psalmist of old manifested his Humiliation, in Psalm. 35.13. I
Humbled my Soul, with Fasting.

There is that Call Now, and Often [perhaps not often enough!] heard, through the
Province, in Joel 1.14. Sanctify a Fast, Call a Solemn Assembly, Gather the
Elders; and all the Inhabitants of the Land, into the House of your God, and
Cry unto the Lord. And I persuade my self, that we generally concur in the
General Principle, hitherto Espoused, by the Church of God, in every
Generation, That a Religions Fast, is a Needful Duty, ( pro Temporibus et
Causis, as Tertullian long since well stated it,) on Just and Great Occasions
for it. That Merry Sect, who Explode Fasting, as a thing not Agreeable to our
Gospel Times, appear not among us. We know, that Fasting has, in all Ag^s,
been esteemed, a Duty incumbent on the People of God. We find such Fasting used
in Elder Times, [Judg. 20.26. and 1 Samuel 7.6.] Both more publicly, [2 Chronicles.
20.30. and Ezr. 8 21.] And more privately; [2 Samuel 12.16 and Neb. 1.4.] What
though these things were in the Days of the Old Testament? I hope, the Old
Testament is not become Apoc^ypha, with any of us. But in the New Testament
also, we have a Praediction, of our Fasting, [Math. 9.15.] Yea, and a
Praescription for it, [M^th. 6.16.] For d^ing it more pub^ickly, we have (...)
W^^rant, [Act. 14.23.] and more privately too. [1 Cor. 7.5.] Yea, we are told,
that there are certain Blessings, which cannot now be obtained, but in such a
way. [Mar. 9.29.] And I am sure of one thing more; when the Apostles, and the
Believers in the Primitive Times, were most Filled with the Holy Spirit of
Christ, then it was that they were most in Fasting before the Lord!

Now, if our Fast, be such a Fast as the Lord has chosen, we shall therein
Humble our selves, most acceptably, most profitably, most efficaciously. And
because, the Right Performance of this Duty, is a thing of great Consequence in
Christianity; it is what is frequently required, and much Weal or Woe will follow
upon the management of it; I will set before you, the Rules of that Sacred
Fast, wherein we are to Humble our Souls.

Having first, Praepared our selves for our Fast, as one would for an
Extraordinary Sabbath, we have these things to do.

First; There is the Internal Humiliation of our Fast; The Duties of Praying,
Repenting and Believing, are the Soul of that Fast wherein we are to Humble our
Souls; and we are to Labor in those Duties. The Duties of a Fast, are those,
in 2 Chronicles. 7.14. My People shall then Humble themselves, and Pray, and Seek my
Face, and Turn from their wicked ways. For men to think, that they Serve God,
by a Fast wherein they do nothing but Fast from Corporal Sustenance, and they
draw not near to God in Devotions all the Day long, it is a plece of Ignorance;
yea, more than one Commandment of God is broken, by this piece of Ignorance.

When we Celebrate a Fast, we are in more than ordinary Prayers, to Acknowledge
our own Sinfulness, and the Greatness and Justice of God, in Chastising our
Sinfulness; and we are to Supplicate those Favors of Heaven, which our Sins,
our Wants, and our Fears, make Necessary for us. The Thing which we have to do,
on a Fast, is what the Praying Daniel did; in Dan. 9.3. I set my Face unto the
Lord God, to seek by Prayer, and Supplications, with Fasting. And haing thus
Quoted, the Ninth Chapter of Daniel, I may Remark, That there are Three N^nths,
which admirably well describe the Task of a Fast unto us; the Ninth Chapter of
Ezra, the Ninth Chapter of Nehemiah, and the Ninth Chapter of Daniel. When the
Fast comes; Remember, Christians, to consult those Three Chapters, with Lively
Meditations thereupon. A Day of Fast, is to be a Day of Prayer. As in Act.
13.3. so elsewhere, Fasting and Praying, are what God has joined, and here, Man
may not separate them. Would you hear, what you have to Do, when a Fast is to
be kept? The words of an Order for a Fast, once ran so, in Jon. 3.8. Cry
mightily unto God. Prayer, it is That, whereof the Jews in one of their Ancient
Adagies, tell us, Nulla est pulchrior virtus hac ipsa; There is no virtue like
it. It is beyond all Oblations. But Repenting and Believing as well as Praying,
must signalize our Fast. Reconciliation with God, is the End of a Fast; without
Repenting and Believing, this Reconciliation is not applied unto us.

A Fast, is but a Form, an Hungry and Empty Form, if we do not therein heartily
Repent of our Miscarriages. Thus we are advised, in Isa. 58.6, 7, 8. Is not
this the Fast, that I have chosen? To Loose the Bonds of Wickedness. On a Fast,
Let us be those Ephraimites, who shail bemoan themselves; Thou have Chastised
me, O Lord, and I was Chastised, Turn thou me, and I shall be Turned! On a
Fast, Let us take those Directions, in the midst of our Lamentations, Let us
Search and Try our ways, and Turn again unto the Lord. A Fasting Day must be a
Soul grieving Day, and a Sin killing Day, or it is nothing. Our Fast, are to
Slay our Lusts; those are the Beasts, which are then to be slaughtered. Indeed,
when ever a Fast recurrs, we should go the whole Work of Conversion over again!
Our Fast will notably be, Ci^us virtutis, if we do so.

Again; The Satisfaction and Intercession of the Lord Jesus Christ, must on a
Fast ^e Repaired unto; and we must Be^^eve in it for our Atonement. It was the
^ite appointed for a Fast, in Lev. 16.27 ^0. The Blood of the Sin Offering,
must be. ^rought in, to make Atonement; On that Day all the Priest make
Atonement for you, to ^eanse you, that you may be clean from all ^ur Sins
before the Lord. Our Lord Jesus christ is our Priest; What He has done ^r our
Atonement, must be this Day, ^ith a strong Faith Laid hold upon. A Fast is a
Day of Expiation; but we know it is only the Lord Jesus Christ, that has by
His Unknown Sufferings (as the Greek Church at this Day express^s it) made
Expiation for our Sins. Hence on a Fast, we must Renew the Dependence of our
Souls, on the Obedience which our Lord Jesus Christ, our Surety, has yielded
unto God for us. Our Sin has procured the Death of our Lord Jesus Christ; In a
Fast, our Faith is to Feed upon it. A Fasting Day, is with Faith, a Feeding
Day. In our Fasts, we are to Imitate the Action of the Molossians, who seeking
the Kings Good will unto them, took the Son of the King into their Arms, and
presenting themselves thus before him, said, Sir, For the sake of this your
Son, we hope, you will be favorable to us. Thus, Let us present our selves before
the Eternal King of Heaven, on our Fast, with His Only Begotten, His Dearly
Beloved Son, in the Arms of our Faith, and plead, Oh! for the Sake of this thy
Son, do Good unto us. But then.

Secondly; There is the External Humiliation of our Fast; when we Humble our
selves in a Fast, we are to Abstain from all our Secular Pleasures and Affayrs,
that we may the better go thorough our Duties. Like Silly Children, we know not
when to Feed, and when to Forbear Feeding. But our Good God, in His Word has
taught us! We are Taught, that we must sometimes have a Day for Fasting, which
must be a Day of Restraint upon us; and this Restraint must Extend unto the
Dimensions of a Sabbath. Of a Fast, it is prescribed, in Lev. 23.32. It shall
be unto you, a Sabbath of Rest, and ye shall Afflict your Souls; from Evening
unto Evening shall ye Celebrate your Sabbath. The Design of the Abstinence thus
to be used on a Fast, is, not only that we may be more free for the several
Spiritual Employments, which are then incumbent on us, (our Lord, like a wife
Falconer, will by keeping of us a little Sharp, fit us for the Highest Flights
in our Prayers!) but also to Show, and Speak, the Humiliation of our Souls in
those Employments. It Is a Ceremony of Gods Appointment, a Symbolical Ceremony,
which God Himself has appointed, and a part of Worship, whereby we are to
Signify, That we (...) our selves utterly unworthy of all those Blessings,
which we now Deny unto our selves, and therefore of all other Blessings
whatsoeever. And the First Sin of man, which Lay in Eating, is to be
considered, as very particularly herein referred unto.

Now, First, A Fast is to be kept with an Abstinence from the Pleasures of this
Life. Our usual Diet must on a Fast be Abstained from. It was therefore said,
in Esth. 4.16. Fast, and neither Eat nor Drink. The very Term of a Fast,
implies thus much; and it has been of old said, They that will not so Fast
with the Children of God, must Eat and Drink of the Furious Wrath of God, with
the Wicked There are indeed Cases of Necessity, wherein our merciful God call;
for, Mercy rather than Sacrifice; and in those Cases, doubtless the Abstinence
may be somewhat Abated and Relaxed. Some cannot Encounter a severe and a total
Abstinence, it would utterly Disable them, for the Service of the Day: the
Severity may then be mitigated. Yet our Abstinence must be such as to produce
our Affliction. Of a Fast, it is said, in Isa. 58.5. It is a Day for a man to
Afflict his Soul; and it is said, in Lev. 23.29. Whatsoever Soul it be, that
shall not be Afflicted in that same Day, he shall be cut off from among his
people. We may not Eat or Drink so much, nor may we Eat or Drink so well, on
such a Day, as at another Time. In the Fast of a Daniel, we have this
Abstinence observed, chapter 10.3. late no pleasant Bread, neither came Flesh nor
Wine, into my mouth, neither did I anoint my self at all: And in Tertullians
Time, they had their Xerophagiae, a Dry sort of Repast, for such as found that
a Rigid Fast, was too hard for them. But by consequence, all other Delights of
the Senses, are then also to be avoided. If you read, Joel 2.16. and (...) Cor.
7.5. You Will find a particular prohibition of this Importance. Hence likewise,
our Sleep is then to be Retrenched. If we are inclinable to Sleep so long on a
Fast, as we do on another Day, we are to Awake^ our selves, with such a Call
from God, as that, What meanest thou, O Sleeper, Arise, and Ca^l upon thy God!
And it is not improper here to be noted, That our Alms are to be one
Concomitant of our Fasts. It was said, in Isa. 58 7. Is (...) this the Fast
that I have Chosen? Is it (...) to deal thy Bread to the Hungry? When we come
to seek Mercy of God, we should, in Thankfulness for our Hope to find what we
seek, show Mercy to men. In our Fasting, we Deny to our selves our usual
Nourishments; and we should then Bestow on others at least as much as we Deny
to our serves, in Token of our Sense, That we are more Undeserving of the
Divine Bounty, than any that we know in our Neighborhood. Our Alms are to go
up with our Prayers, as a Memorial, (we Remember who is did so!) before God. But
there is yet one thing more to be added; Fine Clothes must in a Fast, be
Abstained from. If there were no Scripture for this, why might not mere Nature
teach it unto us, as well as unto the Ninivites? But we have Scripture for it,
in Exodus 33.4. The people mourned, and no man did put on him his Ornaments. I
have see^ a Fault in this place, and My Neighbors, It Is utterly a Fault among
you; That on a Fast, many people, will come to the Worship of God, in as Gay
Clothes, as if they were going to a Feast. Methinks, I hear, the Holy Angels of
God thus uttering their Indignation against such Offenders; What? will those
vain people, never have any sign of an Abased, and an Afflicted Soul upon them?
Truly, to be arrayed in Gorgeous Apparel on a Fast, is very offensive unto
God. Rags are fitter than Robes, for the Children of men therein to appear as
Malefactors before God the Judge of all. They that come to the Assembly, in a
splendid, and flanting Attire, on such a Day, do but Affront the God, whom they
profess to Humble themselves before. Would you Speed in a Fast? Then be able to
say, if not with him, in Psalm 35.13. My Clothing was Sackcloth, when I Humbled
my Soul with Fasting, yet, My Clothing is Sober, Modest, Proper, and very
Humble!

And, Secondly, A Fast, is to be kept with an Abstinence, from the Affayrs of
this Life. The Works of our particular Vocations are to be laid aside, when a
Fast is Indicted; and All Servile Labor on the said Day is Inhibited. A Fast,
is to be kept with the strictness of a Sabbath. It is Enjoined in Lev. 23.28,
30, 32. Ye shall do no work in that same Day, for it is a Day of Atonement.
Whatsoever Soul it be, that does any work in that same Day, the same Soul will
I destroy from among his people. It shall be unto you a Sabbath of Rest; from
Evening to Evening shall ye Celebrate it. When the Services of the Congregation
are over, we are not presently at Liberty to do what we will: Those persons do
but help to Debauch the Land, who take such a Liberty. The Edicts of Heaven run
so, in Joel 2 14. Sanctify a Fast. The whole Day of the Fast is to be
Sanctified, or, set apart, for Communion with God: When we keep a Day, we must
keep it unto the Lord. The Expectation of our God, is intimated unto us, in Isa
58.13. Turn away thy Foot from the Sabbath, (take no long Journeys on it) from
doing thy pleasure on my Holy Day: Honor him, not doing thine own ways, nor
finding thine own pleasure, nor speaking thine own words. Indeed, the Weekly
Sabbath lays a claim to all the things here spoken of; nevertheless, I suspect
that a Fasting Sabbath is here more peculiarly intended. A Fast, is no less
than twice in one verse, Lev. 23.32. called a Sabbath: and why may not that be
the Sabbath more especially meant throughout the whole fifty eighth Chapter of
Isaiah? An Expression twice used in the verse newly quoted, namely, Doi^^^ thy
pleasure, and Finding thy own pleasure, on the Sabbath, occurs in the third
verse, In the Day of your Fast, you find pleasure; which finding of pleasure is
opposed unto the Affliction, both of Spirit and of Body, wherein we are to
Judge our selves on such a Solemnity. Because we do not Fast, with a due
conformity, to the Edicts of Heaven, therefore as of old, Pompey Siezed the
Jewish Temple, on their Fast Day, and Sosius on their Fast Day took the City,
so we in this Land, have on, o^ near our Fast-Dayes often felt such Rebukes of
Heaven, that it has become the just Astonishment of many that have wisely
observed it, and it should be the Humiliation of us all. But now, conform to
this Expectation of Heaven, on your Fast: Then shall thou Delight thy self in
the Lord, for the mouth of the Lord has spoken it.

III. That our Humiliation may b^ Quickene^, Let us Humbly, Awfully and
Mourn^^ily, Consider the most Humbling Circumstances, which the Mighty Hand of
God, has brought us into. I^ was the Counsel, in 1 Pet. 5.6. Humble your
selves under the Mighty Hand of God. Wicked and Hurtful men, have been called,
The Hand of God: see Psalm. 17.14.] It may be, Nero, a Mighty man Raised by God,
for the Vexation of mankind, may be more particularly designed, in that
passage, The Mighty Hand of God. And by a French Nero, have we also been so
vexed, that we have cause to Humble our selves under what we have Endured from
that Mighty Hand. But indeed, there is the Mighty Hand of God, in all
Afflictive Dispensations of His Providence; and now, O Let us Humble our
selves, by Considering, how much the Dispensations of His Mighty Hand have
Humbled us.

The Circumstances of Affliction are Humbling Circumstances. It was said of the
Afflicted, in Psalm. 107.39. They are brought Low through Affliction. It was
said by the Afflicted, in Psalm 39 8. We are brought very L^w. An Afflicted
people may say, as the Afflicted Paul said, My God Humbles me. Afflictions keep
under our Aspiring Spi^its, and make us feel and own our own wretchedness. But
Oh! what Afflictions has this poor people, been Humbled withal!

It was a Prophecy concerning, The Daughter of Zion, in Isa. 3.26. She being
Desolate, shall sit upon the Ground. When Zion was Desolate, by the Roman
Conquest, (unto which this Prophecy might Extend) there were Coins made in
Commemoration of that Conquest, and on those Coins there was a Remarkable
Exposition of this Prophecy. On the Reverse of those Medals, which are to be
seen unto this Day, there is, A Silent Woman sitting upon the Ground, and
leaning against a Palmtree, with this Inscription IUDAEA CAPTA. Nor was any
Conquered City or Country, before this of Judaea, ever thus drawn upon Medals,
as, A Woman sitting upon the Ground. Alas, If poor New England, were to be
shown upon her old Coin, we might show her Leaning against her Thunderstruck
Pine tree, Desolate, sitting upon the Ground. Ah! New England! Upon how many
Accounts, may thou say with her, in Ruth 1 13. The Hand of the Lord is gone
out against me!

An Excellent Minister, who dyed among us, a Young Man, Considerably more than
Twenty years ago, [It was Mr. John Eliot, the younger,] when he lay on his
Deathbed, and was Drawing his Presagious Breath, had these Memorable
Expressions. My Lord Jesus Christ, has been a Great while, preparing a
Mansion, which is now ready for me. He will quickly take me, as He did John, by
the Right Hand, and present me unto the Father, who has Loved me, with an
Everlasting Love. As for New England, I believe, that God will not Unchurch it;
but He will make a Poor and Afflicted People in it Boston, and the Massachuset
Colony, is Coming Down, Coming Down, Coming Down a pace! Expect sad and sore
Afflictions; but Oh! Get an Interest in the Lord Jesus Christ, and you may Live
on That, all the World over. So spoke an Eminent Servant of the Lord Jesus
Christ, when he was just Entering into the Joy of His Lord. Now this
Praediction, we have seen very terribly Accomplished; It has been Strangely and
Sadly Accomplished, ever since the Time that it was uttered: And in almost all
our Concerns, our Story has been that in Judge. 2.15. Whithersoever they went
out, the Hand of the Lord was against them for evil, as the Lord had said, and
they were greatly Distressed.

We have been Humbled, with an Annual Blast upon our Daily Bread, until at
last, the very Staff of the Country has been broken for Two years together,
and an horrible Cry, for Bread, Bread, has been heard in our Streets.

We have been Humbled, with such Losses by Sea and Land, that Strangers afar
off, take notice of it, Concluding, Surely Almighty God is in ill Terms with
that Country!

We have been Humbled by the Angels of Death shooting the Arrows of Death, with
direful Repetitions of Mortality, in the midst of us!

We have been Humbled by a Barbarous Adversary once and again let loose to
Wolve it upon us, and an unequal Contest with such as are not a People, but a
Foolish Nati^n.

We have been Humbled by all Adversity vexing us, in our Going out, and our
Coming in, and in the Constant Miscarriages of our most Likely Expeditions.

We have been Humbled by the Wrath of the Lord of Hosts Darkning our Land, when
Evil Angels broke in among us, to do those Amazing Things, of which no Former
Ages give a parallel.

We have been Humbled, by the Ireful, and the Direful Rebukes of Heaven, upon
all our Precious and Pleasant Things: But above all, by Spiritual Plagues
whereto we are abandoned. The Plagues of a Blind Mind, and an Hard Heart, and
an Astonishing Unfruitfulness under all the Means of Grace; and a Stupid
Insensibility of the Causes for which, and the Manners in which, the Almighty
God is Contending with us, have Siezed upon us. Some of our Seers have a mist
before their Eyes; Some of our Churches fall asleep till they are stripped of
their Garments; under the Sharpest Chastisements of Heaven, we grow worse and
worse, with such a Swift Apostasy, that if we Degenerate the Next Ten Years, as
the most Impartial observers do say, that we have done the Last, God be
Merciful unto us! What a Swift Destruction are we likely to be overwhelmed
withal?

Now there is a Loud Voice, in all these things; the Voice of them is, Be
Humbled, O New England; Humble thy self, Lest a fiercer Anger of the Lord yet
come upon thee! Oh! Let not that be written on our Doors, in Jer 44.10. They
are not Humbled unto this Day! Sirs, We are every Day Coming down most
wonderfully; But let us then Fall down most Humbly, in the Consideration
thereof, and let our Lamentation be That, in Lam. 3.19, 20. Remembering my
Affliction and my Misery; my Soul has them still in Remembrance, and is Humbled
in me!

IV. What will our Humiliation Signify, if it carry us not unto our Lord Jesus
Christ? Wherefore, when we Humble our selves, Let us Humbly Rely on our Lord
Jesus Christ alone, for our Acceptance with God. So are we Di^ected, in Jam.
4.10. Humble your selves in the sight of the Lord: That is to say, With an Eye
to the Lord Jesus Christ, in all you do.

That the Humiliations of men, are of no Account, with God, while the Lord
Jesus Christ is not therein referred unto, the poor Jewish Nation have given to
us, a doleful Experiment: related in a Book Translated by one Paul Isaiah, a
Jew, by that among other motives, converted unto the Faith of our Blessed
Jesus. After many former Humiliations, that the End of their Captivity might be
Revealed unto them, they did in the year 1502. make a Public Repentance, through
all their Habitations, all over the face of the whole World, and both old and
young, men, women and children, spent almost a year together in such mavelous
Devotions as were never heard of in the world before. But all signified
nothing; why? Because they do as the Prophet Isaiah foretold that they would;
they still Reject our Lord Jesus Christ, through whom alone it is, that any of
our Humiliations have Acceptance with the God of Heaven. The Great God has
promised, That He will be favorable unto that Nation, in Lev. 26 41. When
their Uncircumcised Hearts be Humbled, and they then Accept the punishment of
their Iniquity. The Sacrifice, upon whom the punishment of our Iniquity does
fall, [Isa. 53.6. and 2 Cor. 5.21.] is that of the Messiah; and the Messiah
therefore is by that Name intended. When the Jews come to leave off their
Thoughts and Hopes, of any other Sacrifice, or their Dreams of making
Satisfaction by bearing the punishment of their own Iniquity, but Accept the
Messiah, as the only Help of their Souls against all the Guilt of their Sins;
THEN God will Remember His Covenant. O That they would at Last, and at Least
come to such Thoughts, as were in the famous Rabbi Samuel Marochianus, who upon
that Prophecy of Amos, where the Lord threatens to punish Israel for Selling
the Righteous for Silver, has these Memorable words; The Prophet Amos, Expressly
declares the Wickedness, for which we are in our Captivity: It manifestly
appears to me, that we are justly punished, for that Sin of Selling the
Righteous. A thousand years and more, are spent, in all which Time our
condition among the Gentiles is not minded, nor have we any Hopes of mending
it. O My God, I am afraid, I am afraid, Lest the JESUS, whom the Christians
Worship, should be the Righteous One, whom we have Sold for Silver! In the mean
time, Let us that own our selves Christians, now prove our selves to be so, by
our Humbling our selves before God, but Looking for the Success of it, only
from and through our Lord Jesus Christ, our only Mediator. Let the Humiliation of
our Lord Jesus Christ, be our Meditation, and our Consolation. Of Him it is
said, in Psalm. 2.8. He Humbled Himself. And let it provoke our Humiliation,
when we meditate on what our Lord Jesus Christ suffered, when God Laid no Him
the Iniquity of us all. But when we have Humbled our selves never so much, Let
us count that we have cause to be Humbled over again, for the defects of our
own Humiliation. As he of old said, Lava meas Lachrymas Domine; Lord, My very
Tears want washing! So let us be sensible, There is enough in our best
Humiliations, to call for more Humiliations. Fly then to the Lord Jesus Christ,
whose Prayers were always perfect, and whose Fasts were ever Faultless, and
whose Blood being Sprinkled upon our Humiliations, is that, which alone, can
render such Defective Things Acceptable unto the Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God
Almighty. Put all into the Hands of the Great Angel of the Covenant: His
Incense persuming of them, they will Ascend before God, with glorious Effects
following thereupon. Among some of the Americans, it is reported, they have a
strange Usage, when they are Humbling themselves before their Gods, to bring
their Sheep into their Assemblies, that by the Bleats and Cries of their Sheep
they may move the compassion of their Gods. We are better taught than so! when
we are Humbling our selves, we are to bring before our God, that Lamb of God,
which takes away the Sins of the world. Syrs, There was a Sacrifice for the
Congregation, which was on a Day of Humiliation of old Commemorated. Our Lord
Jesus Christ, is to be on our Day of Humiliation, Looked unto, as the Sacrifice
for our whole Congregation. Our Faith is to Argue it, That God has had more
Honor from the Sacrifice of our Lord Jesus Christ, than if all our whole
Congregation, were destroyed for ever. Our Faith is to Resolve it, That
whatever Salvation is vouchsafed unto all our whole Congregation, the Sacrifice
of our Lord Jesus Christ shall have the Honor and the Merit of it all,
ascribed thereunto. Now, who can tell, how far one Humble Soul, may prevail,
that shall put in Suit, the Sacrifice for the Congregation? The Faith of one
Moses, of one Samuel, yea, of one Amos, one poor, obscure, honest Husbandman,
Oh! how far, may it go, to obtain this Answer, from the Great God, They have
Humbled themselves, I will not destroy them, but grant them some Deliverance!

AND, I suppose, there happens to be at this very Time, in this Assembly, an
Example, full of Encouragement unto those Humiliations, which have been thus
called for.

In our Solemn Humiliations before the Lord, we have with a very particular
Fervency besought His Mercy for our poor Captives, that were become the Prey of
the Terrible; Yea, we have done it, with some Assurance, that the Glorious
Hearer of Prayer, would Vouchsafe of His Mercy to some of those Miserables.

Now, I think I see, among you, at this Hour, Three Persons, namely, Two Women,
and one Youth, who have just now, Received a Deliverance from a Captivity in
the Hands of houid Indians, with some very Singular Circumstances; And
therefore, Let it not seem an Unsuitable or Unseasonable Digression, it I
Conclude, this Discourse, with making this unexpected occurrence, to be
Subservient unto the main Intention thereof.

[A Narrative of a Notable Deliverance from Captivity.]
ON the fifteenth Day, of the Last March, Hannah Dustan, of Haverhil, having
Lain in about a Week, attended with her Nurse, Mary Neff, a Widow a Body or
Te^^i^le Indians, drew near unto the House where she lay, with Designs to carry
on the bloody Devastations, which they had begun upon the Neigh bourhood. Her
Husband, hastened from his Employments abroad, unto the Relief of his
Distressed Family; and first bidding Seven of his Eight Children (which were
from Two to Seventeen years of age,) to get away as fast a^ they could, unto
some Garrison in the Town, he went in, to inform his Wife, of the horrible
Distress now come upon them. E're she could get up, the fierce Indians were go^
so near, that i^tetly despairing to do her any Service, he can out after his
Children; Resolving, that on the Horse, which he had with him, he would Ride
away, with That, which he should in this Extremity find his Affections to pitch
most upon, and leave the Rest, unto the care of the Divine Providence. He
overtook his Children, about Forty Rod, from his Door; but then, such was the
Agony of his Parental Affections, that he found it Impossible for him, to
Distinguish any one of them, from the Rest; wherefore he took up a Courageous
Resolution, to Live and Die with them All. A party of Indians came up with him;
and now, though they Fired at him, and he Fired at them, yet he manfully kept
in the Rear of his Little Army of unarmed Children, while they Marched off,
with the pace of a Child of Five years old; until, by the Singular Providence
of God, he arrived safe with them all, unto a place of Safety, about a Mile or
two from his House. But his House must in the mean Time, have more dismal
Tradegies acted at it* The Nurse, trying to Escape, with the New born Infant,
sell into the hands of the formidable Salvages; and those surious Tawnies,
coming in to the House, bid poor Dustan, to Rise immediately. Full of
Astonishment, she did so; and Sitting down in the Chimney, with an heart full
of most fearful Expectation, she saw the Raging Dragons rislle all that they
could carry away: and set the House on Fire. About Nineteen or Twenty Indians,
now led these away, with about Half a score other, English Captives: but e're
they had gone many Steps, they dashed out the Brains of the Infant, against a
Tree, and several of the other Captives, as they begun to Tire in their sad
Journey, were soon sent unto their long Home, but the Salvages would presently
bury their Hatchets in their Brains, and leave their Carcases on the ground,
for Birds and Beasts, to feed upon [Christians, A Joshua would have Rent his
Clothes, and fallen to the Earth on his Face, and have Humbled himself
Exceedingly upon the falling out of such doleful Ruins upon his Neighbors!]
However, Dustan (with her Nurse,) notwithstanding her present Condition,
Traveled that Night, about a Dozen Miles; and then kept up with their New
Masters, in a long Travel of an Hundred and fifty Miles, more or less, within a
few Days Ensuing; without any sensible Damage, in their Health, from the
Hardships, of their Travel, their Lodging, their Diet, and their many other
Difficulties. These Two poor Women, were now in the Hands of those, Whose
Tender Mercies are Cruelty: but the Good God, who has all Hearts in His own.
Hands, heard the Sighs of these Prisoners unto Him, and gave them to find
unexpected Favor, from the Master, who Laid claim unto them. That Indian
Family consisted of Twelve persons, Two stout men, three women, and seven
Children; and for the shame of many a Prayerless Family among our English, I
must now publish what these poor women assure me; It Is This; In Obedience to
the Instruction which the French have given them, they would have Prayers in
their Family, no less than Thrice every Day; In the Morning, at Noen, and in
the Evening; nor would they ordinarily let so much as a Child, Eat, or Sleep,
without first saying their Prayers. Indeed, these Idolaters, were, like the
rest of their whiter Brethren Persecutors, and would not Endure that these poor
Women should Retire to their English Prayers, if they could hinder them.
Nevertheless, the poor Women, had nothing but fervent Prayers, to make their
Lives comfortable ^^^r tolerable; and by being daily sent out, upon Business,
they had opportunities together and asunder, to do like another Hannah, in
pouring ^ut their Souls before the Lord: Nor did their Praying Friends among
our selves, forbear to pour out Supplications for them. Now, they could not
observe it, without some wonder, that their Indian Master, sometimes, when he
saw them Dejected, would say unto them; What need you Trouble your self? If
your God will have you Delivered, you shall be so! And it seems, our God, would
have it so to be!

This Indian Family, was now Traveling with these two Captive women, (and an
English Youth, taken from Worcester, last September was a Twelve month,) unto a
Rendezvouz^ of Salvages, which they call a Town, somewhere beyond Penacook; and
they still told these poor women, that when they came to this Town, they must
be Strip^t, and Scourged, and Run the Gantlet, through the whole Army of
Indians. They said, This was the Fashion, when the Captives first came to a
Town; and they derided, some of the faint hearted English, which, they said,
fainted and swooned away under the Torments of this Discipline. [Syrs, can we
hear of these things befalling out Neighbors, and not Humble our selves before
our God!] But on this Day Se'night, while they were yet it may be, about an
hundred and fifty miles from the Indian Town, a little before Break of Day,
when the whole Crew, was in a Dead Sleep, ('twill presently prove so!) One of
these women took up a Resolution, to Imitate the Action of Jael upon Sisera,
and being where she had not her own Life secured by any Law unto her, she
thought she was not forbidden by any Law, to take away the Life, of the
Murderers, by whom her Child had been butchered. She heartened the Nurse, and
the Youth, to assist her, in this Enterprise; and they all furnishing
themselves with Hatchets for the purpose, they struck such Home Blows, upon
the Heads of their Sleeping Oppressors, that e're they could any of them
struggle into any effectual Resistance, at the Feet of those poor Prisoners,
They bowed, they fell, they lay down; at their feet they bowed, they fell;
where they bowed, there they fell down Dead. Only one Squaw Escaped sorely
wounded from them, and one Boy, whom they Reserved Asleep, intending to bring
him away with them, suddenly waked and stole away, from this Desolation. But
cutting off the Scalps of the Ten Wretches, who had Enslaved 'em they are come
off; and I perceive, that newly arriving among us, they are in the Assembly at
this Time, to give Thanks unto, God their Savior.

[An Improvement of the foregoing Narrative.]
IF we did now Humble our selves throughout the Land, who can say, whether the
Revenges on the Enemy, thus Exemplified, would not proceed much rather unto the
Quick Extirpation, of those B^o^^^y and Crafty men.

Ho^^^^r, I may not Conclude, until I have sa^^ ^^mething unto YOU, that I see,
now ^^^nd before the Lord, in this Assem^^ ^^e Subjects of such a Wonderful
De^ce, from your Captivity; a Deliver^^^^ which has been Signalized with such
Unusual Circumstances. Words that are spoken in an Ordinance of the Lord Jesus
Christ, carry with them a peculiar Efficacy and Authority. The Lord Jesus
Christ, has by a Surprising Providence of His, brought you this Day, to wait
upon Him, in that Great Ordinance, which is His Power for the Salvation of our
Souls. Hear a Servant of the Lord JESUS CHRIST, in His Name, now Publicly and
Solemnly calling upon you, to make a Right use of the Deliverance, wherewith He
has Highly favored you. The Use, which you are to make of it, is, To Humble
your selves before the Lord Exceedingly. As you have had the Extraordinary
Judgments of God upon you, to Humble you, so, Except His Extraordinary Mercies
do likewise Humble you, you do but Exceedingly Abuse them: The Rich Goodness of
God unto you, is to Lead you unto Repentance!

When you were Carried into Captivity, We did not say, That you were greater
Sinners, than the rest that yet Escape it. You are now Resened from Captivity,
and must not think, That they are greater Sinners, who are Left behind in the
most barbarous Hands imaginable. No, you, that have been under the Mighty Hand
of God, are to Humble your selves, under that Hand. But it you do indeed so, I
know, what you will do. You will seriously consider, What you shall render to
the Lord for all His Benefits? And you will sincerely Render your very Selves
unto the Lord: You are not now the Slaves of Indians, as you were a few Days
ago; but if you continue Unhumbled, in your Sins, you will be the Slaves of
Devils; and, Let me tell you, A Slavery to Devils, to be in Their Hands, is
worse than to be in the Hands of Indians! I beseech you then, by the Mercies of
God, that you present your selves unto the Lord Jesus Christ; Become the
sincere Servants of that Lord, who by His Blood has brought you out of the
Dungeon, wherein you were lately Langui^^ing; Oh! Deny not the Lord, who has
thus Bought you, out of your Captivity. I tell you truly, The Lord Expects
great Returns of Humiliation, of Thankfulness, and of Obedience, from you; and
I therefore Leave with you, one Sentence of Scripture to be often thought upon;
It Is That, in Ezra 9.13. 14. After all that is come upon us, for our Evil
Deeds, seeing thou, our God, have given us such Deliverance as this, should we
again break thy Commandments, would thou not be angry with us, till thou
had Consumed us?

Now, Let all Consider what has been said, and the Lord give us Understanding
^n all things!

APPENDIX.
A NARRATIVE of Hannah Swarton, Containing Wonderful Passages, relating to her
Captivity, and her Deliverance.
I Was taken by the Indians, when Casco Fort was taken, (May) 1690. My Husband
being slain, and Four Children taken with me. The Eldest of my Sons they
killed, about two Months after I was taken, and the rest Scattered from me I
was now left a Widow, and as Bereaved of my Children; though, I had them alive,
yet it was very seldom that I could see them, and I had not Liberty to
Discourse with them, without Danger either of my own Life, or theirs; for our
Condoling each others Condition, and showing Natural Affection, was so
displeasing to our Indian Rulers, unto whose Share we fell, that they would
threaten to kill us, if we cried each to other, or discoursed much together. So
that my Condition was like what the Lord threatened the Jews, in Ezekiel. 24.22,
23. We durst not Mourn or Weep, in the sight of our Enemies, lest we lost our
own Lives. For the first Times while the Enemy feasted on our English
Provisions, I might have had some with them: but then I was so filled with
Sorrow and Tears, that I had little Stomach to Eat; and when my Stomach was
come, our English Feed was spent, and the Indians wanted themselves, and we
more: So that then I was pined with want. We had no Corn, or Bread, but
sometimes Groundnuts, Ac^rns, Pursl^in, Hogweel, Weeds, Roots, and sometimes
Dogs Flesh, but not sufficient to sa^i^^y Hunger with these; having but little
at a Time. We had no success at Hun^ing; save that one Bear was killed, which I
had part of; and a very small part of a Tittle I had another time, and once an
Indian gave me a piece of a Mooses Liver, which was a sweet Morsel to me; and
Fish, if we could catch it. Thus I continued with them, hurried up and down the
Wilderness, from May 20. till the middle of February; Carrying continually, a
Great Burden in our Travels; and I must go their pace, or else be killed
presently; and yet was pinched with Cold, for want of Clothing, being put by
them into an Indian Dress, with a slight Blanket, no Stockings, and but one
pair of Indian-Shoes, and of their Leather Stockings for the Winter: My Feet
were pricked with sharp Stones, and prickly Bushes sometimes; and other times
Pinched with Snow, Cold, and Ice, that I traveled upon, ready to be frozen,
and faint for want of Food; so that many times I thought I could go no further,
but must ly down, and if they would kill me, let them kill me. Yet then, the
Lord did so Renew my Strength, that I went on still further, as my Master would
have me, and held out with them. Though many English were taken, and I was
brought to some of them, at times, while we were about Casco Bay and Kennebeck
River, yet at Norridgawock, we were Separated, and no English were in our
Company, but one John York and my self, who were both, almost Starved for want,
and yet told, that if we could not hold up to travel with them, they would kill
us. And accordingly, John York, growing Weak by his wants, they killed him, and
threatened me with the like. One time, my Indian Mistress, and I, were left
alone, while the rest went to look for Eeles; and they left us no Food from
Sabbath day Morning, till the next Sature-day; save that we had a Bladder (of
Moose I think) which was well filled with Maggots, and we boiled it, and drank
the Broth* but the Bladder was so tough, we could not eat it. On the Saturday,
I was sent by my Mistress, to that part of the Island, most likely to see some
Canoo, and there to* make Fire and Smoke, to invite some Indians, if I could
spy any, to come to Relieve us; and I espied a Canoo, and by Signs invited them
to come to the Shore. It proved to be some Squaw's; who understanding our
wants, one of them gave me a Roasted Eel, which I eat, and it seemed unto me,
the most Savoury Food, I ever tasted before. Sometimes we lived on Wortle
burr^es; s^metimes on a kind of Wild Cherry, which grew on Bushes; which I was
sent to gather, once in so bitter a Cold season, that I was not able to bring
my Fingers together, to hold them fast: yet under all these Hardships, the Lord
kept me from any Sickness, or such Weakness as to disenable me from Traveling,
when they put us upon it.

My Indian Mistress, was one that had been bred by the English at Black point,
and now Married to a Canada Indian, and turned Papist; and she would say, That
had the English been as careful to instruct her in our Religion, as the French
were, to instruct her in theirs, she might have been of our Religion: and she
would say, That God delivered us into their Hands to punish us for our Sins;
And, This I knew was true as to my self. And as I desired to consider of all my
Sins, for which the Lord did punish me, so this Lay very heavy upon my Spirit,
many a Time, that I had Left the Public Worship and Ordinances of God, where I
formerly Lived, ( viz. at Beverley) to Remove to the North part of Casco-Bay,
where there was no Church, or Minister of the Gospel; and this we did, for
large Accommodations in the World, thereby Exposing our Children, to be bred
Ignorantly like Indians, and our selves to forget what we had been formerly
instructed in; and so we turned our Backs upon Gods Ordinances to get this
Worlds Goods. But now, God has stripped me of these things also; so that I
must Justify the Lord, in all that has befallen me, and acknowledge that He
has punished me less than my Iniquities deserved. I was now Bereaved of
Husband, Children, Friends, Neighbors, House, Estate, Bread, Clothes, or
Lodging suitable; and my very Life did hang daily in Doubt, being continually
in danger of being killed by the Indians, or pined to Death with Famine, or
tired to Death with hard Traveling, or pinched with Cold, till I dyed in the
Winter season. I was so amazed with many Troubles, and hurried in my Spirit
from one Exercise (...) ^^other, how to preserve my self in da^^^^ and supply
my s^lt in the want that was present; that I had not time or leisure so
composedly to consider of the great Concernments of my Soul, as I should have
done; neither had I any Bible or Good Book to look into, or Christian Friend to
be my Counselor in these Distresses. But I may say, The Words of God, which I
had formerly heard or read, many of them came often into my mind, and kept me
from perishing in my Afflictions. As, when they threatened to Kill me many
times, I often thought of the words of our Savior to Pilate, Joh. 19.11. Thou
could have no power at all against me, except it were given thee from above.
I knew they had no power to kill me, but what the Lord gave them; and I had
many times Hope, that the Lord would not suffer them to slay me, but deliver me
out of their Hands, and in His Time, I hoped, return me to my Country again.
When they told me, that my Eldest Son was killed by the Indians, I thought of
that in Jer. 33.8. I will cleanse them from all their Iniquities whereby they
have sinned against me, and I will pardon all their Iniquities. I hoped, though
the Enemy had barbarously killed his Body, yet that the Lord had Pardoned his
Sins, and that his Soul was safe. When I thought upon my many Troubles, I
thought of Jobs complaint, chap. 14 16, 17. Thou numbrest my steps, and
watchest over my Sin; my Transgression is sealed up in a Bag, and thou sowest
up my Iniquity. This was for my Humiliation, and put me upon Prayer to God, for
His Pardoning Mercy in Christ; and I thought upon David's complaint, Psalm 13.1,
2 and used it in my Prayers to the Lord; How Long will thou forget me, O Lord
for ever! How long will thou hide thy face from me? How long shall I take
counsel in my Soul, having sorrow in my Heart! How long shall my Enemy be
Exalted over me? I sometimes bemoaned my self, as Job; chap. 19.9, 10. He has
stripped me of my Glory, and taken my Crown from my Head; He has destroyed me,
on every side, and I am gone, and my Hope has he removed like a Tree. Yet
sometimes Encouraged from Job 22.27. Thou shall make thy Prayer to him, and He
shall hear thee, and thou shall pay thy Vows. I made my Vows to the Lord, that
I would give up my self to Him, if He would accept me in Jesus Christ, and
pardon my Sins; and I desired and endeavored to Pay my Vows unto the Lord. I
Prayed to Him, Remember not against me the Sins of my Youth; and I besought
Him, Judge me, O God, and plead my cause against an Ungodly Nation; deliver me
from the Deceitful and Unjust man: Why go I mourning because of the Oppression
of the Enemy? And by many other Scriptures, that were brought to my
Remembrance, was I instructed, directed and comforted.

I Traveled over steep and hideous Mountains one while, and another while over
Swamps and Thickets of Fallen Trees, lying one, two, three foot from the
ground, which I have stepped on, from one to another, nigh a thousand in a day;
carrying a great Burden on my Back. Yet I dreaded going to Canada, to the
French, for fear lest I should be overcome by them, to yield to their Religion;
which I had Vowed unto God, That I would not do. But the Extremity of my
Sufferings were such, that at length I was willing to go, to preserve my Life.
And after many weary Journeys, through Frost and Snow, we came to Canada, about
the middle of February, 1690. and Traveling over the River, my Master pitched
his Wigwam in sight of some French Houses Westward of us, and then sent me to
those Houses to beg Victuals for them: which I did, and found the French very
kind to me, giving me Beef, and Pork, and Bread, which I had been without, near
nine months before; so that now, I found a great Change as to Diet. But the
Snow being knee deep, and my Legs and Hams very sore, I found it very tedious
to Travel; and my sores bled, so that as I Traveled, I might be Tracked by my
Blood, that I left behind me on the Snow. I asked leave to stay all Night with
the French, when I went to beg again; which my Master consented unto, and sent
me Eastward, to Houses, which were toward Quebeck, (though then I knew it not:)
So, having begge^ Provisions a^ a French House, and it being man night, after I
was Re^resh^d my s^l, and had Food to ca^ry to the In^i^^s, I sign sied, as
well as I could make the French Woman understand, That I d^sir^d to stay by her
Fire, that Night. Whereupon she laid a good Bed on the Floor, and good
Coverings for me, and there I Lodged comfortably; and the next Mornin^* when I
had breakfasted with the Family, and the men kind were gone abroad, as I was
about to go to my Indian Master, the French Woman stepped out, and left me alone
in her House; and I then staid her Return, to give her thanks for her kindness;
and while I waited, came in two men, and one of them spoke to me in English, I
am glad to see you Country woman! This was exceedingly Reviving, to hear the
voice of an English man; and upon Enquiry, I found, he was an English man,
taken at the North West Passage; and the other was a French Ordinary Keeper.
After some Discourse he asked me to go with him to Quebeck, which he told me,
was about four miles off: I answered, my Indian Master might kill me for it,
when I went back. Then, after some Discourse in French, with his Fellow
Traveller, he said; This French man Engaged, that if I would go with them, he
would keep me, from Returning to the Indians, and I should be Ransomed: and my
French Hostess being now Returned in a doors, persuaded me to go with 'em to
Quebeck; which I did, and was conveyed unto the House of the Lord Intendant,
Monsieur Le Tonant, who was Chief Judge, and the Second to the Governor; and I
was kindly Entertained by the Lady, and had French Clothes given me, with good
Diet and Lodging, and was carried thence unto the Hospital; where I was
Physicked and Blooded, and very courteously provided for. And some time after,
my Indian Master and Mistr^ss coming for me, the Lady Intendant paid a Ransom
for me, and I became her Serv^nt. And I must speak it to the Honor of the
French, they were exceeding kind to me at first, even as kind as I could expect
to find the English: so that I wanted nothing for my Bodily Comfort, which they
could help me unto.

Here was a great and comfortable Change, as to my Outward man, in my Freedom
from my former Hardships, and Hard hearted Oppressors. But here began a greater
Snare and Trouble to my Soul and Danger to my Inward man. For the Lady my
Mistress, the Nuns, the Priests, Friars, and the rest, set upon me, with all
the strength of Argument they could, from Scripture, as they interpreted it, to
persuade me to Turn Papist; which they pressed with very much Zeal, Love,
Entreaties, and Promises, if I would Turn to them, and with many Threatenings,
and sometimes Hard Usages, because I did not Turn to their Religion. Yea,
sometimes the Papists, because I would not Turn to them, Threatened to send me
to France, and there I should be Burned, because I would not Turn to them. Then
was I comforted from that in 2 Cor. 1.8, 9, 10. We were pressed out of measure,
above strength, insomuch that we despaired even of Life; but we had the
sentence of Death in our selves, that we should not trust in our selves, but in
God, who raises the Dead; who delivered us from so great a Death, and does
deliver; in whom we trust that He will yet deliver us. I knew, God was Able to
deliver me, as He did Paul, and as He did the Three Children out of the Fiery
Furnace; and I believed, He would either Deliver me from them, or Fit me for
what He called me to suffer, for His Sake and Name. For their Praying to
Angels, they brought the History of the Angel, that was sent to the Virgin
Mary, in the First of Luke. I answered them, from Rev. 19.10. and 22.9. They
brought Exodus 17.11. of Isreal's prevailing, while Moses held up his Hands. I
told them, we must come to God only by Christ, Joh. 6 37, 44. For Purgatory,
they brought Mat. 5.25. I told them, To agree with God while here on Earth,
was, to Agree with our Adversary in the way; and if we did not, we should be
Cast into Hell, and should not come out until we Paid the utmost Farthing,
which could never be paid. But its bootless for me a poor Woman, to acquaint
the World, with what Arguments I used, if I could now Remember them; and many
of them are slipped out of my memory.

I shall proceed to Relate, what Trials I met with, in these Things. I was put
upon it, either to stand to the Religion I was brought up in, and believed in
my Conscience to be True; or to Turn to another, which I believed was not
Right. And I was kept from Turning, by that Scripture, Mat. 10.32, 33.
Whosoever shall confess me before men, him will I confess before my Father
which is in Heaven, and whosoever denies me before men, him also will I deny
before my Father which is in Heaven. I thought that if I should Deny the Truth,
and own their Religion, I should Deny Christ. Yet upon their persuasions, I
went to see, and be present at their Worship, sometimes: but never to Receive
their Sacrament. And once, when I was at their Worship, that Scripture, 2 Cor.
6.14. to the end, came into my mind: What Communion has Light with Darkness!
What Concord has Christ with Be^^^l! What part has he that believes with an
^^sidel? and what Agreement has the Temple of God with Idols? Wherefore come
out from among them, and be ye Separate, and touch not the Unclean Thing, and I
will Receive you, and I will be a Father to you, and you shall be my Sons and
Daughters, says the Lord Almighty. This Scripture was so strong, upon my
Spirit, that I thought I was out of my way to be present at their id^latrous
Worship, and I Resolved never to come unto it again. But when the time drew
nigh that I was to go again, I was so Restless that Night, that I could not
sleep; thinking, what I should say to them when they urged me to go again, and
what I should Do. And so it was in the morning, that a French woman of my
Acquaintance, told me, if I would not be of Their Religion, I did but mock at
it, to go to their Worship, and therefore bid me, That if I would not be of
their Religion, I should go no more. I answered her, That I would not be of
their Religion, and I would go no more to their Worship: and accordingly, I
never went more, and they did not force me to it.

I have had many Conflicts in my own Spirit; fearing that I was not truly
Converted unto God in Christ, and that I had no Saving Interest in Christ I
could not be of a False Religion, to please men; for it was against my
Conscience: And I was not fit to suffer for the True Religion, and for Christ;
for I then feared, I had no Interest in Him. I was neither fit to Live, nor f^^
to Dye; and brought once to the very pit of Despair, about what would become of
my Soul In this Time I h^d gotten an English Bible, and other Good Books, by
the Help of my Fellow Captives. I Looked over the Scripture, and settled on the
Prayer of Jonah, and those Words, I said, I am cast out of thy sight, yet will
I Look again toward thy Holy Temple. I Resolved, I would do as Jonah did: And
in the Meditation upon this Scripture, the Lord was pleased, by His Spirit, to
come into my Soul, and so fill me with Ravishing Comfort, that I cannot Express
it. Then came to mind, the History of the Transfiguring of Christ, and Peter's
saying, Math. 17.4. Lord, It is Good for us to be here! I thought, it was Good
for me to be here; and I was so full of Comfort and Joy, I even Wished I could
be so always, and never sleep; or else Die in that Rapture of Joy, and never
Live to Sin any more against the Lord. Now I thought God was my God, and my
Sins were pardoned in Christ; and now I thought, I could Suffer for Christ,
yea, Dye for Christ, or do any thing for Him. My Sins had been a Burden to me:
I desired to see all my Sins, and to Repent of them all, with all my Heart, and
of that Sin which had been especially a Burden to me, namely, That I Left the
Public Worship and Ordinances of God, to go to Live in a Remote Place, without
the Public Ministry; depriving our selves and our Children, of so great a
Benefit for our Souls, and all this, for Worldly advantages. I found an Heart
to Repent of them all; and to lay hold of the Blood of Christ, to cleanse me
from them all.

I found much Comfort, while I was among the French, by the Opportunities I had
sometimes to Read the Scriptures, and other. Good Books, and Pray to the Lord
in Secret; and the Conference that some of us Captives had together, about
things of God, and Prayer together sometimes; especially, with one that was in
the same House with me, Margaret Stilson Then was the Word of God precious to
us, and they that feared the LORD, spoke one to another of it, as we had
Opportunity. And Coloned Tyng, and Mr. Alden, as they were permitted, did speak
to us, to Conf^^m and Strengthen us, in the ways of the Lord. At length, the
French debatr'd our coming together, for Religious Conference, or other Duties:
And Word was sent us, by Mr. Alden, That this was one kind of Persecution, that
we must suffer for Christ.

These are some of the Scriptures, which have been my Support and Comfort, in
the Affliction of my Captivity, among the Papists. That in Ezekiel. 16.6. -- 8. I
applied unto my self; and I desired to Enter into Covenant with God, and to be
His; And I Prayed to the Lord, and Hoped the Lord would Return me to my Country
again, That I might Enter into Covenant with Him, among His People, and Enjoy
Communion with Him, in His Churches, and Public Ordinances. Which Prayers the
Lord has now heard, and graciously Answered; Praised be His Name! The Lord
Enable me to Live suitably unto His Mercy, and to those Public and Precious
Privileges, which I now Enjoy. So, That in Ezekiel 11.16, 17. was a Great Comfort
unto me, in my Captivity; Although, I have cast them far off among the Heathen,
yet will I be a little Sanctuary to them; -- I will gather you from the People,
-- where you have been Scattered. I found, that God was a Little Sanctuary to
me there, and hoped, that the Lord would bring me to the Country from whence I
had been Scattered. And the Lord has heard the Prayer of the Destitute, and
not despised my Prayer, but granted me the Desire of my Soul, in bringing me to
His House, and my Relations again. I often thought on the History of the man
Born Blind; of whom Christ, when His Disciples asked, Whether this man had
Sinned, or his Parents? answered, Neither this man, nor his Parents; but this
was, that the works of God might be made manifest in him. So, though I had
deserved all this, yet I knew not, but one Reason, of Gods bringing all these
Afflictions and Miseries upon me, and then Enabling me to bear them, was, That
the Works of God might be made manifest. And in my Great Distress, I was
Revived by that, in Psalm 118.17, 18. I shall not Die but Live, and Declare the
works of the Lord: The Lord has chasten'd (...) sore, but He has not given me
over to Death. I had very often, a secret persuasion, That I should Live to
Declare the Works of the Lord. And, 2 Chronicles. 6.36, 37, 38, 39. was a precious
Scripture to me, in the Day of Evil. We have Read over, and Prayed over, this
Scripture together, and Talked together of this Scripture, Margaret and I; How
the Lord has Promised, Though they were Scattered for their Sins, yet there
should be a Return, if they did Bethink themselves, and Turn, and Pray. So we
did Bethink our selves in the Land where we were Garried Captive, did Turn, did
Pray, and Endeavor to Return to God with all our Hearts: And, as they were to
Pray toward the Temple, I took it, that I should Pray toward Christ; and
accordingly did so, and hoped the Lord would Hear, and He has Heard from
Heaven, His Dwelling Place, my Prayer and Supplication, and mentained my Cause,
and not Rejected me, but Returned me. And Oh! how affectionate was my Reading
of the Eighty Fourth Psalm in this Condition.

The means of my Deliverance, were by reason of Letters that had pass^d between
the Governments of New England and of Canada. Mr. Carry was sent with a Vessel,
to fetch Captives from Quebeck, and when he came, I among others, with my
youngest Son, had our Liberty to come away: And by Gods Blessing upon us, we
Arrived in Safety, at Boston, in November, 1695. our Desired Haven. And I
desire to Praise the Lord for His Goodness, and for His Wonderful Works to me.
Yet still I have left behind, Two Children, a Daughter of Twenty Years old, at
Mont Royal, whom I had not seen in Two years before I came away; and a Son of
Nineteen years old, whom I never saw since we parted, the next morning after we
were taken. I earnestly Request the Prayers of my Christian Friends, that the
Lord will deliver them.

What shall I render to the Lord for all His Benefits?
FINIS.

