A Pastoral LETTER TO THE ENGLISH Captives, IN AFRICA.

From New England.

Boston, Printed by B. Green, and I. Allen, in the year, School.

TO THE English Captives in Africa.
We are Distressed for you, O our BRETHREN, We are Distressed for you!

OUR Neighborhood is, with Bitter Anguish, pouring out the Lamentations, that
were of old heard among the People of God, in Lam. 1. 18. The Lord is
Righteous, for I have Rebelled against His Commandment: Hear, I pray you, all
people, and behold my Sorrow; My Young men are gone into Captivity: And when we
consider, what a dreadful and what a doleful, and how inexpressibly miserable,
Captivity it is, that you are gone into, the Lamentations of our Sorrow, do
indeed become Inexpressible. But, though we cannot Express the Agony of mind,
that seizes us, when we do at our Full Tables, and in our Soft Lodgings, with
all our Friends about us, call to mind, as we often do, How it is with you? yet
we would Express a little of that Affection that we bear you, by Letting you
know, That we Remember you.

And as the Remembrance which we have of you, causes us, Without ceasi^g to
make mention of you in our prayers, and our ardent and constant cries unto the
G^d of all Grace, that you may have Grace to Help you, in your Time of Need,
so, it puts us upon Writing unto you, those things, which may help to Instruct,
and Strengthen, and Comfort you, in the midst of your Terrible Temptations.
Jeremiah the Prophet, thought it his Duty, to Write a Letter unto those of his
people, that were carried Captives, by a Bitter and Hasty Nation. And from a
sense of Duty it is, that we now send a Letter unto you, for your Consolation,
in that Captivity, where you are now Languishing under Bitter, and Heavy,
Afflictions. Indeed, When the Israelites of old, were in the cruel and grievous
Hands of their Egyptian Task Masters, we read, They hearkened not unto Moses,
for Anguish of Spirit, and for cruel Bondage But we hope, that all the Anguish
of Spirit, and Cruel Bondage, which you suffer from worse than Egyptian Task
masters, will not hinder you, from Hearkening to those Admonitions which must
now be given you.

Now in the first place, We must let you know, That we are very much concerned,
for your being preserved Faithful unto the Death, in that Christian Faith,
which you have hitherto professed. We earnestly beg it of God for you, that
whatever Miseries you undergo, you may not, in a vain Hope of Deliverance from
those Miseries, Renounce the Christian Religion. Those Wretched Renegado's, who
have abandoned the Christian Religion, Expecting thereby to mend their
Condition in the World, have not always had their Expectation answered; The
dreadful Vengeance of God, has sometimes filled them with confusion, by
causing their Oppressors afterward to slight them, and vex them, and more
barbarously than ever to multiply Oppressions upon them. Or, if you should get
any Abatement of your Daily Burdens, by becoming Apostates from the Christian
Religion, yet the Jealous God can smite you with such Horror of Conscience in
this World, for your Apostasy, as would be more Intolerable than all the
Torments that you ever yet Endured; and He will certainly punish it with the
Vergeance of Eternal Fire in the World to come, where the Smoke of your
Torments will Ascend for ever and ever. We do, with a most unutterable
Sympathy, feel your miseries; and we would gladly do and spend all we can, to
Rescue you, from them: Nevertheless, we had rather you should Endure all manner
of Temporal Miseries, than Incur Eternal Ones: We had rather a Turk or a Moor
should continually Trample on you, than that the Devil should make a prey of
you. The Great God has said concerning His Christian Religion, If any man draw
back from it, my Soul shall have no pleasure in him. Nor, can you do a Thing
more Displeasing to our Souls, or, Destructive to your own, than to Backslide
from that Holy Religion. Truly, Its being as we have called it, An Holy
Religion. That one Thing is enough to give you, an Everlasting Assurance of its
being, The way of Truth, and the only Religion worthy to be Embraced and
Maintained, with a Reasonable man. There is nothing in that Religion, wherein
you have been Educated, but what has a Tendency to promote Virtue: it allows
no such vicious Pride, and Revenge, and Selfishness, and Filthiness, and
Sensuality, as is countenanced in all other Ways of Worship* If men would live
in all things according to that Religion, which you have had the Happiness to
be acquainted withal, they would be Angels rather than Men; and they are Bruits
rather than Men, that would not count them so. It is impossible, that any but
God, should be the Author of such an Holy Religion. And, What Religion else can
you meet withal, that makes any such Reasonable Provision for the
Reconciliation of a Sinner to the God, whom he has offended by Sin? The
Superstitions practiced among the desolate Nations of the Earth, to obtain the
Pardon of Sin, are so Idle, so Absurd, so Ridiculous, that it is an admirable
Enchantment on any part of mankind, which has made them contented with such
practices* But now, when you see the Methods for the Pardon of Sin, in that
Religion, wherewith you have been Illuminated; when you see the Son of God,
becoming a Man, and this God man, gloriously Living, and Dying, and Rising
again, for to furnish poor Sinners Believing on Him, with a Righteousness,
which will Entitle us unto Everlasting Blessedness, you cannot but say, There
is a wonderful Majesty in this way of Reconciling a Sinner unto God; and the
Glories of the most High, are therein displayed unto the Height. If you should
be so Foolish, as to forego your Blessed Religion, for the sake of any other,
you will by that Folly leave your selves, without all Hope of a Pardon for your
Sins; for none other will put you into any way for a Pardon, that you can
justly think sufficient or agreeable. 'Twere better a thousand times to Die,
with such an Hope of a Pardon for Sin, as your Glorious Religion sets before
you, than to Live in all the pleasure of Sin, under the Blackness of Darkness,
which every other must Leave upon you. But God has done enough, and enough, to
satisfy you in the Truth of the Christian Religion, by what was done for and by
the Illustrious JESUS, the Author of this Religion. The Resurrection of our
dear JESUS from the Dead, is an Incontestable Demonstration, That this His
Religion, must be the way of Truth, and the Truth of God. There were many
Irrefragable proofs, of our Lords being the Messiah, whom God had promised for
to be the Redeemer of the World. Our JESUS Came, when the Messiah was to Come:
Our JESUS Did all the Messiah was to Do; The Characters of the Messiah were
fully answered in our JESUS. But His Resurrection from the Dead, This most of
all effectually proved our JESUS to be the Messiah; This Declared Him to be the
Son of God with power. Now, that our Lord Jesus, Rose from the Dead, you must
needs own; beeause He showed Himself alive after it, by many Infallible proofs.
After His Resurrection, He Exhibited Himself, unto those Good men, who Saw Him,
Heard Him, Felt Him, and convinced all their Senses, that i^ was He. This He
did, no less than Ten several Times, and unto no less than Five Hundred at a
Time; and the Witnesses thereof, went over the Earth, ass ting it, in such a
manner, that the most Judicious Examiners of their Testimony, could not but
acknowledge, that they were neither Deceivers nor Deceived, in the Thing which
they Asserted. Yea, our Lord, since His Ascension into the Heavens, and as a
Fruit and a Proof of His Ascension, sent His Church a Letter, (which we have in
the Book of The Revelation,) wherein He foretold a Thousand Things, that we
have seen exactly come to pass; but He particularly foretold, The Rising of the
Mohammedan Religion; its being propagated by the Arabian Arms; its obscuring the
Christian Religion, with an horrid Smoke, and its Tormenting the Professors of
the Christian Religion, after the Union of the Four Turkish Kingdoms in the one
Ottomian Family, for Three hundred and Ninety seven years together. Besides all
this; The First Publication of the Christian Reagion was attended, which the
Mohammedan Religion has never been, with Miracles, that were a Demonstration
given by the Holy Spirit of God unto it. Astonishing Miracles were done by our
JESUS, before His Retiring from us, into the Heavenly Regions. Those
Astonishing Miracles are so undeniable, that the Writings both of the Jews, and
of the Turks, do at this day confess them; nor were the Pagans, of the First
Ages, in the Volumns which they wrote against Christianity, still Extant, able
to deny them. And the like Miracles were continued among the Apostolical
Preachers of the Christian Religion, after our Lords Departure from us, for Two
hundred years together: They spoke with Tongues, which they had never Learnt
before; they Helped the Blind, they Heal^d the Sick, they Raised the Dead, and
they Cast out the Devils from the Possessed. No History can be True, if This be
not so. Now these things are Seals from God, unto the Christian Religion. I
beseech you, Do not harbor the least suspicion of a Religion, so Sealed by the
God of Heaven, with Ungainsayable Confirmations. But if any Mohammedan Tempters
do assault you, Let the words of their own Alcoran serve to Answer them; The
words of the Alcoran, (or Turkish BIBLE) are; The Spirit of God has given
Testimony, to CHRIST, the Son of Mary; He is the Messenger of the Spirit, and
the Word of God: His Doctrine is perfect. And Mahomet, in this his Alcoran,
calls the Gospel expressly, The Right way to Fear God; and says, That God sent
the Gospel for no other end, but that they might obtain by it, the Love and
Grace of God. Let the Mahometans now know, That you cannot forsake your Christ,
because the Spirit of God has given Testimony to Him; and that you cannot
forsake His Doctrine, because it is perfect; and that you cannot forsake His
Gospel, because it is the Right way to Fear God; as They Themselves have
confessed. My dear Friends, The Lord preserve your Souls chaste unto Him* and
make you Faithful to the Death, and give you a Crown of Life! May you be able
to say, Lord, Though thou have sore broken us in the place of Dragons, yet have
we not forsaken thee, nor dealt falsely in thy Covenant.

But, while you hold fast the Profession of the Christian Religion, it is of
infini^e concern for you, to Experience also the Power and Practice of it. And
it may be, the dismal Affliction of your present Captivity, is come upon you,
to Convince you of, and Convert you to those things in Religion, whereof you
were too insensible, when your heard them dispensed unto you, in the Ordinances
of the Gospel, which you sometimes Enjoyed. Yea, t'wil be an happy Captivity,
that is now come upon you, if the Ears of your Souls be now open to the
Discipline of Christianity, of which it may be, the Lord from Heaven says unto
you, I stake unto thee in thy Prosperity, and thou would not hear me. You
have been particularly told, of your Misery by reason of your Slavery to your
Interior Adversaries; being, Sold under Sin, and being, Taken Captive by the
Devil at his Will. But, alas, alas, have you hitherto been deeply sensible of
that Misery? You were in the worst sort of Slavery, before ever the Corshires
of Africa Siezed upon you; Every Sinful Child of Adam, is by Nature so. It is
an horrible thing, to be continually at work for Satan, Tempted and Blinded by
him, and held fast in the Chains of Lust: And it is of more than a Million
Times greater Consequence to be Redeemed from this cursed Slavery, than from
that other, wherein Turks, and Moors, do now trample upon you. Your Slavery to
the Monsters of Africa will be but short, and you may Serve God under it, and
See God after it: But your Slavery, to the Powers of Darkness, whereinto you
are by your Fall from God, precipitated; This alienates you, from the Knowledge
and Favor of God, and Eternal Confusions in another World, will be the Wages
of it. And that which has left you, in this Condition of Slavery, is, The
Justice of the Holy God, which has arrested you, in dreadful Bonds, for the
Wrongs that your Sins have done, in Denying, and in Defying of His Majesty.
Methinks, It should fill your Hearts with wonderful Joy, to have the Tidings
and Offers, of a Redemption from that your Spiritual Slavery. This Letter now
brings them to you. The Lord JESUS CHRIST is that Strong Redeemer, who is, Able
to Save you unto the uttermost, and who has Engaged, Him that comes to me, I
will in no wise cast out. This gracious Lord, has paid a Sufficient Ransom
unto the Justice of God, for the Souls of His Chosen; His very Life, even the
Life of that Man, who is God as well as Man, and therefore One of infinite
Value, has been given by Him, as a Ransom for them* They, to whom the Virtue
of this Ransom, is actually applied, are set at Liberty, from the Hellish
Thraldom, wherein the Enemies of their Souls have Enslaved them; The Prey is
taken from the Mighty, and the Lawful Captive is delivered. Come then, my
Afflicted Friends; In your Captivity, let it be your first Care, to Commit your
Enslaved Souls into the Hands of the Lord JESUS CHRIST, With whom there is
Plenteous Redemption, for He will Redeem His People from all their Iniquities:
And Cry unto God, that through the Ransom, which the Lord JESUS CHRIST has
paid for you, even that Blood, which is more Precious than Silver and Gold, and
all the Corruptible things of this World, you may have your Souls Redeemed,
from all the Destruction, and Slavery, that Sin has brought upon them. When
you have Sincerely thus, Believed on the Lord JESUS CHRIST, then you may
Joyfully Sing, I know that my Redeemer Lives! Though you Die in your African
Captivity, yet you may Die, Praising of God, for Saving you, from your Spiritual
Captivity. Yea, it is possible, that you may Live to see us again, in this
World, and Bless God with us, that ever you were sent into such a sad part of
the World, as Africa; for if you Seek First, the Redemption of your Souls, the
other will the sooner be Added unto you

Especially, if you go on, more particularly to Express that Repentance, with
which a True Faith in the Lord Jesus Christ, will be accompanied. It is one of
the Oracles in the Word of our God; If they Confess their Iniquity, and that
they have walked Contrary unto me, and I also have walked Contrary unto them,
and have brought them, into the Land of their Enemies, if then their
Uncircumcised Hearts be Humbled, and they then accept of the Punishment of
their Iniquity, then will I remember my Covenant. My Distressed Friends; Now
you are in the Land of your Enemies, it is Time for you, Humbly to Confess unto
the Lord, all that Iniquity, which He is Punishing, in this your Captivity; For
the Lord, in His Oracles also forwarned His People, Because thou Servedst not
the Lord thy God, with Joyfulness, Therefore shall thou Serve thine Enemies,
which the Lord shall send against thee, in Hunger, and in Thirst, and in
Nakedness, and in the want of all Things. It may be said, Who gave you to the
African Pirates? It was the Lord, against whom you had Sinned. Have you
forgotten the Story of Menasseh? Of Menasseh the Story is famous; That his
Enemies took him, and bound him with Fetters, and carried him to Babylon: and
when he was in Affliction, he besought the Lord his God, and humbled himself
greatly, and Prayed unto Him, and He was Entreated of him, and heard his
Supplication, and brought him again to Jerusalem. Truly, my Brethren; your
Enemies have taken you, and bound you, and Carried you to Africa: Now, in your
Affliction, if you will Beseech the Lord your God, and Humble your selves
greatly, who can tell, what He may do for you? It was a Good proposal, made by
the poor Captives of old, among their Lamentations; Let us Seach and Try our
Ways, and Turn unto the Lord* Solomon said, Captives are to Bethink
themselves, and Repent! I advise you, To set before your selves the
Commandments of God and what is Required and what is Forbidden, in every one of
the Commandments; and very Deliberately Examine, how far you have in your own
Conversation, Omitted what is Required, and Committed what is Forbidden; and
Loath and Judge your selves before the Lord, for all the Evil that has been in
all your ways. It may be your Conscences, will now (as it was with Joseph's
Brethren, when they saw themselves becoming Prisoners) accuse you, with a more
special Remorse, for your Unthankfulness, and Perhaps Coffeehouse, under the
Mercies of God, that formerly Surrounded you, and for your Unfruitfulness and
Misbehaviour under the means of Grace that once Enriched you; or, perhaps, for
some Singular Acts of Wickedness against God, or Injustice toward your
Neighbors. Bewayl it all, before that God, who Forgives Iniquity, Transgression
and Sin; and fly to the Blood of the Lord Jesus Christ, as a Fountain set open
for Sin and for Uncleanness. Do not imagine, That it is too late for you, to
obtain the Pardon of your Sins, now the Judgment of God has overtaken you for
them; for it is not so: You may yet, through a CHRIST, come to Sing, Who is a God
like unto thee, that Pardons Iniquity? He retains not His Anger for ever,
because He delights in Mercy?

This therefore is the Fourth, and a Great Thing to be pressed upon you:
PRAYER, Prayer without Ceasing. Your fierce Masters, lay heavy Burdens enough
upon you; The Things, which we now lay upon you, are Burdens indeed unto an
Unregenerate Heart, but they are to Ease your Burdens. I am sure, Prayer will
do it marvellously. Our Bible mentions one, who was of a Sorrowful Spirit; but
it is added, Having poured out her Soul unto the Lord, she was no more sad. Oh!
Let not the Angels of God, who are the Spectators of your Sorrows, and of your
Actions under your Sorrows, have cause to make that Complaint of you, that the
Prophet made of the People, that had been Slaves to the Babylonians, All this
Evil is come upon them, yet they have not made their Prayer before the Lord
their God. You cannot now make your Moans, to your Consorts, to your Parents*
to your tender hearted Relations; You wish, Oh! that I could! But you may make
your moans to God in the Lord JESUS CHRIST, before whom, there comes, the
Sighing of the Prisoner. Oh! Get alone, as often as you can, to pour out your
Souls, and Spread all your Wants, all your Griefs, all your Fears, before that
God, who is, The Hearer of Prayer. And, when you are at Prayer unto God, in the
Lord Jesus Christ, I know, you will Importunately Cry to Him, for your
Deliverance out of your doleful Captivity. We, a great way off, adjoyn our,
AMEN, to that Prayer of yours. But then, to assist it, I counsel you, to look
out, Suitable Promises of God, in His Word, for to plead with Him, in your
Prayer, till your Faith be raised, even unto some Assurance. I hope, you will
do all that is possible, to preserve your Bibles, and prize them, and love
them, and Read them, as much as ever you can; and find in them those Delights,
that will not let you Perish in your Affliction. Now, in your Bibles, make such
Passages as these, the Food of your Meditations, the Force of your
Supplications.

Psalm. 107. 10. Such as sit in darkness, and in the shadow of Death, because
they Rebelled against the words of God, -- therefore He brought down their
Heart with Labor, -- They cried unto the Lord in their Trouble, and He saved
them out of their Distresses, He brought them out of Darkness, and brake their
Bands in sundor.

Deuteronomy. 30. 2. When thou shall Return unto the Lord thy God, Then the Lord thy
God will turn thy Captivity, and have Compassion upon thee -- If any be driven
out, unto the utmost parts of Heaven, from thence will the Lord thy God gather
thee.

Jer. 29. 14. Ye shall Seek me, and Find me, when ye shall search for me, with
all your Heart: And I will Turn away your Captivity, and gather you from all
the places whither I have driven you, says the Lord.

Plead such Promises as these, with that God, whose prerogative it is, to Turn
the Captivity of His people, and to Loose the Prisoners. Don't Rely on the
Endeavors of your Friends, to Deliver you: but say, My Soul, wait thou only
upon God, for my Expectation is from Him. Surprising Salvations have been
sometimes wrought for Captives, in answer to Prayer thus prosecuted: The Lord
has Turned their Captivity, and made them sing, The Lord has done great Things
for us! Only be sure to plead the Blood of the Lord JESUS CHRIST, as the
Ransom for this Deliverance also: It must be by that Blood of the Covenant,
that you are brought out of the Pit: The Lord JESUS CHRIST, is the Temple of
God, with an Eye to whom, if you make your Supplication, unto God, in the Land
of them that have Carried you Captives, God will Hear your Prayer, in Heaven.
His Dwelling place, and forgive you.

In the mean Time; your Prayer will obtain this for you, That God, who has the
Hearts of all in His own Almighty Hand, will give you Compassion, before them,
who have carried you Captives: as we read of some, in Psalm. 106 46 He made them
to be pitied of all those who carried them Captives. Yea, if you carry your
selves, patiently, and Honestly, and Fai^hfully, and Industriously, as well as
Prayerfully, in the Hard Service, which is by the Providence of God put upon
you, the Lord may not only Incline your Masters, to favor you, (as Joseph's did
him, in his Captivity!) but may also make use of you, to do an unknown deal of
Good, where He has now appointed your uneasy Stations. One poor Prisoner onc^,
was the Occasion and Instrument, of bringing a whole Kingdom, to Believe on the
Lord Jesus Christ. If you carry it well, [and, Oh! pray, that you may carry it
well,] in all Respect, under your Tedious Hardships, you may Glorify the Lord
Jesus Christ exceedingly.

Now, that being All, that I can farther do for you, I do with Fervent Zeal for
your Welfare, humbly put you over into His Blessing, and Saving, and Powerful,
and ever glorious Hands, and Subscribe my self,

Yours in Him, Cotton Mather.


