Right Thoughts in Sad Hours, Representing the COMFORTS and the DUTIES OF Good
^en under all their AFFLICTIONS; And Particularly, That one, the Untimely Death
of CHILDREN IN A SERMON DELIVERED At Charls-town, New England; under a fresh
Experience of that Calamity.

Unto the Upright there arises LIGHT in Darkness. Mercatur a est Pauca
amittere, ut majora Lucreris. Tertul. LONDON, Printed by James Astwood. 1689.

TO My very Worthy Friend, Mr. S. S.
Ever Honored Sir,
THE Ensuing Sermon, delivered in a Neighbour-Congregation, under Afflicting
impressions from the sudden Death of an only Child, with a bestowal of some
Correction and Enlargement since upon it; I know no fitter Person than Your
self, to Present unto; Your Self, I say, Who have had several Infants carried
hence unto the Father of Spirits, in the Chariot of the same Distemper that
fetched mine away. Books or Thoughts on such a Subject as that which is handled
here, have been often offered by me unto others, that were Mourners; and being
made a Mourner my self, I thought it a fit occasion for me, to Write as well as
Think more particularly, the things that may be serviceable to the sorrowful.
Nor have I many Friends in this Evil World, whose Edification I can pursue with
more Alacrity and Activity, by such pains as these, than Yours. I have often
felt the Power, and almost as often the Sweetness of that persuasion, My God
will never hurt me. Unto Your self, that I may recommend the entertainment of
that Comfort and Co^dial, under the Death of so many dear Children as you have
been called unto the Resignation of, is the end of my putting these Meditations
into your Hands. I cannot without some Affection read Gregory Nazianzen, in his
Funeral Oration on the Death of his Brother, giving this account of his Aged
and then Living Parents; My Father and Mother, (says he) who are both Lovers of
their Children, but more Lovers of their Savior, after they had in spite of
all the Moths, and all the Thieves, and all the Devils too in this World, laid
up in a better World, a Rich Inheritance for their Children, they have now sent
one of their Sons before, to take Possession of it. If your Modesty and
Humility will not permit me to recite this as a Charecter of, let me however
propound it as an Employment for Your self, and your Virtuous Consort. You
cannot use too much care to secure unto your Children an Inheritance among the
Saints in Light; and for those which are departed, you may be joyfully assured,
That they are made partakers of that Inheritance. What further possession of
this Waste Wild America, the Lord Jesus may take yet before the Time of the
Restitution of all things, we cannot Positively say; only we may probably hope,
that he has a Glorious Interest shortly to be erected and maintained in these
utmost parts of the Earth. But this I am sure of, There are some rich plots of
Ground in this Continent, which in the Approaching Day of God will yield no
small Sheaves of pure Grain unto the Almighty Raiser of the Dead. This last Age
has produced in these Western Indies, those Dormitories, which are filled with
precious Dust, united unto the Son of God. Part of that Honor able Dust has
proceeded from your happy Loins; Your deceased Children are part of the Turf,
with which the Lord Jesus, as it were, takes a Livery and Seisin of this New
World for himself. Sir, Be encouraged to go on, abounding in the Work of the
Lord; and go on, to believe it your Felicity, That you shall go to your
glorified Infants, and they shall not Return unto you.

With these Testimonies of Respct, I am, Sir, Your Affectionate Friend and
Servant, C. M.

Right THOUGHTS IN Sad Hours,
Genesis XLII. 36. Me have ye bereaved of my CHILDREN; Joseph is not, and Simeon
is not -- all these things are AGAINST me.
THE common, but causeless mistake of Pious Men, under and about Afflictions,
is represented in these Words; of which words the venerable Chrysostom in his
Ancient Commentary on them, speaks truly, They are fit words to express the
Relenting Bowels of a Parent; and yet we may without ill manners venture to
add, The words do not altogether so well become the Grace, the Faith, the
Patience of a Christian.

In this Book of the Worlds Beginning, which contains an admirable Narrative of
Transactions for above Three and twenty Hundred Years from the first Dawn of
Time; the Revolutions which went over the Patriarch Jacob, are not the least
spoken of by Moses, the Inspired Historian; and there are especially Three
Travels of that renowned Man, which the History of his Life and Death is
Elegantly woven into: The last of those Journies was of near Two hundred Miles,
namely from Canaan unto Goshen, occasioned by his Son Ioseph's Advancement to
be Viceroy of Egypt, and the Relief which that Honorable ViceRoy had provided
against the sore Famine then raging in the Countries round about.

This Chapter entertains us with a very affecting story of some accidents
preparatory thereunto; a story, How the Ten Brethren of Joseph, by whose
Villainy he had been Spirited away into Egypt, made their Humble Address unto
him for Corn, while his Grandeur and his Policy concealed him from their
knowledge: How by a contrivance he made one of them, Simeon by name, a
Prisoner; in the mean time obliging the rest to return with another Brother of
his, by name Benjamin, who was by them left behind as the chief solace of their
Aged Father, and the only remaining Child of his deceased Mother. Old Jacob was
made acquainted with the true state of the Case, and in this Verse we have his
grievous Resentment of it. In this Querimonious Lamentation of the good old
Saint there are especially Two things intimated:

First, Here seems to be a Suspecting of his Childrens Wickedness; his words
are, Me have ye bereaved of my Children, Joseph is not, Simeon is not, and ye
will take Benjamin away. Methinks the sorrow of his oppressed Heart seems thus
to vent it self, q. d.

This is a strange, and a very sad thing; I cannot trust you all together, but
one or other of you, that you think I have a particular kindness for, must come
short home. I am now confirmed in my doubts, that you were the Wildbeasts, the
unnatural Tygres who tore my Joseph to pieces. I am not without my Fears, that
you are the Iaylors, Shall I say? or the Hangmen who have got my Simeon out of
the way. And I am jealous that you have some ill design upon my best Darling
Benjamin too. Never had any man such mishaps in his Children, as your miserable
Father has.

Next, Here seems to be a Bewailing of his Makers providence: His words are,
All these things are against me. Some render them, All these things are UPON
me, q. d. As for you, you make light of these matters, as if they were no
concernment of yours: For my part, I feel them, they go very near to me. But
our Translation of it, seems more worthy of Approbation and Acceptance; All
these things are AGAINST me: And then this Paraphrase will carry the sense of
it, q. d.

The things which have been my Trouble, will be my Ruin; they are a sort of
things which I cannot conceive any advantage to my self consulted in, or
accruing by. When I look upon the dealings of the Lord, I cannot but be full of
awful Apprehensions that I am utterly banished from the mercies of the Lord;
these things render me an undone Man.

Now, remember that the happy event proved him egregiously mistaken here;
Joseph is not, said he; yet, he was, and his Father had no cause to be sorry
that he was what he was: Simeon is not, said he; yet he was, and his Father
might have been starved, if he had not been where he was. Those things which he
so fondly counted against him, were the very things that not only tried his
Grace, but also saved his Life. Let us admit the deplored Child himself, to
correct the sad mistake; he said afterward in Genesis 50. 20. God meant it unto
Good.

The Truth which from this Mistake we may raise for a Doctrine to be now
insisted on, is therefore this:

Doctrine.
The People of God are apt very frequently, but not a little wrongfully to
conclude, that the Afflictive Dispensations of the most High toward them, are
very highly to their Prejudice, or but a little to their Benefit.

The Propositions that may serve to state this Truth distinctly in your
Thoughts, are such as these.

Proposition I.
The People of God are sure to be exercised with Afflictive Dispensations of
the most High toward them in the World.

There is in every Generation a Remnant, a Little little Flock of Men, who are
effectually called from the Vanities which the biggest part of perishing
Mankind is woefully drowned in, unto the service of the Living God; who have
chosen God as their Best good, and their Last end; chosen Christ as their Lord
Redeemer, and resolved to be for him and not for another. These renewed
Children of Adam are the Mystical Children of Israel; they may with an Eye to a
Spiritual relation, point at Jacob, and say, A Syrian ready to perish was my
Father. Now these must even in a peculiar manner expect to be like their Father
Jacob, who in the close of his days was forced to say, Genesis 47. 9. Evil have
been the days of the years of my Life. In every Age and in every Place, we may
see the most High God afflicting of a Jacob in his Relations; of them, some are
Churlish, others are Profane, and others are Taken away. We may behold the Lord
^fflicting of an Heman in his Mind; the Man complains, Lord, Why do thou cast
off my Soul? While I suffer thy Terrors, I am distracted. We may behold the
Lord Afflicting of a Timothy in his Body, he feels a weak Stomach, with often
Infirmities. We may behold the Lord Afflicting of a Lazarus in his Estate, he
is reduced unto Beggary at the Doors of a wicked Belly-God. We may behold the
Lord Afflicting of an Elijah in his Esteem, he is Libelled as a Seditions
Boutefeau, always Troubling of his Country. In a word, we may ordinarily behold
a David, a Job, a Paul, Afflicted in all, or most of these regards.

The Christian that promises himself an Immunity from Afflictions in this Evil
World, is indeed a Christian only in the Italian, wicked, scoffing usage of the
Word, that is, a Fool. It is one of the Names put upon the People of God, in
Isa. 54. 11. O thou Afflicted. Nor can any particular Believer escape this
common Lot: No, every one that is of Israel, must look to say with Israel, in
Psalm. 129. 1. Many a time have they Afflicted me from my Youth. Indeed the
People of God will at last arrive unto a Quiet Haven. -- Seeds ubi Fata quietas
Ostendunt --

[Or in a better Dialect] Where all Tears shall be wiped from their Eyes: But
where? But when? Truly, this Bliss-land is not on this side the Water; it is a
Land a far off, and we shall not see it, until we put ashore on the Land
flowing with Milk and Honey, beyond the Stars: We must Sail through a turbid
Ocean full of horrible Tempest, here, and, -- Vt Fluctus Fluctum sic Luctus
Luctum -- One Wave will follow upon another, the last Wave still seeming the
tenth Wave, until we drop Anchor within the vail of Heaven it self. When the
Ancient Martyr Ignatius was brought to have his Flesh torn from his Bones, and
his Bones broken by the Teeth of Wild Beasts, he uttered such a speech as that,
O now I begin to be a Christian! Thus our Lord has laid down this as the A B C
of Christianity, in Matthew. 16. 24. If any man will come after me, he must take
up his Cross, and follow me. This is the first Lesson for a Disciple in the
School of the Lord Jesus, Look for Afflictions here! The Glorious God will lay
over our Shoulders that ragged piece of Wood, a Cross; when once we are
associated with his people, who all Travel through the Valley of Baca, that is,
of Weeping, unto their Everlasting Happiness. This was the condition of our
Illustrious Forerunner; he ran through a way all strow'd with Briars and Thorns,
as it is said in Luke 24. 46. He must suffer, and enter into his glory; and all
his followers are to drink of his Cup: We cannot escape treading in the Bloody
Tracks which he has left behind him; we have received this warning from our
Lord himself, in Ioh. 16. 33. In the World you shall have Tribulation: We have
received this Witness from his Apostles also, in Act. 14. 22. Through much
Tribulation we must enter into the Kingdom of God; and the experience of above
Five thousand Years, has now set a Seal to that Observation, in Psalm. 31. 19.
Many are the Troubles of the Righteous.

Question.
But from whose Hands do the Afflictions of the Lords people come?
This is that which we have said, They are the Dispensations of the most High.
Indeed there may often be the Hand of Ioab in our Afflictions, there may be the
Malice of Satan and his Instruments. Those fierce Natives of this dark Climate
will be often as Thorns in the sides of the Pilgrims, that are Traveling to a
better Country.

But still these Rods are all in the Hand of God: We are told in Amos 3. 7.
there is no such Evil in the City, and the Lord has not done it. O that every
Man would always remember this, the Griefs of thy Heart are all ordered by that
God by whom the Hairs of thy Head are all numbered. Not so much as the Tongue of
a Dog will ever stir against thee, unless managed by the Hand of the Lord. The
King of Assyria himself, by whom a vast part of mankind may be Afflicted, is
but a staff of Indignation in that all disposing Hand.

Proposition II.
The people of God are apt very frequently to conclude, that the Afflictive
Dispensations of the most High toward them, are very highly to their prejudice.

From the embittered Heart of a Jacob in his exercises, there is often sob'd
that melancholy Groan, All these things are against me. Alas! under Affliction
we can usually speak no other Language but that in Lam. 3. 1. I have seen
Affliction by the Rod of Gods wrath; we see nothing but Wrath and Curse, and
fiery Vengeance dispensed unto us in our Bitter things.

Question.
Whence does this come to pass?
One reason of this Misprision is; The best people of God are not without bad
remainders of Flesh: Now every Affliction will grate hard upon That; the galled
Flesh of Afflicted Men, cannot forbear that shreek, I am hurt. This Flesh of
ours will cloud our understandings, and beget in us very false Conceptions of
our sharp Afflictions. The methods wherein the great God pursues our good, are
very Certain, and very Glorious; but they are also very Obscure. Silly shallow
Creatures, who dwell in Houses of Clay, cannot fathom the Mysterious
proceedings of the God whose Way is in the Deep, and whose Judgments are a
great Deep; and when we go to Contemplate these deep things, then our Flesh
offers unto us very injurious Glasses to view them in; listen to this
misjudging Flesh, and it will tell us, If thou do not live surrounded with
the Pleasures, and Riches, and Honors of this World, and leave a good Portion
of them unto Children of thy own; when thy time shall come to Dye, thou art a
Miserable Man. The moan of Jacob in our Text is by some Englished so, All these
things are Above me: Truly, it is above the Reach, above the ken of our Flesh to
imagine, That what impairs our Worldly greatness and glory, is no real
Detriment unto us; our Sense, our carnal perverse dim-sighted Sense, will not
easily make sense of that Riddle, in Judge. 14. 14. Out of the Eater came forth
Meat.

Another reason of this Error is; The people of God have been guilty of much
Sin against God. In the dark doleful days of their Unregeneracy, how many, how
mighty, were our doings against the Lord! Yea, and since the Lord made us know
wisdom in the hidden Man; how crooked, how faulty have our ways before him
been! The Psalmist complained in Psalm. 49. 5. In the days of Evil, the iniquity
of my heels does compass me about: Our Heels formerly have stepped awry into
dirty Iniquities, and those Iniquities we have been ready to lay at our Heels
by our Impenitent forgetfulness: But in our Afflictions those Iniquities rising
as it were out of their Grave, haunt us, dog us, and stare us full in the Face;
our Hearts now condemn us, and thereupon they likewise condemn God: We are
prone to think that Gods designs cannot be good, because we know that our
deserts are very bad. Sinful Man will not quickly believe that word of the
Lord, My Thoughts are not as your Thoughts: Hence our own first misgiving, and
then misjudging Hearts will in Affliction say, Now I feel the wounds of an
Enemy: It is not possible that I should suffer these terrible things from one
who is the God of my Salvation; the Lord proceeds to Afflict me thus, because
he intends to destroy me for ever. When once a thinking Man comes to say, God
is Angry, he will soon add, I am undone.

A Third reason (to say no more) of it, is; The Devil of Hell often falls upon
the people of God in their Afflictions, that soul Fiend falls foul on them,
when he has them thus at a disadvantage. The Powers of Darkness take the Hours
of Darkness therein to make their Assaults on the Faith of them that they would
annoy. The Accuser of Men to God, is also an Accuser of God to Men; and when it
is a Gloomy time without them, then will Satan suggest within them, Terribilia
de Deo, very frightful Visions of their Almighty Savior; he will pour in upon
them those things which are called, in Ephesians. 6. 16. The fiery Darts of the
Wicked one: He would have us entertain hard and Hellish thoughts of that God,
whose Mercy endures for Ever: Hence he will be still telling of us, God counts
thee for his Enemy, and thy God has forgotten thee, and the Mercy of the Lord
is clean gone from thee for ever; thou art before thy Maker as a Vessel wherein
he will have no pleasure for evermore; he will undo thee before he has done
with thee.

Now, What is the Result of all this? Alas! the people of God now frequently
have cause to give that mean, that shameful, that pitiful account of
themselves, in Psalm. 77. 2. In the day of my trouble, my Soul refused to be
comforted.

Proposition III.
The people of God conclude not a little wrongfully, when they think his
Afflictive Dispensations to be but a little for their benefit.

When Jacob would surmise, All these things are against me, it might have been
replied upon him, No, you are greatly deceived, you and yours must have
perished, if these things had not happened. When the Afflicted people of God
cry out, Undone! Undone! they have cause to eat that word, and rather to say,
Periissem nisi periissem, I had been quite undone, if I had not been thus
undone. Instead of concluding, All these things are against me, we do much
wrong, if we do not admit that Thought, in Romans 8. 28. All things shall work
together for good.

Question.
How does this Appear?
One piece of Injustice attending of that conclusion is; There is a wrong
thereby done to the Kindness of God. With such a clap of Thunder as this may
the Lord reprove your hard opinion of him, You think worse of me than I
deserve! Our good God has assured us, in Rev. 3. 19. Whom I love, I rebuke and
chasten; why then shall we contradict him with such a vain imagination as this,
I am Rebuked only that I may be ruined, I am Chastened only because I am
abhorred by the Lord?

Another Injustice expressed in that conclusion is; There is thereby a wrong
done to the Wisdom of God. They of Old reflected hard, when they said, Can any
good thing come out of Nazareth? Thus do they that say, Can any good thing come
out of Affliction? Well, and I pray, Why not? What should hinder Good from
coming out of that grievous thing? Is it impossible unto that God, who is wise
in Counsel, and wonderful in Working? We are informed in 1 Pet. 1. 6. It is
only if need be, that we are brought into Heaviness: The Lord would not let one
Affliction give thee any Trouble, if some Occasion did not call for it, if much
Advantage did not come by it.

One more Evidence of Unreasonableness in this conclusion is, The people of God
at the Period of their Afflictions, will themselves confess, this conclusion to
have been Unreasonable. What our Lord said unto the Inquisitive Peter, the same
he says unto the Afflicted Christian, What I do, thou know not now, but thou
shall know hereafter: Verily, when we do hereafter know, how God has at once
Afflicted us and Amended us, then we shall say, He has done all things well.
When we have got through the black Valleys, out on the other side, then we
shall see what now we will hardly believe, then we see that the Thoughts of God
about us were Thoughts of Good and not of Evil; then we see that the Aims of
God were to do us Good in the latter end; then do our Triumphing Souls declare
as in Psalm. 119. 71. It is good for me, that I have been Afflicted. Nothing is
more common than to hear a Christian after many Afflictions professing, I could
not have been well without any one of all my Afflictions, I had want of them
all, I have good by them all: How much more will the Beauty and Benefit of all
our Afflictions be thankfully acknowledged by us in the Land of light, where
every Labyrinth of providence will be explained; for every one of our
Afflictions in this, we shall return a Million of Hallelujahs in another and a
better World.

The Improvement of these things remains.

USE.
And now let these things encourage the people of the Saints of the most High,
unto a due Faith and Patience under the Afflictive Dispensations, which their
Heavenly Father tries them with. Christians, under all your Afflictions, labor
to say steadfastly, to say joyfully, not, All these things are against me, but
rather, Thanks be to God for his unspeakable Gifts. The Language that best
befits us under our Afflictions is that, the frequent using of which gave unto
a famous Jewish Rabbi the name of Rabbi Ganizoth; namely, This Affliction was
for my good; and This too, and This too.

I am this day visited my self with the sudden Death of a dear and only Child:
Permit me to endeavor your Edification, for you all have been and may be under
some Affliction, and most of you under such Affliction; let me do it by
tendering unto you such Considerations as I would this day quiet my own
tempestuous Rebellious Heart withal. As our Lord Jesus Christ himself was
Tempted for this cause in part, That he might know how to succor the Tempted;
thus the frail Men whom he employes, for this, among other that are worse
causes, are Afflicted, even That they may more feelingly speak a word in season
unto others in Affliction too.

There is First a General and then a Special Case, which the following part of
my Discourse must apply it self unto.

The General Case.
The more General Exhortation to be now Urged, is;

Let us under no Affliction whatsoever, be discomposed with any Apprehension,
as if it were utterly Against us.

I am speaking to many Children of Jacob that are Children of Affliction; some
of us are lamenting over our broken Estates, like Naomi, in Ruth 1. 21. saying,
I was Full, but I am become Empty. Some of us are Lamenting over our blasted
Credits, like David, in Psalm. 69. 20. saying, Reproach has broken my Heart;
and there are with us those who are Weeping over their Dead Children, like the
distressed Women of Bethlehom, in Matthew. 2. 18. Weeping for their Children, and
not willing to be comforted, because they are not: And many more such Griefs
are the minds of devout Persons among us Wounded with. That which Jacob sighed
over his Joseph and Simeon, is by multitudes Mourned over their other
Enjoyments also. An Ezekiel, as in Ezekiel. 24. 16. Sighs over the Desire of his
Eyes, She is not! A Widow of one of the Sons of the Prophets, as in 2 King 4.
1. Sighs, My Husband is not. An Isaac, as in Genesis 24. 67. may Sigh over his
Mother, She is not. An Israel, as in Genesis 35. 29. may Sigh over his Father, He
is not. And if a Jonah have had any Gourd which he has taken much contentment
in, he too, as in Ion. 4. 8. is made to Sigh, It is not. But that which puts a
Sting into all these Afflictions, is, that the Afflicted say, All these things
are against me. Now, O that there may be laid upon the thus talking Sorrow a
charge of Silence; Eternal Silence unto thee now, O thou inordinate Passion,
before the Lord. Let this be as a Word upon the Wheels, running into the very
Souls of them that are of an heavy Heart. Be entreated, O Afflicted Christians,
to say no more, All these things are against me. No, be Comforted; be Refreshed
with Sentiments that are quite contrary thereunto. In your most cloudy hours, O
strive to say with him in Psalm. 94. 19. In the multitude of my Thoughts within
me, O Lord, thy comforts delight my Soul.

COMFORTS.
It is the advice of the Wise Man, in Eccl. 7. 14. In the day of Adversity
consider: Now there are these comfortable things, which it is fit for you to
consider in this day of your Adversity; let me advise you with some Good and
Comfortable Words.

Consider FIRST,
Those very things which your Affliction lies in the absence of, might for
ought you can say, be very much unto your prejudice.
That very Joseph, that very Simeon, that very Benjamin, which you are
Afflicted for the want of, might do you more Hurt than Good.

Even in outward Respects, you cannot determine what is best for you: It were as
much Arrogance in you to direct the Providence of God, as it was Blasphemy in
the well-known Prince to Correct the Creation of God, when he said, Had I been
by at the Making of the World, I could have shown how some things might have
been better done. Perhaps you are Afflicted, because your Possessions about you
are diminished; but have you not read in Eccl. 5. 13. of Riches kept to the
hurt of the Owners: Many a Man's Cash has been his Crime; his House has cost him
his Head, by his Land he has forfeited his Life; the poor Heathen of old,
cursing of his Enemy, wished that he might be a Rich man. Perhaps you are
Afflicted because of a little Mud thrown upon your Reputations; but have you
not read in Prove. 27. 14. How pernicious a thing it is to have too much
Applause in the World? To be too well spoken of, procures that Envy, before
which, Who can stand? The Breath in the Trumpet of Fame not rarely carries a
Plague, and a Bane to them whose Names it founds. It may be, your Affliction is
the loss of Children; well, have you not read such a Message sent to a godly
Man, as that in 1 Samuel 2. 33. The Son of thine, whom I shall not cut off, shall
be to consume thine Eyes, and to grieve thine Heart. It Is possible, that if thy
Child had lived, it might have made thee, the Father of a Fool, or (that I may
speak to the Sex that is most unable to bear this Trial) the Mother of a Shame.
It is a very ordinary thing for one Living Child to occasion more trouble than
seven Dead ones.

However, in Spiritual Regards, you may be exceedingly harmed by the secular
Delights which you desire; you may have cause to Rue what you Wish, because it
may prove an Idol which will render your Souls like the Barren Heath in the
Wilderness before the Lord. We do very Childishly often cry for a Knife that
would cut the Fingers of our own Souls; we pant after those things which may be
to our Souls as bad as drink to the Thirsty craving Man in a Dropsy. It was
the very direful calamity of the ancient Israelites, in Psalm. 105. 15. The Lord
gave them their Requests, but sent leanness into their Soul. A Lean Soul, a
Wretched Soul, a Soul pining away in its iniquities, is oftentimes the effect
of those fine things which we Dote upon. It is a blasted banned Soul that sets
up a Creature in the Room, the Throne of the great God, that gives unto a
Creature those Loves and those Cares which are due unto the great God alone:
Such Idolatry the Soul is too frequently by Prosperity seduced unto. We are
told in Prove. 1. 32. The prosperity of Fools destroys them; many a Fool is thus
destroyed! O fearful case! A full Table, and a lean Soul! A big Title, and a
lean Soul! A numerous Posterity, and a Soul e'n like the Kine in Pharaohs
Dream! Madness is in our Hearts if we tremble not at this, Soul-calamities are
sore Calamities.

Consider NEXT,
The benefit which the Lord intends you by your Afflictions, is really very
great and glorious.
The sweet Influences which your Afflictions are like to have upon you, who can
enough describe? If you lose a Joseph, or a Simeon, or a Benjamin, behold these
are Spiritual Blessings in Heavenly things, with which God will abundantly make
up your loss. That very rule which the Lord has given us about the Nurture of
our Children, He observes in the Discipline of his own; we are under our
Heavenly Fathers executions of that Rule, even then when the Death of our
Children is the Affliction under which we labor, Prove. 23. 14. Thou shall beat
thy Child with the Rod, and shall deliver his Soul from Hell. In this World you
are like to be much the Wiser and much the Better for your Afflictions, and
much the more Blessed for them in the other World for evermore. What? And are
these things against you? God forbid you should imagine so.

I. Those things which you conclude to be against you, are the things, by which
the most High designs to promote your KNOWLEDGE.

It is affirmed in Psalm. 94. 12. That those Whom God chastens, he also teaches
out of his Law. The Almighty is now but putting of you to School, and [Schola
Crucis est Schola Lucis;] you are in a School where the Lord will have you to
learn many very notable and surprising Lessons: God will have Afflictions to be
the Clay and Spittle that shall open those Eyes which Sin has blinded;
horrible Cataracts have seized those Eyes, which are by these means removed;
the Physician recites to you the names of some Bitter Herbs, which the
Eyesight is relieved by. We are indeed all of us a sort of Creatures which can
see best in the Dark; it was the Aphorism of Solomon the Wise, in Prove. 29. 15.
The Rod and Correction give Wisdom. It usually comes to pass that Correction
and Instruction go together. You shall find that II (...) are (...), that Quae
Nocent Docent, that Maturant Aspera Mentem, and that Vexatio dat Intellectum;
or as the Proverb of the Ancients has it, In Adversity Men find Eyes. You
shall now know more; but hear of What:

. The Lord resolves to make you know more, First of HIMSELF: We have been
miserably deficient in the knowledge of God, (we may say of our selves, as Paul
of some) we may speak it unto our shame; Our Ignorance of God has been the
cause of ours Sins; Heu! Prima haec scelerum causa est mortalibus aegris
Naturam nescire Dei -- And our Knowledge of God will be the effect of our
Sorrows for them: The Lord is carrying of you into the Clifts of a cragged
Rock, and it is to make the Glory of his Attributes pass before you. When Job
had gone through his weary Months, he then said unto the Lord, as in Job. 42.
5. Now mine Eye sees thee! It is by Affliction that we are brought to see the
Sovereignty of God, and to lie before him as Clay in the Hand of the Potter; to
see the Righteousness of God, and to own that he punishes us far less than our
iniquities deserve; to see the Holiness of God, and to Reverence him as one
that is of purer Eyes than to behold Evil; to see the Power of God, and to
think, that nothing is too hard for the Lord; to see the Goodness of God, and
to find him a rewarder of them that diligently seek him; in a word, a little
more Affliction will bring thee to say, Lord, I know thy Name, and I will put
my Trust in thee.

. The Lord resolves to make you know more, Secondly, of his SON: What are all
those Afflictions that make you groan? Truly, they are a few Chips and
Splinters of a Redeemers Cross: They are, as it is said, in Col. 1. 24. That
which is behind of the Afflictions of Christ; some Vinegar and Gall was left by
him for us to pledge him by tasting of: God will thereby make you sensible a
little of the Agonies and Anguishes that made him to Roar, when there were Laid
on him the Iniquities of us all. We were never yet enough affected with the
Kindness of our Lord Jesus in the dark doleful day, when he endured the Cross,
despising the Shame which was due unto us all. Art thou Poor? God will have
thee call to mind the Poverty which thy Redeemer underwent for thy sake, the
Poverty which when our Lord Inventoried his Estate, rendered the Sum Total of it
only this, The Son of Man has not where to lay his Head. Art thou Pained? God
will have thee mindful of the strong Pains which thy Redeemer felt, when his
Flesh was torn from his Bones, when from Head to Foot bloody Wounds and Stripes
and Stabs were to be seen upon him. Art thou Fearful? God will have thee bear
in mind, the horrible Consternation which caused thy Redeemer to Sweat clots of
Blood, though in a cold Night he were grovelling on the cold Ground. Art thou
Disgraced? God will have thee mindful of the Ignominy cast upon thy Savior,
when he was used as a Traitor, as all that was Vile, and when the basest fellow
in the City was counted a better Man than he. Do thy Friends deal unworthily?
Thou shall then learn what the Exercise of thy Redeemer was, when even those of
his own Family, all forsook him and fled: these things Affliction will make us
Thoughtful of, and Thankful for: And as the Kindness of a Jesus, so the Value
of a Jesus, comes to be duly rated by such means as these. The Afflicted man is
driven to call every Creature, A lying Vanity, and from hence he comes to call
a Christ, The Pearl of great Price: It has been said, Unto you that are
Believers he is Precious; we may add, He is Precious to you that are Afflicted
also. The Afflicted man finds that Gold it self will do him no good; whereupon
a Savior becomes more desirable than whole Mountains of Ophirs Gold unto him.

. The Lord resolves to make you know more, Thirdly, Of his WORD. There is a
Glorious Letter which the God of Heaven, has sent from the Third Heaven unto
the Children of Men. Foolish man often throws it by like Wast-paper, until
Affliction puts him upon the due, the diligent study of it. David that had a
lesser Bible than we, could say in Psalm. 119. 23. Princes did sit and speak
against me; but what was the issue of the Affliction which the Calumny and
Obloquy of his Persecutors gave unto him? It follows, Thy Servant did Meditate
on thy Statutes. Bad weather in the World makes Afflicted men to keep their
Eyes much upon the Light shining in a Dark place unto them. To Meditate on a
fit portion of the Bible, dwelling on every Verse, till at least one
Observation and one Supplication be drawn from it; has not seldomer been the
Ease, than it has been the Work of Afflicted Men: And God will hereby help
you, as to a better Relish of, so to a fuller Comment on these Miraculous Lines
than once you had: The bitter Tang of Afflictions will bring you to a better
Taste of that Book, whereof the Psalmist could say, How sweet are thy words
unto my Taste! A Leaf of the Bible appears (as to Luther) not to be parted
withal for all this whole World; chiefly unto those whom Affliction has
convinced of the Vanity and Vexation here. But this is not all; the best
Expositors of not a few Assertions in the Bible are some sore Afflictions in
the World. The Stars and the Scriptures are seen best in a Frosty Night. The
Mysteries of a Well-ordered Covenant, the Maeanders of a Deceitful Heart, the
worth and use of Great and Precious promises, you will best understand in your
Afflicted Hours. Adversity makes a Verse of Scripture to be not like a Verse of
Ovid, as it often is to them that are not in Trouble as other men.

The Lord resolves to make you know more, Fourthly, of YOUR SELVES. The Golden
Rule, Know thy self, is that which our God will have us Learn, while we feel
his Rod. A Wound will convince an Emperor that he is a Man. It was said unto
Israel in Deuteronomy. 8. 2. The Lord Humbled them, that what was in their Hearts
might be known: God will have us to see our own Follies and be Ashamed. God
will have us to see our own Graces and be Refreshed; and in the Furnace of
Affliction we must undergo a Fiery Trial in order thereunto. Scilicet ut Fulvum
spectatur in Ignibus Aurum -- Under Affliction, as God will bring you to say of
your selves, I have perverted that which is Right, so he will find occasion for
you to hear him saying to you, Now I know that thou fear me.

. But where shall I stop? About the advancements of Sight procured by
Affliction, I may say as about the Instances of Faith, it is said by the
Apostle, The time would fail me to mention them: Yet let me briefly add; By the
Afflictions whereof you complain, God will bring you to Know what SIN is. You
that formerly counted Stolen Waters are Sweet, shall now see Sin in a truer
uglier dress; you shall see that it is as in Ier. 44. 4. The abominable thing,
which I hate, says the Lord. God will also bring you to Know what RELIGION is:
You that sometimes have said, It is in vain to serve the Lord, shall now be
reduced unto better Sentiments; you will soon believe that in Psalm. 111. 10.
The fear of the Lord is the beginning of Wisdom. Finally, God will bring you to
Know what all Sublunary things are. You have had your too high Thoughts in your
good Times; then your Song was, My Mountain is made strong. God will now show
you what Creatures are, and give you cause to say of them, They are all
Physicians of no value, and They are broken Cisterns that can hold no Water.
Well then; say not, All these things are against me: It is a matchless
Privilege to be thus Taught of God. We are told in Eccl. 1. 18. He that
increases Knowledge, increases Sorrow: Behold, we may Invert the Words, and
not Injure the Truth, Increase of Sorrow brings increase of Knowledge with it.

II Those things which you conclude to be against you, are the things by which
the most High designs to promote your VIRTUE also.

The interest of Holiness will be marvellously befriended in your Souls and
Lives, by the influence of Affliction; we are told in Heb. 12. 10. That God
chastens us, to make us partakers of his Holiness; that Holiness which he does
like, and which is like to himself: These Three will the Holy Effects of your
Affliction be.

. Your Afflictions will, First, Help your Disorders. Your Souls are depraved
with, or exposed to dangerous deadly Disorders and Distempers: By Afflictions
your Heavenly Father will Prevent them; by Afflictions he will Redress them.
What are you Afflicted for? See a short and a sweet account given of this
Physic, in Isa. 27. 9. By this the iniquity of Jacob shall be purged, and all
the Fruit shall be to take away his Sin. The first ways of David were his best
ways. Why so? Truly, it was because the first days of David were his worst
days: He does himself assign this reason of it, Psalm. 119. 67. Before I was
Afflicted I went astray, but now I have kept thy word. Usually men Sin least
when they Suffer most. God will have thy ways too to be good ways; they shall
therefore be ways Hedged with Thorns, that thy Soul may not step awry: Thy way
must be incommoded by Thorns, that it may not be overrun with Weeds. There are
great Sins which thy wild Lusts would hurry thee on unto; there is a Madness in
thy Heart that would produce all manner of Mischief in thy Life, if restraint
be not laid upon it; now the Iron Chains of Affliction are clapped upon thee to
keep thee from thy Exorbitancies. What is said concerning the good Subjects of
the Ancient Typical, Antiochal Perfecution, in Dan. 11. 35. is to be said
concerning the good Subjects of any Affliction whatsoever, They are Purged and
made White thereby. This more generally; but more particularly, I would add:

. Again, Your Affictions will wean your Afflections from the wrong Objects of
them. God will have you to look upon all things here below with such Affections
as David had for a Kingdom in an Exile, and to say, I am as a weaned Child. To
this end the Lord by Afflictions lays Wormwood on the Breasts which you have
hung too much upon. He will cause Creatures to be our Grief that they may not
be our God. Tertullian said very true of Idolatry, It is praecipuum crimen
Humani generis, the grand Crime of Mankind: Affliction mortifies that
Rebellion; therefore, David, are thy Children cut off: therefore, Jacob, is the
Wife of thy Bosom snatched out of it; therefore, Hezekiah, is thy Treasure
blasted and wasted: It is that Idolatrous Affections may be recalled.

. Once more; both your Graces and your Duties will be quickened by your
Afflictions. Afflictions will prove the Weights by the Hanging whereof upon
you, you shall more flourish like Palm Trees in the Court-yards of the Lord:
Afflictions will be the Feet which by treading upon you, will make you as the
Chamomil, to grow the more. Afflictions will be the Fires, which like Viols,
you shall make the better Music by being disposed near unto: Afflictions will
be the Spurs which shall cause you to mend your pace in Running the Race which
is set before you. Afflictions -- But room for enlargement is denied -- In
short; God by Afflictions is as it were pounding or grinding of his rare Spices
in your Souls, the scent of them will now become very Fragrant, very Glorious.
We have heard in Eccl. 7. 3. By the sadness of the Countenance, the Heart is
made better: God will make that Heart of thine very Serious, very Circumspect,
very Spiritual, and very Heavenly by the Afflictions which thou art prone to
quarrel at.

O'then say not, All these things are against me; the price of these things is
above Rubies. Well faith the sentence of the Ancient, O servum illum Beatum,
cujus emendationi Deus instat, and cut dignatur (sic) Irasci.

III. The most High designs likewise by the Afflictions to promote your HEAVEN
for ever more.

The Speech of the Apostle to this purpose is very Emphatical, 2 Cor. 4. 17.
Our light Affliction here, which is but for a Moment, works for us a far more
Exceeding and Eternal weight of Glory. O surprising connection! Light
Afflictions work a Weight of Glory! Afflictions for a Moment work a Glory
Eternal; and this Glory shall be a far more Exceeding Glory; or, as the
Original intimates, a Glory which no Hyperbole upon Hyperbole can give a too
Glorious Character of! Your Afflictions do prepare you for, though they do not
purchase for you, the Glories of the World to come. The Hebrew word for Glory
signifies the same that your own sense of Affliction feels, a Weighty thing.
Well, from the one Weight you shall pass to the other. Your Crown of Thorns
will shortly be turned into a Crown of Glory; a Weighty, a Massy, a neverfading
Crown. A Roman Emperor once rewarded one that wore an Iron Chain in a Prison
for his sake, with a Golden Chain as heavy in a Preferment afterward: Such, and
more than such at last will be thy Felicity. Art thou Afflicted? Be assured, --
Dolor hic tibi proder it olim. After thy Sowing time in Tears, thou shall have
a Reaping time in Joy; after thy Bread of Adversity, thou shall come to Eat of
the Tree of Life in the midst of the Paradise of God; after thy Water of
Affliction, thou shall come to Drink of the River of Pleasures at Gods right
Hand for evermore. Let me say to thee as the Martyr to his Friend, Thy
Affliction will scour and rub thee bright, that thou may be fit to be set
upon an high Shelf in Heaven for ever: or, let me say to thee as the Martyr to
himself, Hold out Faith and Patience, Heaven will quickly make amends for all.
Thou shall have the more of Heaven for all thy past Heaviness; thou shall e're
long be received into the place of Rest, and there all thy former Difficulties
will but sweeten the Times of Refreshing which now come from the Presence of
the Lord.

Say now, O Believer, Are all these things Against thee? O what things can be
for thy Good, if these are not so? Sit down then, and whatever thy Afflictions
are, let these words of the Lord Jesus al-lay thy Storms. Do not now
practically say, These Consolations of God are small: Behold, thou art
furnished with strong Consolations.

Counsels.
But that you may be able to apply these Consolations unto good purpose, under
Affliction there are some Counsels to be set before you. In so many Scriptures
you shall therefore have so many Counsels; they will be both best Received and
best Remembered if they come unto you with a, Thus says the Lord.

The First Counsel proper for you, is intimated in
Ephesians. 1. 3. Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has
blessed us with all Spiritual blessings in Heavenly matters in Christ.
Count Spiritual Blessings the most Desirable Blessings. A sufferer should be a
Solomon; under Affliction be of his temper who in 2 Chronicles. 1. 5. counted Wisdom
preferrable to Riches and Honors and Life it self. Count an Acquaintance with
God, that thing by which Good will come unto you; then you will not count
Afflictions from God, the thing which is Against you. On one side, be sure to
judge so, If I lose in Temporals and get in Spirituals, I am an abundant
Gainer. Be sure to judge so on the other side, If I lose in Spirituals and get
in Temporals, it certainly fares very Ill with me. Souls, let SIN be the only
thing of which you will absolutely say, It is Against me: But of every thing
which makes you more conformed unto Jesus Christ, say, This is for me: O say,
This is all my Salvation, and all my Desire.

The Second Counsel pertaining to you, is expressed in
Jam. 5. 13. Is any among you Afflicted? Let him Pray.
A time of Affliction should be a time of Supplication. It was the Precept of a
good God, in Psalm. 50. 15. Call upon me in the day of Trouble: And it was the
Purpose of a good Man, in Psalm. 86. 7. Lord, In the day of my Trouble, I will
call upon thee. Has any remarkable Affliction befallen thee? I would seriously
ask, Was not the Spirit of Prayer abated in thee before that Affliction came?
Let me then a little alter the words of Deborah, and say, Awake, awake, O Soul,
awake, awake, and utter a Prayer. The Title of the Hundred and second Psalm
shows the Duty of all Afflicted men; there should be, A Prayer made by the
Afflicted when he is overwhelmed, and he should pour out his complaint before
the Lord. It was a very wise proposal of Eliphaz, in Job 5. 6, 8. Affliction
comes not forth of the Dust, nor does Trouble spring out of the Ground: It may
be thou have lost a desirable piece of Dust, it may be one of thy Delights is
put into the Ground: O look up, look above Chance, look beyond all second
Causes: it is added, I would seek unto God; the most advisable thing in the
World! We are in Affliction prone to make sad complaints unto our Fellow-worms;
unto them we say, O my Dead Infant! or, O my Lost Estate! But Job found cause
to say, in chapter 21. 4. Is my complaint to Man? If it were so, Why should not my
Spirit be Troubled? Then let us not keep saying, Have pity on me, O ye my
Friends: But instead thereof let us be saying, The Lord be Merciful unto me a
Sinner! Does not thy Affliction put thee upon more Prayer than thou did use
before? It is a sad sign that the Sower Cup arrives unto thee, spiced with the
dreadful Vengeance of God upon thy Soul. An Affliction will neither come in
Mercy, nor go in Mercy, if much Prayer do not accompany it. In Affliction, Pray
much. As soon as ever any Affliction befalls us, the First thing we do, should
be to fall down upon our knees, to cry mightily unto the Lord that his Grace
may be Sufficient for us. And still, as long as Gods hand is Lying in Trials
upon us, our hand should be lifted in Prayers unto God. We should Pray that our
Affliction may be Moderated, that our Affliction may be Sanctified, that our
Affliction may be Removed. The Pious Hannah of old found Prayer to be an
Heart-ease. Let this be your good Character, your good Carriage, Lord, in
Trouble have they visited thee, and poured out a Prayer when thy Chastening was
upon them.

The Third Counsel which you are to follow, is declared in
Job 34. 31. Surely, it is meet to be said unto God, I have born Chastisement,
I will not offend any more.
Repentance of Sin should be the effect of Affliction on Men. The End of every
Affiction in Sum, is the same that the End of every Mercy is; we may say of it,
as in Romans 2. 4. O man, it leads thee to Repentance. God spoke by his Ten
Judgments unto Egypt, as well as by his Ten Commandments unto Israel. Every
Affliction cries this in our Ears, O Repent, Reform, Return to him that Smites
thee. We read of a gracious person, who upon having a Child taken away by
Death, said in 1 King. 17. 18. My sins are brought unto Remembrance. This is
that which perhaps all thy Sickness, all thy Reproach, all thy Poverty, and all
thy Bereavments are sent upon; God would have thee to remember some Sin with
Grief and Shame, and Wherein thou have done Iniquity, to do it no more. It was
a black brand set upon a bad Man, in 2 Chronicles. 28. 22. In the time of his
Distress, did he Trespass yet more against the Lord. Shall God Prune thee and
Cut thee, and no good Fruit be found upon thee after all? Shall God Prick thee
and Lance thee, and all thy bad Blood be still running in thy Veins? Then
indeed, these things are Against thee. Ieroboam's withered Hand was Against
him, because it rectified not his naughty Heart. There hardly ever was a more
lamentable sight in this World, than, A Thief on a Cross continuing to
dishonor the Lord Jesus Christ. Art thou Afflicted? Then take the course which
the Church propounded in Lam. 3. 40. Let us search and try our ways. O now,
First Petition thy God; Lord, show me wherefore thou contendest with me! And
then Examine thy self, Wherein have I transgressed and exceeded? Endeavor to
find out what Controversy there may be between God and Thee; let thy impartial
Conscience, the Preacher in thy Bosom, inform thee, Whether thou have not
Overvalued, or Undervalued the things which thy Affliction is in the privation
of; Whether thou have not injuriously procured unto some other person, an
Affliction like that which thou thy self now Smartest under; or Whether no
Circumstance of thy Affliction, as the Time of it, the Place of it, do loudly
proclaim Gods quarrel in it. enquire thus, and immediately comply with what the
Lord shall Require. Let thy Dead Friends cause thee to Repent of thy Dead
works; thou Mournest over a lost Child, or a lost Name; O be concerned about a
lost Soul that is loding in thee. Ask thy felf, What have my past Behaviors
been? And ask, What should my future Deportment be? Bewail now, and Amend all
thy miscarriages in the sight of God. We are very ready to fall out with
Creatures when any thing happens amiss unto us: But O spend all thy Passion and
all thy Indignation here. Thou may look upon thy Sins, and Curse them as the
Authors of all thy Sorrows. O look upon Sin and say, Have I found thee, O mine
Enemy; Man, loath now, and leave every Sin. 'Twas that Sin that killed thy
Child; 'Twas that Sin that burnt thy House, that sunk thy Ship, that robbed
thee of thy Delights: Never after this be at peace with that mischievous
Monster, Sin.

The Fourth Counsel, big with which every Affliction says unto us, as Eliud
unto Eglon, I have a Message to thee from God; we have specified in
Job. 13. 15. Though he slay me, yet will I trust in him.
An Holy Resolution for God is to be maintained under every Afflicition from
God. Afflictions will not be Against us, if we Resolve under them to be still
For him from whom they come. To lay aside no Devotions for all Afflictions, to
serve a Smiting God as well as a Smiling God, to seek a God that is Frowning on
us, as well as a God that is Owning of us, this will argue, An Israelite
indeed. We should after all our Afflictions be still able to make that Appeal
unto the Lord, in the Psalm. 44. 17, 18. All this is come upon us, yet have we
not forgotten thee, O Lord. Resolve never to Renounce the Truths of God,
Resolve never to Desert the Ways of God, whatever your Afflictions are; still,
With full purpose of Heart cleave unto the Lord. In Resolutions for God, O be
like an Iron Pillar, and a Brazen Wall, that cannot be prevailed against.

Resolve to be Holy though the Wrath of Man would molest you for it. Suppose a
wicked World should Abuse you and Oppress you, yet say with Joshua, I and my
House will serve the Lord. Continue Sacrificing to, and Pleasing of your God
though Cains bloody Club should be Cudgelling of you.

Resolve to be Holy, though the Hand of God should distress you in it. When you
feel the Discouragements of the Narrow way, still say with Paul, None of these
things move me. Suppose God should inflict the stroke of his Displeasure on
your outward Man, still say, Though my Life should be continually worn away with
pining Sickness, yet to me to Live it shall be Christ. Still say, Though my Name
should in the Reproach of the Drunkard have Cart-loads of Mud thrown upon it,
yet will I labor all I can to honor the Name of God. Still say, Though I am
Reduced to be among the Poor in this World, yet will I study to be Rich in Good
Works. And still say, Though I cannot have my Children like Olive-plants about my
Table, yet will endeavor to be my self a Dutiful Child of God, and as a
Fruitful Olive Tree in the Courts of the Lord. Once more; Suppose God should
withdraw the light of his Countenance from your inward Man; still say, The Lord
shall be my God, my God, even when he forsakes me. Still say, I will fear the
Lord and obey his Voice, tho I walk in Darkness, and shall see no Light. Happy
is the Afflicted Man, that is a thus Resolved Man. The followers of these
Counsels may boldly and safely lay claim to all the Comforts which have this
day been set before the Heirs of Consolation.

The special Case.
But there is a more special Exhortation to be pressed, which may give a Period
unto this Discourse.

Let not the loss of Children particularly, as a thing Against us, cause in us
any irregular Discomposures.

The loss of Children, did I say? Nay, let me recall so harsh a Word; the
Catachresis is a little too hard for the Language of a Christian. The Children
which we count Lost, are not so. The Death of our Children is not the Loss of
our Children; when all the Losses of Job were made up with Doublings, yet the
Number of his Children need not be doubled, in the Restoration. Our Children
are not Lost, but given back, they are not Lost, but sent before. In such a
Dialect have the Sager Heathen sometimes talked of this Affliction; and shall
the professors of Christianity, with bitter Groans enter this among their
Losses, My Children are Dead! O tell it not at Athens, publish it not at Rome;
lest the Heathen Philosophers hiss at our weakness, at our Folly!

Well, this is the Calamity which many of you at some time or other have
experience of; The Death of Children, this is a thing which the Children of
Jacob seldom escape a resemblance of their Father in. Many carry themselves
under the trial, as if, A Death of Virtue, yea as if, A Death of Reason, had
therewithal befallen them; but recollect your selves, O dejected Christians,
and be not like them that Mourn without Hope this day. Let Bereaved Parents be
yet Believing Parents; the Voice of the great God that formed all things is
unto them that in Ier. 31. 16. Refrain thy Voice from Weeping, and thine Eyes
from Tears, for thy Work shall be Rewarded, says the Lord.

Let the Thoughts which have been this day tendered unto our Improvement,
gloriously compose and settle our Royled minds under this Affliction. Let us
not say, This thing is Against us; but let us say, The Lord that has given
has also taken away, blessed be the name of the Lord. It is indeed very true,
That this Affliction is none of the most easy to be born; the Heart of a
Parent will have peculiar Passions working in it, and racking of it, at such a
time as this. Tho there be greater Sorrows than those with which we follow a
Child unto the Grave; I bless God, it is a more bitter thing to say, My Sin is
mighty, or to say, My Soul is guilty, than it is to say, My Child is Dead; that
moan, I have pierced my Savior, is more Heart-wounding than to Mourn as one
mourns for a Firstborn. Yet few outward Earthly Anguishes are equal unto
these. The Dying of a Child is like the Tearing off a Limb, unto us. But, O
remember, That if ever we had any Grace in our Souls, we have e're this
willingly plucked out a Right Eye, and cut off a Right Hand, for the sake of
God. Why should we not then at the Call of God readily part with a Limb, and
leave Him room to say, Now I know that thou fear me, because thou have not
withheld thy Child when I called for it! It was from God that we did Receive
those dear Pledges our Children, and it is to God that we Return them. We
cannot quarrel with our God, if about those Loans he say unto us, Give them up,
you have had them long enough! We knew what they were, when first we took them
into our Arms: We knew that they were Potsherds, that they were Mortals, that
the Worms which usually do kill them, or at least will eat them, are but their
Names-sakes, and that a Dead Child is a sight no more surprising than a broken
Pitcher, or a blasted Flower.

But we did not, we do not know, What they might be, in case they were
continued among the Living on the Earth. We cannot tell whether our Sons would
prove as Plants grown up in their Youth, and our Daughters as Corner-stones
polished after the similitude of a Palace; or, whether our Sons might not, like
Isaac's Son, do those things that would be a grief of Mind unto us, and our
Daughters like Iephta's Daughter, be of them that Trouble us. Christians, let
us be content that our wise and good God should Carve our Portion for us; he
will appoint us none but a goodly Heritage. Our Temptation is no more than what
is common to Men, yea, and to good Men. The biggest part of those Humane
Spirits that are now beholding the Face of God in Glory, are such as dwelt in
the Children of Pious people, departed in their Infancy. And what have we to
say, why we should not undergo it as well as they! Was the Infant whose Decease
we do deplore, one that was very Pretty, one that had pretty Features, pretty
Speeches, pretty Actions? Well, at the Resurrection of the Just we shall see
the dear Lambs again; the Lord Jesus will deal with our dead Children as the
Prophets* Elijah and Elisha did by those whom they Raised of Old; he will bring
them to us, recovered from the pale Jaws of Death; and how Amiable, how
Beautiful, how Comely they will then be, no Tongue is able to express, or Heart
conceive. Though their Beauty do Consume in the Grave, yet it shall be Restored,
it shall be Advanced, when they shall put off their Bed-cloths in the Morning
of the day of God. Again, Was the Infant now lamented, very suddenly snatched
away? and perhaps Awfully too! not merely by a Convulsion, but by Scalding, by
Burning, by Drowning, by Shooting, by Stabbing, or by some unusual Harm? Truly,
it is often so, that the quicker the Death, the better. It is more desirable
for our Children to feel but a few Minutes of Pain, than it is for them to lie
Groaning in those exquisite Agonies which would cause us even our selves to
wish that the Lord would take them out of their Misery. As for any more
grievous and signal circumstance attending of our Dying Children, our best
course will be to have it said of us, They ceased, saying, The Will of the Lord
be done! As the Love or Wrath of God is not certainly declared in, so, our
Grief before him should not be too much augmented by such things as these. And
it is a favor, if so much as one of our Children be left alive unto us. Let
not the sense of one Trouble swallow up the sense of a Thousand Mercies. The
Mother from whom a violent Death has taken one of her two Children, may
immediately Embrace the other and say, Blessed be God that has left me this!
But once more, Is the gone Infant an only Child? Are we now ready to sigh, All
is gone! Nay, Thou have but a poor All, if this were All. I hope, thy only
Child is not thy only Joy. If thou have ever passed through the New Birth, the
sense of thy Soul is, One Jesus is worth Ten Children; yea, One Christ is worth
Ten Worlds. What though all thy Candles are put out! The Sun, the Sun of
Righteousness is arising to thy Soul for ever. An undone Man art thou indeed!
that have thy little Glass of Water spil'd or spoiled, while thou have a
Fountain, a Living Fountain running by thy Door! The blessed God calls thee, My
Child; and that is infinitely better than, A Name of Sons and of Daughters.

Finally, Have we any Doubts about the Eternal Salvation of the Children which
we have Bur^ed out of our sight? Indeed, as to grown Children, there is often
too sad cause of suspicion or solicitude; and yet here, the Sovereign disposals
of God must be submitted unto. Besides, Tho it may be, we could not see such
plain Marks and Signs of Grace in our Adult Children as we could have wished
for, nevertheless they might have the Root of the matter in them. There are
many Serious, Gracious, Well-inclined young People, who conceal from every
body, the Evidences of their Repentance, the Instances of their Devotion. You
cannot tell what the Lord did for the Souls of your poor Children before he
took them out of the World. Perhaps they sought, they found Mercy, between the
Stirrup and the Ground. The Child of a Godly Parent, is not to be despaired of,
tho turned off the Gallows.

But as to young Children, the Fear of God will take away all matter of Scruple
in the Owners of them. Parents, Can you not sincerely say, That you have given,
as your selves, so your Children, unto God in a Covenant never to be forgotten?
Can you not sincerely say, That you have chosen God in Christ for the Best
Portion, as of your selves, so of your Children? Answer to this: If your
Children had been spared unto you, would it not have been your care to have
brought them up in the Nurture and Admonition of the Lord? Would you not have
used all Prayers and Pains to have engaged them unto the Service of the Living
God, and unto a just prejudice against all the vile Idols and vain courses of
the World? Then, be of good cheer: Your Children are in a better place, a
better state, than you your selves are yet arrived unto. The Faithful God had
promised, I will be their God, as well as thy God. O say, This is all my
Desire, tho the Lord suffer not my House to grow. Those dear Children are gone
from your kind Arms into the sweet Bosom of Jesus, and this is, by far the best
of all. To have Children this Day in Heaven! Truly this is an Honor which
neither you nor I are worthy of. But so it is; The King of Kings has sent for
our Children to conferr a Kingdom on them. They are gone from a dark Vale of
Sin and Shame; they are gone into the Land of Light and Life and Love; there
they are with the spirits of Just men made perfect; there they serve the Lord
Day and Night in His Temple, having all Tears wiped from their Eyes; and from
thence methinks, I hear them crying aloud unto us, As well as you love us, we
would not be with you again; weep not for us, but for your selves; and count
not your selves at Home till you come to be, as We, for ever with the Lord.

I have done. The fit Epitaph of a Dead Infant, That, That alone is enough to
be the Solace of a Sad Parent, Of such is the Kingdom of Heaven.

FINIS.
Extract of a Letter.
Westfield, 14th. 6 M. 1686.
I Am sorry to hear that God has laid you under that Exercise you spoke of in
your first Letter, in the Death of Children. But if Heathenish Men could take
their little Babes and burn them in the red Fire, in Love and Honor to their
Idol-God, the Devil; how should we who have Hope in God, blush at the least
Heart-risings against such Determinations as are made by his all-disposing
Providence, whereby he picks and chooses what Flowers please him best. We have
nothing too sweet for Him.

I sometimes have been refreshed in like Cases by such Thoughts as these: Viz.

I pausing on it, this sweet refreshed my thought,
Christ would in Glory have a Flower sweet, prime,
And having Choice, chose this my branch forth brought:
Lord take it: I thank Thee, Thou take ought of mine.
It is my Pledge in Glory: Part of me
Is glorified in it, now, Lord, with Thee.
Grief over would flow, and Nature fault would find
Were not thy Will my Spell, Charm, Joy and Gem;
That as I said, I say, Take Lord, they are thine:
I piecemeal pass to Glory do in them.
I joy, may I sweet flowers for Glory breed; Whether Thou gett'st them fresh,
or lett'st them seed.

E. T.


