Wussukwhonk En Christianeue asuh peantamwae INDIANOG, Wahteauwaheonaount
Teanteagquassinish, Nish ENGLISHMANSOG Kodtantamwog Indianog Wahteaunate kah
Ussenate, En michemohtae Wunniyeuonganit.

Wussukwhosik nashpe Cotton Mather, Englishmanne Nohtompeantog, nampoohamunate
kodtantamoonk Edward Bromfield Englishmanne Nanawunnuaenuh, noh ukkodanmnumau
yeu womoausue Magooonk en Indiansut.

MVSHAVWOMVK, Printeuun nashpe Bartholomew Green, kah John Allen. 1700.

Wussukwhonk EN INDIANSUT, Neeg wehquetogeeg oowesuong Jesus Christ,
Nullordeumun, wuttaieyeuoh kah Nenawun. Kitteamonteanitteaonk apehtunko^k kah
wunohteaonk wutch Godut kooshinonut kah wutch nulLordeumun Jesus Christ.
KOOwehquetumonumwoo, Neematog, nashpe ummonaneteaongash God, unnantamoe
natwontamunate ^ish wunnamuhkuteyeuash yeuut wussukwhonganit Ut wabesuoga^n it
kah womoausuonganit God yeush (...) w^^^mook: Yeush Noowaongash quttauwemocutch
ut kuttahhoowout.

Kuppey a^numwoo paudtanunnate yeu nehtamoonk; Webe wuttinneum bkook Lord Jesus
Christ nashpe mamusse kuttahhoowoash; newutche, natwontamook uttoh an mogagish
kutusseanshuken.

Wunnamuhkut woh kussimwoo, Jehovah, kummishanakausuwehtunkqun.

Ne Q^oshowaonk God, Nag nuttinnoog, matta wamissiminneumeoneg, ken
nummissinninneum, kah nag gish noowaog, keen Nummanittoom.

Ut kuhhogkaout, Christian Indianog, nenawun Christian Englishmansog, nashpe
monchanata^w^ wekontamoonk nunnaumumum ne Quoshodtuonh pakodche nnih. Kah
sunnamatta kenaau kummonchanatamumwoo yeu wutuffeeonk God?

Tohsohke kenaau mat peantamoog, kenishkeneunkqussimwoo kah
kukkittumunkeyeumwoo kah kuppogkenumwoo kah kapposkissimwoo; Qut God ut wunnana
wontamooonganit wogl^ouunum Englishmansog Womoausuonk kukkuhkootomunkqunaout
wahteauonk, noh webe wunnamuhkuttee Manit kah Jesus Christ noh anoonut, nnoh
sampoi wahteaunnate ne micheme pomantamoonk

Asquam kenootamumwoo Sobsumoe Wunaunchemokaonk God, na ahquompak wanne
koo-Christeumumwop, wanne annoosey^g kah wanne Manittoemeyog, u^ muttachkit
Neit apeyog ut wuttahpebannit Mattannit, mafinobteamukeeg nashpe nagum ussenate
wuttenantammoonk. Na abquompak kenaau kummattamagoemumwoo, matta
kenoswehtamumwoo kutasoekekodteamumwos, kah kutussemwoo moocheke matchekedtant
amoong ash, kuppomantamumwoo ishkauanittuonganit, kussekene asimwoo kah
kussekenaattimwoo ishkauanittuonganit, kussekeneasimwoo kah kussekenaattimwoo
Kuppomantamumwoo ut pohk^nahtu^kah asootuonganit; nux, kenupmwoo, ash
p^mantam^g; kah moochcke kenuppooonganoo kukketeahogkounooog auog en muttae
pohkenaiyeuut, kah awakompanae ayeuonganit.

Missi ukkitteamonteanitteaonkaneuoo ut Englishmansog, matra we be
kuttinninnumunkqunaout monataih mutraohkee wanegukish, qut
koowahteauwahikqunaout may ne sagkompagunuomocuk en micheme pomantamoonganit.
Matta pahtoooog Englishmansog weenauwetuonk wutche kenaau; wamut onkquatunk
oadich^caog Englishmansog wu^che nishnoh teag ne a^^^munumopanneg wutche
Indianog; Matta, qut kukkuhkootamunkoopanneg Wanaunchemooka^^^ Christ, atquam
ne kukkodtantamumwoo, kah ayi^^ wog Wunaunchemook ^onk Christ mo
^ohunnoadti^nooudt, tohkonogque malishadtauog moocheke muttanongane
poundtooooash, on^ kenaau woh kutahtomwoo Wunaunchemookaonk God.

Monatash ennomaiyeuteaon gash, yeu waj woh kuttabuttantamumwoo womoausue
Englishmanog, newutche naumoh^ttit Indiansog poshkino^g, noochumwehtahwhoog,
kah naken nuppooog; ukkitteamonteanumouh kah wunnanauwanumouh. Englishmanog
missi ketompaog: y^^ waj woh koowomonomwoo Englishmanog neane kooshoowong, kah
k^mattooog: Toh n^it kenaau marwaweyog ayeuuhkone Englishmansog; asuh tohneit
kummagumwoo aninnumoad^uonk en nummatwomunonut, neit kutonkquadtausimwoo
machi^k wutch wanegik; kah neit kutogqueneunkqussimwoo Askook togquodchit, neh
howae Indian pasooont en nootaut mahche Askook nano kussoppissu, chohkoohwhau
nnoh Indianoh kah wunnushoun.

Qu^ mat wohkukquoshinnue missi kitteamonteanitteaouk mistugkenuk God,
wekontamwaheonate Englishmanog k^nohtinukqunate yeu womoausuonk Jehovah.
Missuglten God annoonont Wunaunchemookaonk en kuhhogkaout, woh kussimwoo,
Honane K^s^kquie Ketas^oot natinneaham? nuppooe Atium? asuh Papekq?

Mahc^e ku^ohtomwoo Wunaunchemook^onk, Missinninnueg apitcheg pohkenaiyeuut
naumwog missi ^^qu^i; kah apb^ttit wutohket kah wutonkouchtom Nuppooonk, wequai
speemoo. Newaieh yeu wunnetoonk God, mishontoowagk, Vttoh unne wunnegen God?
kah yeu oonenehuwaonk God woh usluwehteamoo en aiu^koianatamunate.

Tob unne wum^egen God? noh kuttinninumunkqun Wus^ukwhongash, nish
tapenunmoougish koowaeantamwahikqunnaou en wadeha^i^tuongani^, Vpbookum God,
pomantamo^ Vpbo^kum, Vpbib^eum qushkinnumuk en Indiane unnontoowaonganit. U^
kenugke wame muttanonganogkuss^og Indianog wu^ohtimoneash, ut yeu missi chippi
muttaohke^; matta howae Indiane wutohtimoin webe kenaau, ohtoog Upbibleum
nehenwonche unnontowaonganit, kenaau kummithetteamwoo en kesukqut. Kah
kutahtomwoo ukkatechizaongash kah onkatoganash upbookumash ut nehenwonche
Indiane unnontowaonganit kattaninnumonkqunaount wohtamunate Upbiblcum

Kukkunkootomonteamwoo onk pasuk nont webe God, nashpe nagum wame
teanteagquassinish; yeuoh JEHOVAH wunnamubkuttee God kah pomantamwae God.

Onk missugken kum-Manittoomun, kah mishe menuhkesu; oowohwohtamoonk matta
wohkukquoano: kah God womoausu kah numwohtea kitteamonteanitteaonk, chehcheke
musquantam, kah monat Vmmonaneteaonk? Kah Jehovah sampweussu ut wame ummayut,
and wunnetupanatam wame wittanakausuonganit.

O^k ut pasuk Manittoout ne Wutooshimau, Wunnaumonniin and wunnetupanatamwe
Nashauanit, and yeug nishuog pasukooooog.

Onk negonne kuhquttum God ummissinninneumoh en wunnaumonakononate mukki^g
nashpe Jesus Christ, and noh ^ezteunk wame neane weogkontog ut nehenwonche
wuttenantamooonganit.

Onk we^ke kutchissik ayim God Kesuk and obke, and wunnaumun G d nishnoh teag
mahche kezteunk and kusseb mo ahche wunnegen.

Onk kogkounum (asuh quaquanunnum) God wame ceanteagqussinish nas^pe
ummenuhkesue wuttinnoowaonk.

Onk nnihyeuog Angelsog, neg wuttenn^^^^^^ Nashauanittooog, annoonooog nah
wunnanaunonaount neg pish ^ump^nukeeg wadchanittuonk; Kah apoog onkatogkeeg
Angelsog neg matta wadchanumoogeg wunnegonappuonganoo, qut nukkodtumwog
wutappuonganoo kah wadchanoog ut michemohtag Chainsash agwe pohkenahtu en
wussittumooonganit ne mohsag kesuk^d.

Onk God kezheop wosketompuh neaunak nehenwenche wuttinnussuonk

Onk nashpe pasuk wosketomp, nashpe Adam kah ummittamwussoh Evah, nag meechwog
ummeechummuonk Mahtug ne God ukquhtinouh, Ma^eheseonk petutteau mutta^hket kah
Nuppooonk nashpe Matcheseonk kah nemehkuh Nuppooonk nuhkuhkauau wame
missinnin^uog newutche wame matchesebettit.

Onk God wus^aumowomontam muttaok, newaj maguk Wunnukquttegheonob, onk howan
wunnamptauont, matta wob awakompanau, qut woh ohtau micheme pomantamooonk

Onk Christ noh wutche Israelitsog nashpe weyans, noh aneukausit wame Manit
micheme wunniyeu.

Onk, Jesus Christ neemunum en wuhhogkat neyanayeuunate wuttinneumunat, kah
namhet netatuppe wosketompaut, hohpaheau wuhhogkuh kah noswehtamwae Nupp^o
pummetenkapunae Nuppooonk Newajeh God qunnunkqueu misheheop kah
oowesuonganukauopoh aneuk^m^^moo wame Wesuongash.

Onk God missohham K^suk uttoh ad^ pish Wussittuk mutta^k u^ sampweusseonganit,
nashpe neh wosketompuh (Lord Jesus Christ) anonobeh, yeu wame wosketompaog w^h
wunnamuhkut oowabtineau, newutche wutomuhkinub wu^ch Nuppunate.

O k H^ur peraumoo, na ut wame ut wenohkeit apiteh^eg pish nootamuneau
oowadtauatonkqussuonk Lord Jesus Christ, kah pish sohhamwog, neg wunne^sseecheg
eu omohkenate en Pomantamoconganit and neg mateh^secheeg omohkena^s en
Awakompanaonganit.

O^k noowadchanitteamun, nashpe Kitteamonteanittu^nk nashpe Wunnamptamooonk and
matta nashpe nehenwonche nenawun, ne ummagooonk God.

Onk nashpe Jesus Christ kohkotomouteaog abquoantamoadtin matcheseongash, and
nashpe ^^uoh wame Wanamptogeeg sampwanumoog.

Onk Wunnamptamwe imnoowaonk onk nag Wanamptauoncheg God, woh abchue usseog
wunanakausuongash, newutche yeush wunnegenash and wutchaiyeuong anooooash wutch
wosketompaog.

Onk noh nooche usseit wunanakausuonk ut nuhhogkanonut, pish upkodehe ussen no
pajeh ukkesuk^dtumus Jesus Christ.

Woi kuttumunge Indianog; Ketassoot Kesukqu^ and ohkeit adtahtunk yeush
sohsumoe teanteagquaffinish wutche onkatoganash wutohtimoneash ut muttaohket
(neg paguanoog, newutche quenauhikquog wohwchtamoonk) qut Koowabteauwahitteanash

Yeuyeu missi ne kutanakaufuonganoo, att^^unum^enate wunnamuhkuteyeuuk ut
womonittuonganit.

Wimnamptamog wunamuhkuteyeuuk, ne^ kenunnook asuh menuhkenook ne
Kitteamonteanittea^ Wuunoowaonk ne God ayik weeche ummissinuinneumoh nashpe
Jesus Christ. Unnok.

W^i Schsumoe Jehovah, pasuk God, Wutooshima^, Wunnaumoniin and
wunnetupanatamwe Nashauanit; Nanous Kukkitteamonteanitteaonk yeuyeu
noowekonta^wahikqun kittinninnumaunate nuhhog, onk woh nutoheo wnnnaiye^onk
webe ut Kuhhogkat, nnoh Nummanitt^om and Nussampoiyeum (asuh nutahtoonk)
micheme. Kah nuhhog nummagon en Wunnaumonuh God abtauunate Samp^^usseonk and
wadchanittuonk and quiunupp^^ peyaonaonk en Watooshimau, nashpe Nagum: Kah
nuhhog nummagon en Wunnashauanis God, onk wo^ noowahtedh Wunnaum niin and
o^womononate and ootinninneumuhkouonate, and wek ntamoe metahuc ussenato
Naumatuongash Nuppo^qu^chwussueneum

Ku^tumunge Indian! Ponush Ku^tah ka^ k nutch^g yeu Wunnoowaonganit. Ogk ^aman
kah nootaman yeu wunnoowaonkan^ Kut^^oongash, U, Lord, Noowek^^itam; Lord! noo^
elcontum

Y^u Wunnoow^onk le^dtantamup God as imunate weeche mona^g li d^^nog
^u^oh^imou^ash ^keratrean^u^gano^: qu^ ma^a wuttapen^^noounneau. Kah newu c^^
ma^^ wo^^p neamoounn au yeu waj paguanoog na^hpe U kqu^^u^q^e W^ss^tumooongash
God, n^an^ ^^^u^q^ash ut Touohkomuk Mohtuttaash nas^ p^ N o^au

Nullordeun ^ J ^us Christ kuhquuum Baptizaonk menu^kereahac K^nkinn^^su^nk yeu
Wunnoowaonk. Neg me^ahhoowac n^munuke ^ ^eu Wunnoowaonk l^shnon^ Baptiz^og
nashp^ Ukku^koo^umwetenenuh Jesus Christ N^htomp^antog lok^nuk Nippe ut
kuhhogkat, ut o^w^su^nganit Wutooshimau, Wunnaumon^^kah wunn^ upanatamwe
Nashauanit, wussin God, Kitunnumauunun ^^henwonche nuhhog kah Nuk i
^eamont^ani^^eaonk kah (...) quoantamoadtuonk kah K^suk; K^h ku^sh^^nt neil
kussim, Lord, neen kutta^h^, wudchanen! Lord wekon^amwe neen kittinninn^um.

Kah ^euyeu m^nul ke usseck noswehtamunate Wuum^u^^ma^uong^sh kui-Lordeumwoo
kum-Manoohoowaeneum.

N^wu ^^e annoonau God en kuhhogkaout wekontmo^ Wunaunchemokaonk, onk neetu
wutch kena^u wadchanuwaenin, ku^shnont kuttabuttanmauomwoo God, kah
wahteauwaheuk kuttabuttantamoonk nashpt Nosw^htamoonk

Ahque cheketok Jehovah kesukque Ketassoot, noh wunnanumukqueog nashpe
Nashauanhtue Wunnanittuongash ut kesukque ayeuonganehtu nashpe Jesus Christ
Nullordeumun! Woi mattammagwe and asooge missinninnuog, toh neit yeu kuttin
oadtuhkauoneau Jehovah.

Plukquodtash wutannoo^eamoongash God, kah yeush wame wunnetupanatamweyeuooash,
sampoi^euash and wunnegenuooash. Nish piuk wutannooteamoongash God
kukkuhkootomunkqun, Woi Indiane Netomp! Womononate Jehovah kum-Manittoom weeche
wame Kuttah and wame Kukketeahogkou and wame Kuttenantamoonk and womonnonate
ketatteamung neane Kuhhog. Natwontash yeush Piuk wutannooteamoongash ne
ahhuttahshe kenaum pluk Kuppohchanutchegash.

Negonne Wutannooteamoonk ne, um Manittomuhkon onkatogkeeg Manittooog ut
anaquabeh, Yeu nauwuttamun, Sohsumwah ne webeyeue wunnamu^kuttee Jehovah, webe
Lordut Jesus Christ and Wowussumau nagum, nashpe Kukketeahogkou and Kuhhog, and
matta howan onkatog qut webe nagum. W^ekontash nnoh ut, yeuoh Pabuhtanum, yeuoh
Womous, yeuoh Peantamau, wuttinnoowaonk Nootas^, and Ketoohamau Waenomaonk.

N^h^h o^u wutannooteamoonk, ne A^imauuhkon Kuhhog Nunnukontunk, you
nauwuttamun, Kunkinneasish and nanaeihteash wame ukkuhkoowaongash ut
wowussumaonganit God kah matta onkatoganash, qut yeush w^be nish ku^quttum God
nagum.

Nishwe wutannooteamoonk ne, Neemunumoohkon OOwesuonk Jehovah kum-Mani^toom
tahnooche, yeu nauwuttamun, U wame wauflumaonganit God, nahnaunne ut
chadch^ke^euaonganit nanawontamwe avish, kah nagwu^teae quttianumo^ auwohteash
nishnoh teag n^ nashpe God noowahteauwahikqun Wuhhog, OOwesuongash,
Wuttinnoowaongash kah Wutanak^usuongash

Y^ue tahshe Wu^annoot^am^onk, ne Mehquoantash Sabbath day kuppahketeauunate,
yeu na uwuttamun, chippe ponush Manittoe ukk sukodtum wutche Wauss^maonk God
Kah momansh nanawehteaush mamusse Ukkesukod^um wutche Peantamooonk and momansh
mamusse ukkesukodtum wutche Tabu^^antamoonk.

Na panna ta^she Wutannooteamoonk, ne Quttianum Koosh and Kookas, Yeu
nauwuttamun, nishnoh Howan quttianum ut ayeuonganit, Wessukiin kah
Ummittamwussin, Wutchetuonganog and Mukkielog, Wussontimominneunk and
Wu^tinneuminneunk, Nananuacheg and agwopehtauoncheeg, Noht ompeantogeeg and neg
Nootoge^g, kuttinne womonittinneaout kah kuttinne quttianittinneaout.

Nequtta tanshe Wuttannooteamoonk ne, Nushehteohkon, Yeu nauwuttamun,
Auwohteash nishnoh wunnegen Aninnumoadtuonk wadchanumunate nukketeaonk,
nuppomantamoonk and noonohteaonk kah onkatogkeeg uppomantamooonganoo.

Nesiusuk tahshe Wutanooteamooonk ne, Mamussehkon; Yeu nauwuttamun, Ahqueteaush
wame nishkeneunk^ussuonk ut metahnut, ut kuttoowonganit, ^ah ut uss^onganit.
Akodchish ut nishnoh teag.

Swos^k tanshe Wutannooteamooonk ne, Kummoo^ubkon, Yeu nauwuttamun, Ussish
sampwutteahae ut antuhamauaonganit kah ut wadchanumooonganit maumachiash, kah
wanne teag mat sampweusseae neemunush wutche howan, enninnumau nanouwe
Magooongash neg ut quenauhikqutcheeg.

Paskoogash tahshe Wutannooteamoonk ne, Pannoowae wauwaonuhkon ketatteamung.
Nagwutteae sampwe unnounch kah menuhke ussegk onkatogkeeg wosketompaog sampwe
unnonate: Nanawehteaush kukquehtianumoonk kah quehtianum onkatogkeeg
missinninnuog.

Piuk tahshe Wutannooteamoonk ye^, Ahchowonwontogkon, Yeu nauwuttamun,
Tapantamook meta^hoowae ne ut unnihyeuonganit ne God kuhquttumungqueong. A^que
ishkauoush onkatogkeeg wunnaiyeuonk.

Nootamook, Woi kenaau kuhkootomauwutcheeg Indianog. Tohneit Koonamptamumwoo ut
wunnoftamooonganit Lord Jesus Christ en Godut, onk woh Kussampweusseahitteamwoo
nashpe wunnoswehtammoonk Lord Jesus Christ; neit God kupponumunkou wekontamwe
Metah ussenate neaunak sampwe wutuhshuwaonk Christ, kah asuhkauonate God neane
wcmonitcheeg Noswehtamoe Mukkiesog.

Wunnamuhkut Nunnoswehtamoonk nogque en wunnetupanatamwe Godur, webe peasin:
Yeu waj asekesukokish Aiuskoiantamoe wussumook kuhhogkaoog an^quabit Lord,
newutche ne wussaume peasin.

Qut tohncit matta kenoswehtamoomwoo wuttenantamoonk God ut Jesus Christut,
neaunak wame Watanno^teamo^ongash, neit kenaau asq Wunnamptamoogeeg kah
ummusquanittea^nk God kutapehtunkumwoo. Kah tohneit kenaau matta
Wunnetupanatamwaenuog, kah matta kukkodtantamumwoo Wunnetupanatamweyeuinnate
nishnch ut unnibyeuonganit, matta kuttapenumo^mwoo obtauunate wussam poiyeu^^
W^^netupanatogeeg ut wequaiyeuut.

Hah, ahche womonogeeg Indianog, Vnnok Lord, nootowontam wame Kittinoowa^ngash
papaume wame teanteagquassinish sampoiyeuut kah nussekeneam nishnoh pannoowae
man.

Newutche, wunnamuhkut woh nuffim, Wann^ wunnetupanatamoonk, matta h^wa^
wosket^mp w^h nauoou Godoh.

Qut Neetompaog! Toh waj neit monaog ut kenugke kenaau matcheseog nashpe
Kogkeissippamoonk netatuppe nikku^me, neane wosketomp pomushadt ut pohkenahtu
nikkumme penushau ut pahsahtheganit? Kogkeissippamoonk ne Matcheseonk
ayeuuhkone nishwe tahshe Wutannooteamoonk; Newutche ne nashpe wunnegen Teag
matcheseae auwohteamuk. Kah ne matcheseonk ayeuuhkone wame piuk
Wutannooteamoongash: newutche Kogkeissippamwaen, qutchehuk Mattanitto, wahteurk
pokquenum wame Piuk Wutanncoteamoongash. Uttoh unne ku^tumunge kah
nishkencunkqussu K^gkeissipamwaen, ogque Hogsut oyomweu pusseogquanit. Woi
kuttumungeyeue lndianog, Sun kukodtauwompasimwo Christ wutche peasin
wuttattamooonk? Sun pish kummagumwoo kukketeahogkounoog wutche peasin Rum asuh
Cider. Wananetamoohteok ne unkqueneunkque Wuttinnoowaonk God; ne ogque
mishontoowau Padtohquohhanit, Kogkeissippamwaenuog matta pish ahtauouog
Wutassootamoonk God.

Kah, Tohwaj monaog ut kenugke kenaau matta sampwe wunne nananumooog
wutteateashiyeuonganooash? Kuhkootomok Kummukkiesumog, nanauanumook
Kummukkiesumog; menuhke ussegk, onk Kummukkiesumog woh Peantamunneau en Godut.
Matta ne nanoog, neit nashpe napanna tahshe Wutann ottamoonk pish
Koosumitteamwoo?

N^shpe swosuk tahshe Wutannooteamoonk pish koosumitteamwoo pomantamog ut
Sasekeneamooonganit. N g matta anakauseog, nananweseog Tohwajmatta
ku^ahtooomwoo Wetuomash, kah wuttittannohketeaong^sh and Orcha^dsash and
Netasuog and tumhowae N^h^oanakausuongash netatuppe wonk Nenawun. Naumog
nu^uhshuwaonganun, woh kutakodchimwoo; kah wogkouunook kuhhogkaoog menuhke Ana
kausinate.

Ahquompi, yeu nagwutteac menuhke kutussemwoo matta wuttameheonate asuh God
asuh wosk^tompaog, Neit neg Wunnetowog woh moacog en Moeuwehk^monganit.

Qut asquam ayik Motuwehkomunk, negonne mo^ Kuppeantamumwoo weeche matmetseonk
and mos Kenatootomumwoo ukkenoosoowaonk onkatoganash Moeuwehkomonganash
nanceswe Englishmansog kab Indiansog.

Neit woh kuppetutteam wunnetupanatamwe Wunnoowaonk kah Quoshomuaonk, yeu unne.

Metahboowae nummagumun nuhogkanonog en webeyeue wunnamuhkutee God, JEHOVAH,
noh Wutooshiman, Wunnaumoniin, kah wunnetupanatamwe Nashauanic, kah
nuppogkodtantaminnun nashpe aninnumoadtuonk God, wuttinneumuhkauonate micheme:
Kah nukquoshauomun moae wowussumonate God kah aninnummeadtinate wame neemalog
yeu ut Mooeuwehkomonganit pumushonate ut Sampwe ummayash Lord

Neit pepenamook Nohtompeantog, yeu mos Wunn^tou, Tap^nuk kah w^kontog
kukkuhkootomunkqunaout Wahteauunate Lord, kah woshwunnumunato kah Auwonteanate
Vkkuhkootomwehteaongash God, en wame missinninnutu, kah noh mos Askuhwheteau
kah Mamtunissu and muttae Peantog keme (...) weeche onkatogeeg, kah noh wunne
Nanawanum nehenwonche Week; kah noh Waenomukqussu kah Kesukquie Uppomushaonk.
Netatuppe Nohtompeantog kusnunt Konoswetamumwoo, newutche Nanawunnuwaen kah
Askuhwheteaenin wutche Kukketeahogkounouh, noh pish nampooham en Godut wutche
Kukketeahogkounouh. Kah woh kuppepenamumwoo Eldersog, neg pish wunne
Wunnanawunumunneau Vmmoeuwehkomonganit; kah en netatuppeyeue Eldersut magook
anue Quttianittuonk, kah en onkatogkeeg wosketompaog Wonk Deaconsog woh ohtoog
ut Kummoeuwehkomonganuout, quoshai^amunate nish quenauhikoongash wutche
Nohtompeantogecg kah wutche wut-Tableumut Lord. Ut Wuttableeumut Lord,
Pastorsog asuh Nohtompeantog neit pish magou en kuhhogkaout, Sohqunum^e
Petukqunnunk kah Wine ut Wuttattamwaitch, ne nauwuttamun, Wuhhog kah OOsqheonk
Lord Jesus Christ, ne Sephausu Christ wu^ch kenaau.

A^quam kummoookomoomwoo Sacrament, Natootomook Kuttahhoowoash kah
kuppomantamooonganoooash, kah aiuskoiantamoe sampooagk kumma^cheseonganoo
ayeuuhkone wame Piuk Wutaennooteamoongash, kah pean^amo^k God wutche
ahquoantamoad^uonk nashpe wunnuppooonk Jesus Christ. Kah apeog Sacramen^ut,
a^quompi kuttatumunumumwoo Petukqunnunk kah Wine, Anomitteahae unnok, Lord!
Nuttattumunum koo-Christeum! Lord! Yeu^eu nunneemunum Christ! kah Lord newutche
Christ napuk, yeuwaj nuppoomooutch nummatchese^uk k^^ (...) mantaj
Nukketeahogkou

M^hehe yeu, match^sean, neit anue matchi^ kummatahes^onk, onk orkatog^eg
missinninnuog matcheseong. Wunnetupanatamwe Manit moocheke moomoosqheau neg
matchesecheg mahche mooohkomwog Sacrament. Howan ut kenugke kenaau yeuyeu
matcheseit, nnoh Aushkomook, kah nnoh ayimook sampoounate ummatcheseonk kah
aiu^k^ianatamunnate Qut tohneit Howan nagwuteae aushkomut matta aius
oianatamoo, neit Pogkenook wutch kenugke kenaau noh matcheseanuh.

Womonogkeeg Indianog! Nukkodtumog ummayash Lord Jesus Christ, Nummenuhke
wanwon pish papquanne Kummahtissimwoo. God pish wutuhque paguanau kenaau nashpe
ummusquanittamoe wussittumooongash: Kah ut Chepiohkomukqut pish
kummishontoowam, Nutawakompanam, Nutawakompanam! wutche anue moocheke
kodtumwaeu onk wunnepagwash kenaum ut Mehtugqut.

Qut, toh neit kuppomushaumwoo ut ummayut Lord Jesus Christ, pish kutahtomwoo
anue Nashauanittue weenauwetuongash moocheke onk neg ahtongeeg wame muttaohkee
teanteagquassinish Kah nuppooog, God pish neemunau Kukketeahogkounouh
we^chauonate Angelsog. Lord Jesus Christ pi^^ Omol^kinnau kuhhogkaoog wutch
Nuppunnate en michemohtae Pomontamoonganit, Wussituumwae K^tukodtut. Pish
koonanumitteamwoo weoche Lord Jesus Christ anue mooch^ke kodtumwaeu onk
kenaumumwoo anogqsog ponkokqut, asuh quslukquanash ut ohkeit, asuh nippe
padtipp^shinsh ut Seippuut.

Yeuveu Natwontash toh Ancowai kah Lord aninnumnnksush wohwohtamoonk nishnoh ut.

WOHKUKQUOSHIN.
An EPISTLE To the Christian INDIANS, Giving them A Short Account, of what the
ENGLISH Desire them to KNOW and to DO, in order to their Happiness.

Written by an English Minister, at the Desire of an English Magistrate, who
sends unto them this Token of Love.

BOSTON, Printed by Bartholomew Green, and John Allen. 1700.

An EPISTLE To the INDIANS Who call upon the Name of Jesus Christ our Lord,
both their Lord and ours. Grace be unto you, and Peace, from God our Father,
and from our Lord Jesus Christ.
I Beseech you Brethren, by the mercies of God, that you consider seriously the
true things, Which my Epistle shall tell you. In the Fear, and the Love of God,
consider them. Let these sayings sink down into your Hearts.

I come to you, with this M^ssage; Only serve the Lord Jesus Christ with all
your Heart, for, consider how great things he has done for you

Truly, you may say, The Lord has done great things for us

It was the promise of God, I will say to them which were not my people, Thou
art my people, and they shall say, Thou art my God.

In you Christian Indians, we Christian English, do with wonder and gladness
behold that promise accomplished. And will not you wonder at it?

While you were in your Ignorance, you were wretched, and miserable, and poor,
and blind, and naked; But God in his providence has stirrid up the charity of
the English, to bring you the knowledge of Him, who is the only true God, and
Jesus Christ, whom he has sent, whom to know is Life eternal.

Before you heard the Glorious Gospel of God, you were at that time without
Christ, having no Hope, and without God in the world. Then y^ were, in the
snare of the Devil, taken Captive by him, to do his Will. Then ye were, foolish
disobedient, deceived, serving diverse Lusts and pleasures, living in malice,
and envy, hateful and hating one another. You lived in Darkness, and madness,
while you lived: yea, you were Dead while you lived; And when you Died, your
Spirits went into utter Darkness and the place of Torment.

It was great compassion in the English, not only to offer you many comforts of
this Life, but also to show you the way that leads to everlasting Life. The
English did not expect any Benefits from you; they have given you a good price,
for all that you Communicate unto them; No, but they have Preached unto you the
Gospel of Christ, even when you, being asleep, did not ask for it; and in doing
so, they have made the Gospel of Christ without charge to you, though they put
themselves to the charge of many thousands of pounds, that you might enjoy that
Favor of God. You have cause to be thanklul unto the Chari^able English; who
saw you stripped, and wounded, and Half Dead; but when they saw you they had
compassion on you, and took care of you. The English have been your great
Friends; you must be for them, as for your Fathers, and your Brothers; If you
be their enemies, or help their enemies, you will Requite Evil for Good, and
you will be, as if an Indian should bring to the fire side a Snake frozen and
starved, and the Snake after he is comforted should sting the kind Indian, and
kiil him.

But infinitely g^ea^er was the compassion of the great God in moving the
English, thus to show you the kindness of the Lord. When the great God sends
his Gosp^l to you, you may say, After whom does the King of Heaven seek? After
a dead Dog, after a Flea.

Since you have the Gospel, The people which Sat in Darkness, See a Great
Light, and unto them which sat in the Region and shadow of Death, Light is
sprung up. Let this goodness of God, cause you to cry out, How Good is God? and
let it lead you to Repentance.

How good is God, who has given you the Scripture, whereby you may be made
wise unto Salvation! Gods Book, the Book of life, the Bible, is translated into
your language. Among all the thousands of Na^ions of Indians, on this mighty
half of the Wo^ld, there is not one besides you, so Lifted up to Heaven And you
have Catechisms, and other Treatises, in your own language, to help you in
understanding of the Bible.

You are Instructed, That there is but one God of whom are all things, even
JEHOVAH, He is the True God, he is the living God.

That great is our Lord, and of great Power, His understanding is Infinite,
And, The Lord is Gracious, and full of compassion, slow to Anger, and of great
Mercy: And, The Lord is Righteous in all His ways, and Holy in His works

That in the one God, there is the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit, and,
These three are One

That God has predestined His People unto the Adoption of children by Jesus
Christ, and works all things after the counsel of His own Will.

That in the Beginning God created the Heavens and the Earth, and God saw all
that He had made, and behold, it was very good.

That God upholds all things, by the word of his Power.

That there are Angels, who are Ministering Spirits, sent forth to minister for
them, who shall be Heirs of salvation; And there are other Angel^, who k^p^ not
their first Estate, but left their own Habitation and be Reserved in
everlasting Chains under Darkness, unto the Judgment of the great Day.

That God created man in Hi^ own Image.

That by one man even by Adam, and his wife Eve, ea^ing the F^uit of a Tree
forbidden by God unto them Sin entered into the world, and Death by Sin: and so
Death is come upon all men, for that all have sinned.

That God so loved the world, as to give His only Begotten Son, that whosever
Believes on Him shou d not perish but have ever^asting Life.

Tha Christ, who is of the Israelites as concerning the flesh, is, God over all
Blessed forever.

That Jesus Christ took upon Him the form of a Servant, and being found in
fashion as a man, He humbled himself, and became obedient unto Death, even the
Death of the Cross. Wherefore God has highly ex^lted Him, and given Him a Name
above every Name.

That God has appointed a Day in which He will Judge the world in
Righteousness by that Man the Lord Jesus Christ whom he has Ordained, whereof
He has given Assurance unto all men, in that He has raised Him from the Dead.

That the Hour is coming, in which all that are in their graves, shall Hear the
voice of the Lord Jesus Christ, and shall come forth, they that have done Good,
unto the Resurrection of Life, and they that have done Evil, unto the
Resurrection of Damnation.

That we are saved by Grace, through Faith and this not of our selves, but it
is the Gift of God.

That through Jesus Christ is Preached unto us the forgiveness of Sins, and by
Him all that Believe are made Righteous.

That it is a Faithful saying, That they who Believe in God, should be
careful to maintain good Works, for these things are good and profitable unto
men

That He who has begun a good Work in us, will finish it until the day of
Jesus Christ.

Poor Indians; The Lord of Heaven and Earth, has hid these Glorious things,
from other nations of the Earth, (who are destroyed for the lack of knowledge)
and has Revealed them unto you.

It is your main Duty now, to Receive this Truth in the Love of it.

If you do Receive it, Let it appear, by your consenting to that Covenant of
Grace, which God has made with His People, through Jesus Christ. Say,

O Glorious Jehovah, One God, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit; Thy Free Grace,
does now help me to give my self unto thee, That I may be happy in thee alone,
as my God, and my Portion forever: and to give my self unto the Son of God that
I may obtain Righteousness and Salvation, and be brought Home unto the Father
th^ouh Him; and to give my self unto the Spirit of God, that I may know the
Son, and Love Him, and serve Him, and have an Heart to keep the Laws of my
Redeemer.

Poor Indian, Let thy Heart, and thy Hand, be put unto this Covenant When thou
Read and Hear the Words of this Covenant, Let thy Tongue say, Lord, I am
Willing, Lord, I am Willing.

This Covenant of God, was offered unto many Nations of your N^ighbours, but
they Refused it. And because they Refus^d it, they are destroyed by the
Dreadful Judgments of God, just as one would Burn up the Trees in the
Wilderness.

The Lord Jesus Christ, has appointed Baptism, to be the Seal of this
Covenant. When you heartily lay Hold on the Covenant, you must then be
Baptized, by a Minister of Jesus Christ. When a Minister pours Water on you, In
the Name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit, God says, I give you my
Self, and my Grace, and Pardon and Heaven; and you must say, Lord, I am thine,
Save me: Lord, I am willing to be thy servant.

And now, it must be your endeavor to keep the Laws of your Lord Redeemer.

Because the Lord has sent you good Tidings of great Joy, that unto you, there
is born a Savior, you must be thankful to Him, and show your Thankfulness by
your Obedience.

Will you be Rebellious against the King of Heaven, who has Blessed us with
Spiritual Blessings, in Heavenly Places, through Jesus Christ our Lord? Oh,
Foolish people and unwise, If you so Requi^e the Lord.

God has given you Ten Commandments, which are all Holy, and Just, and good.
Those Ten Commandments require, thee, my Indian Friend, To Love the Lord thy
God, with all thy Heart, and all thy Soul, and all thy Mind, and, To Love thy
Neighbor as thy Self. Look upon these Ten Commandments, as often as upon thy
Ten Fingers.

The first Commandment is, Thou shall have no other Gods before my face. That
is, Glorify the only True God, Jehovah, only in the Lord Jesus Christ, Let thy
Love, thy Trust, thy Joy be placed on Him, and pray to Him, and Hear His word,
and sing His Praise: And worship Him, with Soul and Body: And none else besides
Him.

The second is, Thou shall not make to thy self any Image. That is, Observe
such Ordinances in the Worship of God, as God Himself has ordained; And None
but such.

The third is, Thou shall not take the Name of the Lord thy God in vain. That
is, In all the Worship of God, and especially in Swearing, be very Serious.
And, Neither Irreverently nor unprofitably make us of any thing whereby God
makes Himself known unto us; as, His Names, His Words, and His Works.

The fourth is, Remember the Sabbah day to keep it Holy. That is, When the
Lords day comes, wholly set it a part for the Service of the Lord. And keep
Solemn Days of Supplication, and solemn Days of Thanks giving, when there is
occasion for them.

The fifth is, Honor thy Father and thy Mother. That is, Let every man be
respected in his Place; Let Husbands and Wives, Let Parents and Children, Let
Masters and Servants, Let Rulers and Subjects, Let Pastors and People, Show
suitable Respects to one another.

The sixth is, Thou shall not kill, That is, Use all due means, to preserve our
own Life, and Health, and Peace, and the Life of others.

The seventh is, Thou shall not Commit Adultery. That is, Shun all unchaste
Filthiness, of Heart, and of Speech, and of Action: Be Modest in every Thing.

The eighth is, Thou shall not Steal.

That is, Be Honest in increasing, and preserving our Estates, and unjustly
take away nothing of another man's, but give Alms to them that are in want.

The ninth is, Thou shall not bear False witness against thy Neighbor. That
is, Evermore speak the Truth our selves, and Labor that the Truth may be
spoken by others; and particularly, be Tender as of our own Credit, so of other
men's.

The tenth is, Thou shall not Covet. That is, Let our Heart be content with
what condition God shall order for us, and Let not our Heart burn with any Envy
against the prosperity of others.

Hear, O Instructed Indians. If you Believe in the Obedience which the Lord
Jesus Christ yielded unto God, that you may be Righteous by the obedience of
the Lord Jesus Christ, then, as a sign of it, God gives you an Heart to imitate
His exemple as far as you can, and be Followers of God, as Obedient Children.

Indeed it is but little Obedience that you can yield unto the Holy God: And
you must with daily Repentance, Loath and Judge your selves before the Lord for
its being so little.

But if you don't Obey the will of God in Jesus Christ, with Respect unto all
His Commandments, you are unbelievers, and the wrath of God abides on you. And
if you be not Saints, and persons who Desire and study to be Holy in all manner
of conversation, you will not be meet for the Inheritance of the Saints in
Light. Come then, Say, my dear Indians, O say, Lord, I count thy Precepts
concerning all things to be Right, and I hate every false way. For indeed I
must tell you, Without Holiness no man shall see the Lord.

Is it so, my Indians? How comes it then to pass that many of you fall into the
sin of Drunkenness, as easily, as a man going in the Dark, falls into a Pit?
The sin of Drunkenness, is against the Third Commandment; for it abuses the
Good creatures of God. And it is against all the Ten Commandments; For a
Drunken man, Tempted by the Devil, will soon break all the Ten Commandments.
How miserable do you make your selves, even like a Swine wallowing in the mire,
when you make your s^lves Drunk? Unhappy Indians! will you sell Christ, for a
little Drink? Will you truck away your souls, for a little Rum, or Cider? Don't
forget the Terrible Word of God, which sounds like the Thunder, Drunkards shall
not inherit the Kingdom of God.

And, Why have so many of you, so Little Order in your Families? Teach your
Children, Rule your Children, do what you can, that your Children may pray to
God. Else the Fifth Commandment will condemn you.

The eighth Commandment will condemn you, if you Live in Idleness. They that
work not at all, do walk Disorderly. What ails you that you cannot have your
Houses, and Orchards, and Cattle, and gainful Trades, as well as We? Let our
enample shame you, and spur you, into Diligence?

When you exercise your selves to keep a Conscience void of offense, toward
God, and toward men, Then it is time for your Godly Men, to Gather a Church.

But when you Gather a Church, you must Pray with Fasting over the undertaking,
and ask the Advice of other Churches, both English and Indian.

You must then Enter into solemn Covenant, and promise after this manner.

We heartely give up our selves to the Only true God, JEHOVAH, who is Father,
Son, and Holy Spirit, Resolving by His Help, to Serve Him forever. And we give
our selves to one another, promising, that by the Help of God, we will Worship
Him together, and Help one another in the Right ways of the Lord.

After this you must Choose a Pastor, who must be a Good Man, Able and Ready to
feed you with the Know^edge of the Lord, and Open and Apply the Oracles of God,
unto the whole Flock, and a Watchful, and Sober man, and a man much in Prayer,
both by himself, and with you, and one that Rules well his own House, and a
man of Good Report, and one of an Heavenly conversation.

When you have such a Pastor, you must Obey him, as having the Rule over you,
and watching for your Souls, being to give an Account of them. And you may Join
to him, Elders that shall Rule well; and unto such Elders you must give more
Honor then unto other men. Deacons also should be in your. Churches, to
Provide Necessary things both for the Pastor, and for the Table of the Lord. At
the Table of the Lord, your Pastors will then administer unto you, Bread
Broken, and, Wine in a Cup, to signify the Body, and the Bl^od of the Lord
Jesus Christ, which were once offered unto God for you. Before the
Administration of that Sacrament, you must spend some time, in searching your
Hearts, and Lives, and in mourning over all your sins against the Ten
Commandments, and in crying to God, for the pardon of them, through the Death
of Jesus Christ. And, at the Sacrament, when you Receive the Bread and the
Wine, you must with all seriousness, inwardly say, Lord! I Receive thy Christ!
Lord, I Receive thy Christ! And, Lord, Because thy Christ did Die, therefore let
my sin Die, and let my Soul Live.

If after this, you fall into Sin, your sin will be worse then other men's The
Holy God will be very Angry at them, that sin after the Sacrament. If any of
you do now sin, you must Reprove one another, and bring the sinful to
Confession and Repentance. But, if they are Incorrigible, you must put away
that wicked Person from among you

My dear Indians, If you do forsake the ways of the Lord Jesus Christ, I
earnestly testify unto you, That you shall utterly perish God will kill you,
with one Thunderstroke of His wrath after another. And in Hell, you shall cry
out, I am Tormented! I am Tormented! for more years, than you now see Leaves
upon the Trees.

But, if you do follow the ways of the Lord Jesus Christ, you will be Rich
above those people that have Money, and all Riches. At your Death, God will
take your Souls to be among the Angels. The Lord Jesus Christ shall Raise you
from the Dead unto everlasting Life, at the Day of Judgment. You shall be
Blessed with the Lord Jesus Christ, infinitely more years, than you see stars
in the Sky, or stones on the Earth, or Drops of water in the Rivers.

Now, Consider what I say, and the Lord give you understanding.

FINIS.

