Speedy Repentance urged* SERMON Preached at Boston, December. 29. 1689.

In the Hearing, and at the Request of One Hugh Stone, (...) ^^^erable Man
(...) ^^^tence of (...) for a (...) Hor^^^^^ (...) (...)

COnscientia mea meruit Damnationem, and paenitentia mea non sufficit ad
Satisfactionem: Sed (...) est quod mis^ricordi^ (...) super at (...)

THE Introduction.
OUr Blessed Savior, has given that Character of his Ministers, That they be
Rulers over His Household, and that Commandment to them, That they should give
every one their meat (...) du^ Season. Whether or no our Good Neighbors will
acknowledge our Government, which we Esteem to be not at all De^potio^ but
wholly Ministerial, and would rejoice (...) we could therein, with more
universal Edi^^^cation enjoy the Assistence of those that mig^^ Rule well,
though they Labor (...) Word and Doctrine; yet I am sure (...) ought with a
very sollicitous Fidelity to (...) our Stewardship, in that (...) which
conc^rns the Feeding of the Household. It is Food and not (...) which we are to
Entertain the Soul^ (...) people with; (...) Windy and Empty (...), and Notions
which (...) dant quia non habent, are (...) from us; but solemn and useful
(...), about Faith and Repentance and Holiness, which make up, The One Thing
Needful, and about those things without ^word4 no man shall see the Lord. And
if not Froth, much less is Poison, to be found in our Discourses: not a Snake
instead of a Fish; which alas, is now adays no less frequently, than fatally
met withal in Sermons about Justification, more than about any one Article of
Religion But in all this there is to be had a special Regard unto the Due
Season too; in which Every Thing (...) Beautiful. For, though the Efficacy of
Grace consist not in Moral Persuasions applied (as the Arminians Dogmatize*)
Tempore and Modo Congruis, in a suitable and seasonable manner; yet a Spiritual
Physician ought t^ wa^ch his Time, as well as weigh his Dose; and we should
prudently take what Advantage may be given by Providence to make this (...)
that particular Truth awakening to the mind^ of them with whom we have to do.

The Sense of these things, caused me to Preach a Sermon, which might Excite
and Assist Speedy Repentance, in that Congregation, which I would awfully
Remember my self, Accountable to the Lord Jesus for. The Due Season, which this
Homely, but I hope, wholesome Food, was adopted unto, was at the Request and
Presence of a miserable Murderer, then under a just Sentence of Death, to be
speedily Executed on him. The Man was one HUGH STONE, of Andover; who npon a
Quarrel between him and his own Wife, about Selling a piece of Land, having
some words as they were walking together, on a certain Evening, very
barbarously reached a stroke at her Throat with a sharp Knife, and by that one
stroke, fetched away the Soul of her, who had made him a Father of several
Children, and would have brought yet another to him, if she had Lived a few
Weeks longer in the World. The wretched man, was too soon surprised by his
Neighbor (...) be capable of denying the Fact; and so he pleaded Guilty, upon
his Trial. Being under Condemnation, and his End hastening upon him, he gave me
his Desires to hear a Sermon from me, before he Died* Wherefore, I thought
there was now before me a Due Season, to make a Food of such Things, as I now
also per others (and to permit them, is all I have done) to Print for the
Edification of such as the Publishers propound thereby to benefit. I confess
that I had not so much as One Day allowed me for my Original Preparations of
the Sermon; and therefore, not being able exactly to keep what I did not, could
not write, necessitates me to Alter, and doubtless to Amend some Imperfections
in it. Yet it is very near, what it was at its first Delivery; and from the
Experience which formerly I have had, in publishing a Discourse of this kind, I
encourage my self, with Hopes, that notwitstanding all the Weaknesses in it, I
may find in the Day of the Lord Jesus, That I have not Labored in vain. The
Sermon is plain; but besides my inclination at all Times to make none but such,
even an Heathen Seneca would have taught me, that on this occasion any other
would have been improper. I excuse not the ^eanness of the Composure; but am
waitin^ upon the Eternal Spirit, (...) and blows where, He ^lease, (...)

The SERMON.
Job. VII. 21. And why do thou not pardon my transgression, and take away
mine Iniquity? for now shall I sleep in the dust, and thou shall seek me in the
morning, but I shall not be.
WE have now before us, a very miserable, but we cannot excuse the hardness of
our own Hearts, if it be not also a very profitable, Spectacle. You see a poor
man in Irons here, whose crying Murders have now procured unto him that
Sentence, which will not permit him to live many hours longer in the world. His
Case does truly Preach to (...) ^ame that my Text will Preach (...) but while I
have an Eye to his particular circumstances, I shall not so overlook yours, as
to leave any one person in this vast Congregation without the Food proper in
the present season for them. This Malefactor does know that he quickly must;
and all of you do not know but you sooner may come to sleep in the Dust;
wherefore let every one of you now hear as those that are concerned to get
their Transgression pardoned, and their Iniquity taken away.

The Book of JOB, in a sweet Poesy, gives us a true History, of strange
Calamities, and stranger Deliverances befalling a famous Person, who made
Arabia the Happy, by his dwelling there. Had it not been Real and Certain
matter of Fact, which is here (...), we may not imagine that (...) Prophet
Ezekiel, or the Apostle James, would have made such References, as they did
unto it; it only remains that we do our parts to make it as useful as it is Real
and Certain.

It has been conjectured by some, that Moses was the Writer of this elegant
Narrative; and the Arabian Idioms here and there occurring in it* consist very
well with the Abode of Moses in his Exile: but it is as evident that Job lived
before Moses, as it is that he lived after Abraham.

Very wonderful Afflictions at once did surprise this Renowned Man! and under
his Troubles, we find him pouring out of his Complaints. Un^o whom? It was a
sigh that once passed from him As for me is my complaint to Man? Alas, he found
Man a Physician of no value to be complained unto; and therefore it is unto God,
that he now makes the Complaints, which our Context is the conclusion of.

In the Verse before our Text, we have both a Confession, and a Petition of a
Distressed Man.

For the Confession, we have both the Matter of it, and the Object of it. The
Matter of it, is contained in those words, I have sinned, what shall I do unto
thee? q. d. Though I am clear of many things which my Friends do accuse me of,
yet my sins before God are so manifest and so multiplied, that I can do nothing
for the vindication or expiation of my Miscarriages. The Object of it is
intimated in those words, O Thou preserver of Men, which are by some rendered, O
thou Observer of Men, q. d. God has Observed more amiss in me, than ever I
found in my self.

For the Petition, it is with an Expostulation. It is, Why have thou set me as
a Mark against thee; so that I am a Burden to my self? The Sorrows of men, are
the Arrows of God; they that (...) shot full thereof are sensible of (...) in
every one of their (...) Why have thou? is here a Deprec^tion of the evil
mentioned.

Well, if we now pass on to (...) Text, we shall have there, both^ (...), and
an Argument.

For the Petition, it is here with an Expostulation too. It Is, Why do thou not
Pardon my Transgression, and take oway my Iniquity? As before, Why do Thou?
was as much as to say, O do it not; so here, Why do thou not? is equivalent
unto saying, O do it. And it seems to follow upon the Title newly put upon the
Great God, O thou Preserver of Men; q. d. Lord, since thou art the Preserver
and the Pardoner of so many Sinners in the World, why should not I share in thy
Mercies among the rest?

For the Argument: the force of the plea for a Pardon here, seems to ly in
this, It will else quickly be too late! The terms of it are, For now shall I
sleep in the Dust and thou shall seek me in the morning, but I shall not be;
which in short is, I shall quickly be dead and (...)! To Not be, is a
Scripture-Sacred-Phrase for Dying: denoting not a total (...) but a vast
Alteration comeing upon us by Mortality* which is also here styled Sleeping,
with respect unto the condition of the Body in the Grave. And whereas we read
of the Morning, in this place, it may be an Allusion to the Morning Sacrifices
usual among the people of God; and it may carry this Import with it, q. d.
Lord, if a Morning or two hence, thou should Look to find me on my Knees as
I am now before thee, it will be too late; I shall be departed into that State,
where in, I can make no Prayer to thee, and have no Pardon from thee, World
without End.

Wherefore the Doctrine unto which you are now to give a very great Attention,
is this.

Men should be very Impor^^^^^ in their Prayers to the Eternal God, That their
Transgression may be pardoned, and their Iniquity taken away, before the Sleep
of Death bring their Great Change upon them.

For the clearing of this Truth, we have now Two Enquiries that ly before us.

Our first Enquiry is to be, What is implied in the Pardoning of Transgression
and the Taking away of Iniquity?
For answer to this; In general, The Glorious Benefit of JUSTIFICATION is
herein implied. If you ask for a Description of Iusti^ication then know, That
it is an Act of Gods Free Grace, Releasing a Believer from the Guilt of Sin,
and Accepting him as Righteous, through the Obedience of the Lord Jesus Christ.
There are two things which a Religion still pretends to make provision for; to
remove the greatest of our Troubles, and to obtain the greatest of our Desires.
The Christian Religion does both of these in a very admirable manner. The First
is done in Justification. The Distress of a Guilty Sinner lies in this point*
What shall I give for the sin of my Soul? Behold, that matter in Justification
very wonderfully provided for. The Psalmist of old, called this a Parable, and
A Dark Saying; even this, The precious Redemption of a Soul, by the Messiah
alone. Blessed be God, that we can with satisfaction penetrate a little way
into the Mystery. But I may not give you a full Discourse upon this illustrious
Head of Divinity, which indeed the Standing or the Falling of the whole Church
is concerned in the right stating of; and as I may not* so I need not insist
upon it, because, you have the published Writings of many Learned Men* on this
very point; which I (...) ^ecommend unto your (...) suppose you are all of the
Disposition, which our famous Wilson would often express, by saying, I Love
nothing so much as to see a Preacher keep close to his Text, and the Scope of
it; and therefore I shall now keep Close to my Text, by offering to you a few
Conclusions relating to JUSTIFICATION, All which the Terms used in my Text
suggest unto us; but in all, I must also keep close to the Man whom I do here
most particularly design the edification of.

Conclusion 1.
[ My Transgression] The Hebrew word for it Notes, a Transgression out of
Pride: And my Conclusion from it is, (...). There is a wicked and a cursed
Pride in the Sins of men.

The First of our sins was founded in a cursed Pride, and the most of our Sins
are tainted with it. The first sin of Adam had Pride for a main ingredient of
it. It was propounded unto him, in Genesis 3. 5. Ye shall be as Gods, Honor and
Grandeur was the Bait which he was taken with, and his Pride affected a higher
condition that that which his Maker had placed him in. The first Sin of Satan
too had Pride for its Original. Hence we are advised in 1 Timothy 36. he that is
lifted up with pride, falls into the condemnation of the Devil. It is thought
that his Dissatisfaction at some Privileges, which he foresaw Mankind likely
to be the subject of, was that which prompted him to the Rebellion and
Apostasy, in which he is now King over the children of pride. It Is thus in all
the Sins which those have been the Parents of; there lies Pride at the bottom
of them all. What S^l^mon says of one Sin, Only by Pride comes contention; the
like may be said of All Sin, Mainly by Pride comes Transgression. Upon the Root
of Pride it is, that there grows all the Disobedience to God, which is at any
time com^mitted in the World. It was the S^ying of the Prophet, in (...). If ye
will not hear, my soul shall weep in secret Places for your pride. From our
Pride it is, that we do not Hear the voice of God unto us in his Ordinances o^
in His Providence; It Is Pride that makes us thick o^ Hearing when ou^ God
councels us to Do Justice and love Me^cy, and walk Humbly with Him. Every Sin
(as one says of every man) has a Pope in the Belly of it; something that
Exalts it self against all that is called GOD. The Sinners whom Solomon calls
the Fools, are those whom David calls the pro^d. If men were not proud Fools
they would never espouse a way of wickedness; men Sin with an High Heart, and
that makes them Sin with an High Hand against the God of Heaven. Through Pride
it is, that we must have our Will, tho Gods Will be quite contrary thereunto.
And when the most High (...) his commands before us, we do, as if we were
Above* Him, say, We will not hearken therounto. Through pride it is that we
cannot bear the Order which the Sovereign God has ^ixt us in, but we take
indirect ways to relieve and alter our circumstances. And here is the R^se of
all our Miscarriages. Be sure YOU that are now in Chains before us, must
acknowledge this to be the Rise of yours. Your Proud Impatience of a little
contradiction, and your Proud Resistance to the Rules of good living, have
brought you to the Sin for which you are to die.

Conclusion 2.
[ My Iniquity] The Hebrew Word for it imports Iniquity with Crookedness and
Perverseness. And hence I form this Conclusion.

The Sins of Men have a World of ^^righteous Crookedness and Perverseness in
them.

Our Sins are not Right Things, but there is a most uncomely Obliquity in all
of our Iniquity. Every Sinner may say, as in Job. 33. 27. I have perverte^ that
which is right. The Path which God in his Word has directed (...), is a right
path, or as it is called A path of Righteousness; but sin is a wandering from it;
the Sinner goes astray in the greatness of his folly. Sin is a Deviation from a
strait Rule The Psalmist could say in Psnl: 119: 128. I esteem thy precepts
concerning all things to be right. But now every false way has a figure not
conformed unto the precepts of God. The Sinner walks in crooked paths, when God
has required, make strait paths for your selves: And he has no constant
course. One while it is one Lust, and than another, which he is madly slaving
unto; Sin is that Harlot, whereof it is said, her ways are moveable! And the
Sinner is herein a most unrighteous man: He defrauds both God and man of their
dues, with an injnstice too black to be described. But if ever there were a
perverse and an unjust man in the World, I am sure YOU that are in Irons here
ought to account your self such an one. Your F^o^ardness has pusht you on to
the most unreasonable thing that was ever done in the Land, in which you have
not now long to live.

Conclusion 3.
[ Pardon my Transgression] The word, Pardon, signifies the Removing of a Load;
yea, a Transferring of it unto him who takes it off.

Whence this Conclusion does arise*

In Justification, the Burden of Sin is Translated from the Sinner unto the
Lord Jesus Christ.

Sin is an heavy Burden upon the Soul which it lies upon; and the Sinner may
justly roar under it, as in Psalm. 38. 4. My Iniquities, as an heavy Burden, are
too heavy for me. Hence, The Bearing of Iniquity, is a phrase that sometimes
occurrs in the Book of God. Every sensible Soul, feels it like a ponderous
Mountain of Lead upon him; the Thousands of Talents which he owes unto the
Revenge of God, are ^ Weight upon him, which he finds there is no Enduring of.
Ask the Undone Murderer that is now before you, whether he feels not Sin like a
Load upon him? That Malefactor will be pressed to Death for ever, by the Dead
Weight of Sin, who shall be so Mute under his Guilt* as not to cr^ out, Lord, I
am oppressed, undertake for me. But in Justification this intolerable. Burden
is T^anslated unto the Blessed Lord Jesus Christ, who was made a Curse for us.
And thus we are told in Isa. 53. 6. God has laid on him the Iniquity of us
all. The Burden of Sin* (...) the Obligation to make Satisfaction for it; this
is a Burden enough to Break the Backs of all the Angels in Heaven, if it were
laid upon them. On Supposition of a Law given by God, and on Supposition of
that Law broken by man, there follows a Necessity* of a Satisfaction to be made
unto the Justice of that Holy One, who will be known to be of purer Eyes than
to behold Iniquity. The Rule according to which the Almighty God acts as the
Judge of the World, is the Re^titude and Holiness of His Nature; and the Law
which he has given us is Ratified with such a Sanction, that there is now no
pardoning of a Sinner without a Satisfaction to Him, Against whom only we have
sinned. Now the Obligation to pay the Debt which our Sin has run us into, is in
Justification made to fall upon our Lord Jesus Christ, who is our Surety for
Good. As one speaks well, Nostram causam Sustinebat, qui nostram sibi Carnem
aduniverat; and as I remember, Prosper expressed it, We were Crucified in Him;
or according to the Language of the ancient Cyprian, He bore both us and all
our sins. The Lord Jesus now becomes the Antitype of the Ancient Scapegoat,
upon whose Head, is laid all the Sin, which we have to answer for. There is an
Imputation in this Affair; and as it is said (...) 5. 21. God made Him to be Sin
for (...)* who knew no Sin, that we might be made the Righteousness of God in
Him; it is thus by a Divine Imputation and Constitution.

Conclusion 4.
[ Take away mine Iniquity] The word, Take away, signifies a Causing to pass
away, and indeed therein, a passing by. Whence we have this Conclusion.

In Justification the Great God causes the Sin of Men, to pass away, without
Notice of it.

Sin is passed by, and made to pass away, when it is Forgiven to us. Our God
therein says unto us, as in 2 Samuel 12. 13. The Lord has put away thy Sin. As
we do by Gods Law, in Sinning, so God does by our Sin in Forgiving. Hence the
same word, is used for both. In Sinning we pass by His Law, as a thing not
worthy of our Notice; thus in Forgiving, He passes by our Sin, without any such
Notice of it, as to Damn us, or to Judge us, for the same. Our sin becomes now,
in some sort as though it had never been at all; but as it is said, in Jer. 50.
20. Iniquity shall be sought for, and there shall be None; and Sins, and they
shall not be found. And Methinks, a poor Murderer, such an One as is within
Hearing of what we are now speaking, should have his very Heart leap within him
at the mention of such a thing. What? For such an One, when He stands at the
Bar of the Lord Jesus, to have such a Verdict brought in for him, as, Not
Guilty, there! But thus it is in Justification; God therein causes our Sin to
pass away But (...) does it pass? We have a Repl^ (...) that in, Isa. 38. 17.
Thou have cast my Sins behind thy Back. Our Sin therein passes as far from the
Avenging Eye of God, as what we cast behind us, never to be regarded any more.
Whither did I say, it passes? Nay, to advance a little further, it is said in
Mic. 7. 19 Thou will cast all their sins into the Depths of the Sea. But shall
they not Rise and Float again? Truly, a Millstone thrown into the deepest Ocean
shall sooner be brought in sight, than the Sin of one who has been a Subject of
Justification, shall ever be brought up for his Condemnation any more.

Conclusion 5.
It is observed, that the same words [ Transgression, and Iniquity] are used
both for Sin it self, and for the punishment of Sin.

Wherefore I shall here tender you this one Conclusion more.

In Justification the severe punishment of Sin, is Remitted, with the Fault it
self.

There has been a vain Distinction used about this matter, between [ Reatus
Culpae] Guilt, as Deserving of punishment; and [ Rectus Paenae] Guilt, as
Obliging to punishment. But these are so inseparable, that when Guilt is
Remitted, the punishment goes along with it. In Justification, our Bonds are
taken off, and nothing is demanded of us, as a price to A^one the Righteous
God. It was said in in Isa. 33. 24. The Inhabitant shall not say, I am sick;
the people shall be for given their Iniquity. Thus, when men are Forgiven their
Iniquity, they shall not by vindictive Justice be made to say, I am sick, or I
am poor, or, I am pained, and the like. There are no proper Paenalties
remaining for a justified man. Whatever Troubles he may afterward meet withal,
there shall not be the Wrath and the Curse of God spicing of them; and in
regard of the Second Death, it is very peremptorily declared unto him, Thou
shall not Die. It was the cry of the Psalmist, in Psalm. 143. 2. Enter not into
Judgment with thy Servant. The God of Heaven, acts not so much like a Judge, as
like a Father, to a justified man; and He not only secures him from the
vengeance of Eternal Fire, but also, puts a New and a Knd Respect upon all the
Temporal Afflictions, which do befall such a Man. The Afflictions which happen
to him, are not so much Punishments as Chastisements; and a Reconciled God
therein proceeds according to that Rule in Rev 3. 19. Whom I Love, I Rebuke and
Chasten. Yea, if a Correction be at any time employed upon him, it is at the
same time a Benefit, in that very thing which called for it. As the Dumbness of
Zachary was as much an Argument for his Faith, as a Chastisement for his
Unbelief.

And I am to tell the wretched Malefactor here, That his Prison, and his very
Gall^ws, will but be turned into his Advantages, upon his true Repentance. Man,
you shall find Honey for your Soul, in the Bowels of those Devourers, if your
Sins be once done away.

But then, our Next Enquiry is to be: Why should men be Importunate in their
Prayers to the Eternal God, for the pardon of their Sins, before the Sleep of
Death bring their Great Change upon them.
For Answer to this, Let these three Conclusions, all found in the Text, be
laid together.

Conclusion 1.
None can Forgive Sins, but God.

The Scribes of old were so far Well Instructed, as to say, in Marc. 2. 7. Who
can Forgive Sin, but God only? The true Answer is very short; None. Injuries
done to men, may so far be forgiven by Men, as men only are concerned in them.
Hence it is among the solemn Charges of the Lord Jesus, to us all, in Mat. 6. 14.
Forgive men their Trespasses. But as it was of old said, If a Man sin against
the Lord, who shall entreat for him? Even so If a Man sin against the LORD, who
shall pardon him? Injuries done to God, are to be Forgiven by Him alone, whose
Great Name is that in Exodus 34. 7. The Lord Forgiving Iniquity, and
Transgression, and Sin. It is a Maxim, Nemo potest Remittere de Iure Alieno; No
man can dispose of Another Right. Who then can Intrude, or dare Invade upon
the Great God, so as to allow for a Wrong which has been done unto His Majesty?
To Forgive Sin, is a prerogative peculiar to the God of Heaven; and it is
therefore mentioned among* His Regalia, in Mic. 7 8. Who is a God like unto
thee, that pardons Iniquity? It Is one of His Incomparable Excellencies, and a
Flower in His Glorious Crown; It Is the Glory which He will not give unto
another. Look upon sin as a Debt; still God is the Creditor; Look upon sin as a
Fault; still God is the Governor, to whom alone belongs the Remission of it.
We are advertised of this, Rom 8 33. It is God that Iustifies Ministerially to
Declare a Pardon, is one thing. This may be done by the Churches of the Lord
Jesus Chirst; as the Priests were to pronounce upon the Cleanness of the Leper.
(...) which respect our Lord said in John 20. 23. Whose soever sins ye remit,
they are remitted to them And in such a sense was the Prophet* Jeremiah to pull
down and pluck up Nations; that was, to Declare what Nations were so to be
dealt withal.

But Authoritatively to Dispense a Pardon, is another thing, and it pertains to
God alone. It was a passage of Moses, in Numb 14* 17 Let the power of my Lord
be great [The Jews find a Letter of a greater figure than usual there, to
intimate, they say, something of an extraordinary Greatness; but what is it? it
follows] Pardon I beseech thee. None but one that has the great Power of a God
can pardon Sin. The Popish Blasphemy and Villainy upon this point, was the
Scandal which first gave occasion to the Protestant Reformation; and God forbid
that any Pr^testant should Return to lick it up. Wherefore YOU that here stand
Condemned both by God and Man, are now to be put in mind, not only that we have
no* Priest, to Absolve you and Deceive you, and that the Rulers of this place
may not Pardon you, if they could: but also, if that your murdered Wife had
Forgiven you before her Expiration, this would not acquit you before the
Tribunal of the Eternal God. To invert the words of Elihu, When He gives quiet,
who can make trouble? I would say* If he trouble you, who can Quiet you? I^ He
do not forgive, none can Pardon you.

Conclusion 2*
The God of Heaven requires our Importunate Prayers, that our Sins may be
forgiven to us.

It Is an Article in that Platform of Prayer, which our Lord has given us, O our
Heavenly Father, Forgive us our Trespasses. When a certain Man had sinned at a
grievous Rate, there was this Direction given to him, in Acts 8. 22. Repent of
thy wickedness, and pray to God. And O that this Direction might penetrate into
the very Soul of the sad man that is now before us here* a Man (if he be worthy
to be called so) of whom we may say, O this Man has sinned a great Sin!
Behold, the course to be taken by every sinner. that would have a Pardon from
the Lord; Pray to God, if perhaps thy Sin may be forgiven thee. We have a
promise of a Pardon, in Ezekiel. 36. 25. I will sprinkle clean water upon you, and
ye shall be clean. But what follows? Thus says the Lord God, I will yet for
this be enquired of, to do it. We must enquire of God, and entreat of God, if
we would not perish without a Pardon forever* There is no sign of a Pardon in
any man, till it can be said of him, as in in Acts 9. 11. Behold he Prays! It Is
in Prayer that we confess our Sins, it is in Prayer that we renounce our Sins,
it is by Prayer that we cast all our Sins, upon the Lord Jesus Christ; and with
out this, the least Sin in the World is utterly unpardonable.

Even those that have been already Pardoned, are to continue praying for a
Pardon still. It Is a thing which none among the Disciples of our Lord Jesus
Christ, are to be excused from. They need the comfort of a Pardon to be
sensibly Renewed unto them; and though it have been once told unto a David, The
Lord has put away thy sin, yet he keeps praying still in the terms of the fifty
first Psalm, a Prayer fitted for the lips of all that want a Pardon. Luther
sometimes distinguished between a Secret pardon, and an open pardon; a secret
Pardon, every true Believer has, but an open Pardon implies an Assurance and
Evidence of a Pardon, which many a Believer wants. Well, if we want Assurance,
we are to pray that it may be vouchsafed; if we have Assurance, we are still to
pray, that it be continned. A Prayer for a pardon is never out of Season.

Conclusion 3.
The sleep of Death, brings upon men so great a change, that they had need make
sure of a Pardon before they are overtaken with it.

To set this Conclusion home, there are three Assertions, which methinks may
sound like so many Claps of the loudest Thunder, in the Ears of all this
Numerous Auditory; but especially of that poor man, that must never come within
these Walls again*

Assertion 1.
The Death of Men, is a kind of sleep unto them.

This is a Scheme of speaking used by the Holy Spirit of God. Death is a Sleep
to the Godly: therefore it was said in John 11: 11, 12. Our Friend Laz^rus
s^eepeth; Howbeit Jesus spoke of his death. Death is a Sleep to the Wicked
also. Hence it is said in Dan. 12. 2. many of them that sleep in the Dust shall
awake, to shame and everlasting contempt. Our Burying places, are therefore not
unfitly termed, Caeme^ries, or Dormitories, or Sleeping places. Thus the
Psalmist feared, in Psalm 13. 3. Lest I sleep, the sleep of Death. Death is a
Sleep, How? It Is not for the Spirit so. A Psychopannychia, a sleeping of the
Soul on Death, is too gross and sad a thing to be imagined: it is it self, a
Dream. The Active Apostle would never have said, as in Phil. 1* 23. I desire to
be dislodged and be with Christ; if he should have had nothing to do but Sleep
in the Lodging which he was thus desirous to go unto. Let no man imagine that
his departed Soul shall become stupid and senseless* and with out all
Apprehensions after Death. God forbid it should be so! N^r do YOU that are here
a dying Prisoner, expect that within a few Hours, you shall be fallen into a
Deep Sleep of all your Faculties. No, the Souls of M^n at the hour of Death, do
rather begin to Awake out of the Slumbers and Phan^a^ms, which they are here
buried in, and they have a most exquisite feeling of the condition which they
then pass into. How then is Death a sleep? It Is thus for the Body. The Body then
has a Rest, in a Bed; a Rest from a million weary Travels: but as a Sleep will
have an End, so this Rest will be not perpetual, not eternal; the Resurrection
when the Almighty God will call, Awake ye that ly in the Dust! that is the
Morning which will put a period thereunto.

Assertion 2.
The Pardon of Sin, is not after Death, a thing to be obtained. As it is said in
Isa. 38. 18, 19. They that go down into the Pit, cannot hope for thy Truth; The
Living, the Living, he shall praise thee. Even so, The Living, the Living, he
may get a Pardon, but if once a man be gone down to the Pit. he is past hope of
such a thing. The Dead must cry out, as the Dying have sometimes done* with a
woeful Desperation, It Is all too late! all too late! When once a man is Dead,
what is the next thing? It Is answered in Heb. 9. 27. After Death, the Judgment.
A Judgment, and not a Pardon, is the thing to be then attended unto. And what
kind of Judgment will it be? Truly,'twill be a Judgment which no Pardon will
Reverse, none can Repeal. We read an amazing property of it, in Heb. 6. ^.
Eternal Judgment; even the Jews in their Confession of Faith call it so. When
once we are Dead, we pass into a World, where all is Eternal; there we are
fixed like Rocks in an astonishing Ocean of Eternity; it is an Eternity of
Weal, or an Eternity of Woe, nothing but Eternity which remains before us. And
O how awful should the mention of Eternity, Eternity! be to YOU, forlorn and
setter'd man, who, if you do not get a Pardon of the Great God, before this
week be ou^, must unto all Eternity be deprived of it.

Assertion 2.
But infini^e and Horrible Woes must be the Portion of those whom Death find^
Unpardoned. A^ the Prophet said, Woe unto the Wicked, even so I say, Woe unto the
Unpardoned, it shall be ill with him, if Death find him so. It is testified
unto us, in Romans 6. 23. The wages of sin is Death. Our Sins are every Day
crying in the Ears of the Lord of Hosts, pay us our wages, pay us our wages!
When Death arrives unto an Unpardoned Man, then pay-day comes, and the Wages of
Death and Hell for ever, are paid unto the Sinner, whom it is due unto. That
Good Man took it for granted, If I be Wicked, woe unto me! So may a man upon the
Brinks of Death [and ONE of you is very certainly so] assure himself, Woe unto
me, if I now be found Unpardoned! Then He that made me will not have mercy on
me, and He that formed me, will show me no Favor. Where Sin is the Needy,
there Destruction is the Thread; if a pardon have not cut it off, before the
T^^ed of our Lives be broken, Woe to us! Nothing will then remain for an
Unpardoned Sinner, but A Fearful Expectation of a Fiery Indignation to devour
him; Nothing will remain, but Everlasting Fire with the Devil and his Angels;
Nothing will remain, but, The Worm which Dies not and the Fire which never
shall be Quenched. But no Tongue man Express or Heart conceive, the Dolo^, the
Torment, and Anguish of that Estate, which after Death is reserved for the
Unpardoned. By the Help of an Exalted Fancy, a man may represent unto himself,
Racks, and Boots, and Fires, and Rivers of Ardent Brimstone and Running
Belmetal, to cruciate a Malefactor in, but all of them are little things in
comparison of, That which is the portion of the Unpardoned, and the Heritage
appointed unto Him by God. As One in Trouble of Conscience for Sin, hearing
some Discourse about Burning to Death, cried out, This is but a Metaphor to
what I feel! Truly, the most hideous Tortures in the world, are but Metaphors
unto the terrible Blows and Wounds, which with immediate Impressions of Divine
Indignation, will in the other world, be inflicted, upon the Unpardoned World
without End. Indeed, as a Painter being asked to draw unto the Life, the
Horrors of the Spanish, Inquisition, only besmeared his Table with Blood,
intimating that the Thing was too Bloody to be otherwise Described. So, could I
cover my Pulpit with nothing but Blood and Fire, it would give some little
expressive Characters of what the Unpardoned at their Death are Doomed unto.
But all words are here swallowed up.

What Remains must be the APPLICATION Of the Truths which have been thus
cleared unto us. And
1. There is an USE of these things which every one of us All are to be
addressed with. It Is this;

Let every man among you seek, and Secure a Pardon before the Sleep of Death
shall overtake you.

We all own our selves to be Sinners before that God, whose Eyes are like a
Flame of Fire. It was begged, by one, and may be begged by us all, as in Psalm,
19. 12, 13. Cleanse thou me from Secret Sins, keep back thy Servant also from
presumptuous Sins. Besides, the Corruption brought with us into the world,
which Concupiscence the Apopostle to the Romans, in two or three Chapters
together, calls by the Name of SIN more than twice seven times; there have been
Actual Sins of all sorts, which we have defiled our selves withal. And besides
our presumptuous sins many thousands of times Repeated in our Lives, whereof I
may say to every man, as once 'twas said unto One, Thou know the wickedness
which thy own Heart, is privy to; there are also our Secret Faults which every
day, without Humble Recollections, we fall into. Some Sin through Ignorance; and
thus do many among us, with whom Clipped Oaths are such frequent Things. Their
common interjection is Marry; and they think not, that they Swear by the Virgin
Mary: ever now and then, a God so, passes from them, and they do not think that
they swear, by Gods Soul, in speaking so. Others do sin through Carelessness, and
Heedlesness: and hence they let more Spiritual Sins wonderfully have Dominson
over them; Pride, Passion, Malice, and By-Ends, do strangely carry them away.
In short, it is impossible to reckon up, how many Regards there are, wherein we
have cause to Acknowledge before the Great God, Father, we have sinned! But why
then do not we seek a pardon for our many and our mighty Sins? know we not,
That we shall quickly Sleep in the Dust? As we are Sinners, we are also Mortal;
and we are Mortal Sinners too. Let me then urge a few Counsils upon you all;
and Let That man who is now just upon taking an Eternal Farewell of such
Counsils, give ^ very particular Attention thereunto.

Counsel 1.
Seek a Pardon, and seek it EARNESTLY. O be in Good Earnest, and (to speak
Scripturally) be in Agonies about this Grand Concern.

To awaken your zeal hereabout.

Consider, The vast Blessings and Comforts which a Pardon is accompanied
withal. It Is an iterated Exclamation about a pardoned Man in Psalm. 3. ^ 1, 2. O
the Blessednesses of such a man There are Blessednesses in this Life which a
pardon will bring unto us. A pardon will be the Sugar of all our mercies. This
was that which made Health, to be Health indeed unto Hezekiah; he could not
only say, I am alive and Healthy! but he could say therewithal, as in Isai. 38.
17. Thou have cast all my sins behind thy back. A Pardon will also be the
sweetner of all our Troubles. It will be a piece of wood from the Cross of our
Lord Jesus, to dulcifie the waters of Marah, which are usually so bitter to us.
When a man lay sick of a sore Disease, this Word was enough to make his Bed for
ever easy to him, in Man. 9. 3* Son, be of good cheer, thy Sins be Forgiven
thee. But there are more mavelous Blessednesses which a pardon brings in the
Life to come* (...) a Link which the Apostle finds, it* (that which the
Ancients call) The Golden Chain of Salvation, Romans 8. 30. Whom he Justified,
Them he also Glorified. There is no less than a Kingdom to follow upon a
Pardon. Though the Sinner were here in the Fetters of Affliction, yet his very
Chains will be turned into Crowns, when once a Pardon has made him capable
thereof. O It Is well worth your while, to be in Earnest, about so Desirable a
Thing as this! What shall I say more? A Malefactor once receiving Sentence of
Death, did with a most Earnest Noise cry to the Judge for mercy; and being
rebuked, for being so clamorous, replied, Why, it is for (...), it is for my
Life^l and shall not ^ be in Earnest for it.? So, and more th^n that, may I say
concerning a Pardon from the Hands of God; Seek it; it (...) for the life of a
precious (...) Immortal (...) which is worth your being in (...).

Counsel 2.
Seek a Pardon, and seek it PRESENTLY. Be able to say, concerning your Seeking
a Pardon from, as the Psalmist said about his Keeping the Precept of, the
Eternal God; I made Have, and did not Delay to do it.

To awaken your Have here-about.

Consider the Incredible Dangers of all Delays. Your main Business is to become
well provided of a pardon for your Sins. Let me now say unto you, as in 2 Cor.
6. 2. Behold, Now is the Accepted Time, Behold Now is the Day of Salvation! If
you slip th^s N^w, you may never have another; you may miss of Acceptance and
Salvation for ever more. O do not say, as (...) Unhappy Faelix did I Will concern
my self about these matters at a more convenient season; for a More convenient
Season will never com^ The Great God says, To Day! and our To morrow, cannot be
a more convenient season than that which the allwise God has pointed us unto.
You have Now about you, a thousand conveniences for the getting of a Pardon,
which no Season hereafter will have blowing in the Sails thereof. Nay it is
possible, you may never have any other season at all. We are told, in Eccl. 9.
12. Man knows not his time. We are bid in Prove. 27. 1. Boast not thy self of
Tomorrow. We do not know that the ^ime which is future, will ever come to be
present with us, and he was but a well-advised man, who could say, I have not
had a To morrow, for these many years. It was a prudent Admonition given by a
Rabbi to a Scholar, among the Jews, Child, Be sure to Repent at least a day
before you Die. That person is worse than Mad who does not make sure of this.
But you cannot make sure of (...), if you do not Repent within the (...) three
or four hours that are now before you. If any man propound an Hereafter unto
himself, to make sure of a Pardon in, I would say unto him, Thou Fool, This
Night thy Soul may be required of thee. And let me add the words once used in a
case of sudden and extreme Hazard, save thy self to Night, for To morrow thou
may be Slain.

Counsil. 3.
Seek a pardon, and seek it HOPEFULLY. Despair not of it, but that your sins
which have been like Scarlet, may yet become as Wool, and that your sins, which
have been as Crimson may become like Snow. To quicken this Hope in your Souls.

Consider the Boundless Mercy of the infinite God. It may be that your sins
have had most bloody Aggravations; as being against much Light, and much Love,
and against very solemn Vows unto the contrary. Yet a Pardon is attainable, if
you slight it not. What is Gods Design, in our Pardon? it is to magnify His
Grace, and (as the Apostle speaks) that he may Commend His Love. Well then,
then greater our Pardon is, the greater will Gods Glory be. Hence it was the
plea of the Psalmist, in Psalm. 25. 11. O Lord, Pardon my Iniquity, for it is
great. What a FOR is that? How strange an Argument is this? The Despairing Soul
thinks, God will not Pardon my Iniquity FOR it is Great. But if we really Turn
to God, the greatness of our sins will become no less than a plea for the
Pardon of them. For Great Sinners will give Great praises, if they may taste of
his pardoning mercy. Be not then Discouraged from industrious endeavors
hereabout; but remember, that when our Lord Jesus has said, in Ioh. 6 37. Him
that comes to me, I will in no wise cast out; None of our Names are excepted
there.

Remember also that there are some now Triumphing with God in Heaven that once
were guilty of the very same Sins which We are now terrified withal. Where is
Abraham, that once was an Idolater? what became of Menasseh, the Conjurer? and
of Magdal^n the Strumpet? Is it not an Epitaph written by the Apostle upon the
Grave of Rahab, Rahab the Harlot perished not? yea, did not even some of those
that Murdered the Lord Jesus Christ Himself, afterward partake in the
pardoning virtue of His Blood, which with wicked Hands they had been shedding
of? see also 1 Cor. 6. 9, 10, 11, And why may not YOU come to be pardoned as
well as the^, if you tread in their steps, by a serious and sedulous making
after it? Perhaps you have been ready to Sin. But it is an Attribute of God, in
Neh. 9. 17. He is ready to pardon. Have you gone on a great while in Sin, and
grown old and gray, and horribly Ripe in your Evil ways? yet hear that Charm,
in Ier. 3. 1. Thou have played the Harlot with many Lovers, yet Return unto Me
says the Lord. In the primitive times there was one Victorius, a very old Man,
converted unto Christianity: the Church would not receive him for some time,
for thought they, Old Sinners do not use thus to turn and Live: But he
evidenced the Reality of his Conversion, so that they sang Hymns about it, in
the Christian Assemblies, and it was every where proclaimed, Victorius is
become a Christian! Victorius is become a Christian! Even so may it come to be
a shout over the oldest Sinner among you all, That Old Wretch has got a Pardon
after all! Behold I have an Order to make an Offer of a Pardon within these
Walls this Day; and in the Name of the Eternal King, I make it unto every Soul
among the many hundreds of People here. A Preface once Angrily made by Moses,
let me Cheerfully and Joyfully make th^^ Day; Hear ye Rebels: But that which I
thus Preface is, The glorious King ^f Heaven will receive every one of you to
Mercy, if you will now at last lay down your Arms. I am to assure you There is
Hope in Israel concerning this thing. Do not say with them, in Eze. 7 3: 11.
Our Hope is lost. No, to all your other Sins, I beseech you add not that of
Despair, which will be at least equal to the greatest of them, which you have
already perpetrated. What a nefandous Blasphemy was that of Spira, one of whose
Roarings was, My Sin is greater than the Mercy of God! That is the Cursed
Language of Despair, which let no man indulge! Don't connt the Day of yet over
with you. Say thou? I am afraid the Spirit of God has done striving with me?
nay, if thou art afraid of it, then it is not yet come to pass; He may be
striving in those very Fears. Say thou, I fear I have committed the
Unpardonable sin? If thou fear it, then thou have never Done it. They that are
conscienciously solicitous and suspicious about it, are yet Clear from the
great Transgression. O then come to God at the Door Hope thus opened for you.

Counsel 4.
Seek a Pardon, and seek it BELIEVINGLY. It is to be Enjoyed by none but a
Believing Soul.

To Excite this Faith.

Consider, The proper and only Gospel-way, to a pardon. It Is by Faith; as we
are minded in Romans 5. 1. We are Iustify'd by Faith. We must Request, and Expect
our Pardon to come swimming down unto us in the Blood of the Lord Jesus Christ
alone; and we must keep our Eye upon Him, under that Notion, in John 1. 29. The
Lamb of God which takes away the Sin of the World. We must look upon our Pardon
as purchased and procured for us, by the Death of our Lord Jesus Christ, who in
the Eternal Covenant of Redemption Engaged unto His Father, That He would make
His own Soul an offering for the Sins of all His Chosen ones. We are to take
the Merits of the Lord Jesus Christ, as they are proffered unto us in the
Tenders of the Gospel; and lay the whole Stress of our Guilty Souls thereupon
for ever. It is said in 1 John 1. 7. The Blood of Jesus Christ cleanses us
from all Sin. Wherefore we must Renounce all Dependence upon any Righteousness
of our own for our pardon. Let us not place any Trust, in any Good Works, or in
any Good Frames of our own, as though they could render the Holy God propitious
to us. It is said in Job 9. 2, 3. How should man be Just with God? If He will
contend with him, he cannot answer Him one of a thousand. The Jews give this
Exposition of it; The pleas which men fetch from any Good thing in themselves,
for the pardon of their sins, are so weak, and so trifling, and so foolish,
that the Great God would scorn to give an Answer to one among a Thousand of
them. Alas, we must not so much as ascribe the Inclinations of God to Impute
the Righteousness of Jesus Christ unto us, unto any Humiliations and
Reformati^ns which we may be disposed unto. We are to ly before the Lord, as
Loathsome, Undone, Wretched Creatures, and Shout Grace! Grace! concerning all
the Methods of our pardon. Here, to speak as Jerome of old, All Hands are
Dissolved, because nothing done by our Hands will be found to answer the
Righteousness of God. It was a thing prescribed in Ancient Directiores for the
Visitation of the Sick, that the Sick Man should be taught to say, O my God, I
now place the Death of the Lord Jesus Christ, between me and my Sins. Behold,
words fitted for every Sin-sick Soul! What else can we say, seeing we are told
in Acts 26. 18. Men receive the Forgiveness of Sins, and are Sanctified by
Faith in Christ Jesus. And hence even one of the greatest Giants among the
Romish Philistines, having argued a great while, for the Interest of our own
Merits, in the pardon of our Sins, at last he comes to that memorable issue of
all [Tutissimum est] By Reason of the uncertainty of our own Righteousness, and
the Danger of vain Glory, it is the safest course to Repose our whole Trust, in
the Mercy and Grace of God alone. Indeed! I pray, why then did you, Bellarmine,
Dispute with so long and strong a Sophistry, against the safest course in the
World? I beseech you, Let none of us take any other course for the pardon of
our Sins.

Counsel 5
Seek a Pardon, and seek it PENITENTLY. And there are especially Two
Expressions of Repentance, which we are to be exercised in, They are conjoined
in Prove. 28. 13. He that Confesses, and Forsakes his Sins, shall find Mercy.

Wherefore,

1. Confess all your Sins, if you would have the pardon of them. It was said
upon a devout purpose of Confession, in Psalm. 32. 5. I said, I will Confess my
Transgressions unto the Lord, and thou forgavest the Iniquity of my Sin. How
much more, will an exact performance of it, have such a Consequence?

In some Cases our Sins must be confessed unto Men. Indeed, our secret Sins
must not be divulged, until God Himself have in a manner brought them out; but
then we are by our own ingenuous Confessions to perfect the Discovery, So
David, so Jonah thought, though they could say unto God, Against thee, thee only
have I sinned; scarce any but God being privy to their Miscarriages. And thus
Achan, when others were made Sufferers by his being a Sinner, and God was
pointing at him as the Troubler of all the Neighborhood, his Duty then was
that, My Son, Confess and Give Glory to God. But be sure, Sins committed before
Men, must be Confessed unto Men. When Ioseph^ Brethren had been Brethren in
Iniquity, they heard one another with a bitter Confession saying, We are verily
Guilty! When the Publicans and Soldiers and such people, that had sinned
publicly of old, came to a better sense, they Confessed their sins, no doubt
a^ publicly as they could. We must give all men to see that we do not Approve
of Sin, by our taking shame to our selves for what sin they have seen us
overtaken with, and like the Convicted Leper crying out, Unclean, Unclean!

But in all Cases, our sins must be confessed unto God; who knows them all; and
whom they have all affronted and ^^used, It is said in 1 John 1. 9. If we
Confess our Sins, He is Faithful and Just to forgive us our Sins. We are to
confess our sins before the God of Heaven, both very particularly, and very
sincerely. We may do well to take a Catalogue of Duties Required, and Sins
Forbidden, in all the Commandments of God; and Examining by that Glass, what
Spots we have had in our Hearts and Lives, we should Bewayl them all before
God. And Bewayl them, without any Excuses or Defenses to Extenuate them, in our
Lamentations. An Upright man, lies in the Dust; Let us lay our selves there,
and so Enlarge upon our own Vileness, as becomes, A Spirit without Guile. Such
a Confession as this, must be made if we would have any marks of a pardoned
Soul upon us.

2. Forsake all your Sins, if you would make Genuine your Confession of them.
When you have once Vomited up your Sins by Confessing of them, O do not return
to them, as, A Dog to his Vomit. Come to say, as in Job 34. 31. I will not
offend any more; and study to Do what you say. As, The Burnt Child will dread
the Fire, So let us Dread all the Sins which our Souls have been scorched with;
and let us not espouse any Way of wickedness. If any of us will go on still in
our Sins, let us not forget what will come of it; no less truly than that in
Psalm. 68 21. God shall wound the Head of such an one, as goes on still in his
Trespasses. But O what horrible wounds are those which the Omnipotent Hand of
the Great God shall be the Inflicter of! Do not venture to go on in any course
of Sin; but be able to say, I hate every false way; and especially, be able to
say, I kept my self from mine Iniquity. Albeit any Sin may have been as dear
as a Right-eye, or a Right Hand unto you, nevertheless, Away with it! Whatever
bad course you have heretofore been used unto, abhor it now, with a very hearty
and zealous Detestation; and say, What have I any more to do with Idols? It Is a
New Life that we are now to be studious of; and we may not promise a pardon to
our selves, while we continue in Sin. Though God at first Justify the Ungodly,
yet he will not let a Justified man remain ungodly any more; no he teaches him
to Deny all ungodliness, and Live Godlily, Soberly, and Righteously in this
present Evil World.

II. But there is a very particular USE of these things, to be Regarded by one
among us, who is never to see the light of another Sabbath more. It Is Hugh
Stone, that I am now more immediately concerned with; and therefore let him, as
a man just come unto the very side of the black River of Death, give earnest
heed, unto what shall now be said before we part.

Unhappy Man; you must now Die before your time, for your being wicked ^vermuch,
and because you have been a Man of Blood, you must not Live out all your Days.
I am a little to invert the Words of my Text, in my Speech unto you, and say,
Why don't you seek (...) have your Transgression pardoned, and your Iniquity
taken away? For you shall sleep in the Dust, before this Week be out, and if we
seek you next Friday Morning, you shall not be among us. It Is a great Favor of
God unto you* that you have liberty to hear a Sermon or two; before the
Execution which you are Sentenced unto; your Monstrous Hands hurried your poor
Wife out of the World with a greater and more cruel Expedition. You may lament
it with an inexpressible Bitterness, that you have no better improved those
hundreds of Sermons which you have enjoyed heretofore. But I now beseech you,
let not one more be lost. You are Hearing for your last; O let it be as for
your Life: Look out for a Pardon before it be too late, and let not the Devils
cheat you of a Never-dying Soul. Every Drop of that innocent Blood in which you
have imbrued your merciless Hands has a Tongue in it; and it makes a fearful
hideous Clamor in the Ears of the Great God, saying, Vengeance, O Lord,
Vengeance on the cruel Murderer! Methinks, you should be concerned for a Saving
Interest in that Blood, that speaks better things Nothing but the Blood of the
Lord Jesus, will drown the voice of that horrible Cry. This Blood speaks for, A
Pardon, to them, whom it belongs unto (...) O do you now speak for a Title to
that Blood; I say again, Before it be too late!

What shall I say, that may stimulate the Christward motions of you^ Fettered
Soul!

I am to tell you, First, That your Slit is very Great. The Sin, for which you
now stand Condemned, is, a sin of a deep and bloody Dye* Murder is the most
Barbarous and Divelish, among all the Crimes that are Iniquities to be punished
by the Judge. Will a Wolf kill a Wolf? no, and the very Bears agree among
themselves. But shall a Man than be worse than a Wolf unto a Man? If, He that
loves another fulfils the Law, it is easy to tell what he does, that Murders
another. The most Wretched Pagans have observed of the Murderer, That Vengeance
will not suffer him to Live. But your Murder is one hardly to be paralleled in
an Age! It Is said, No Man (if he have but the Heart of a MAN in him) ever hated
his own Flesh. What then are you, that have Murdered yours? Find a Name for
yourself, if you think it possible! You have Murdered Her whom you should have
Loved above all the world; Her whom you should have Cherished with all the
Kindness and Goodness of an Holy Conversation; Her whom you should have been
willing even your self to have Died for the preservation of. And with Her it is
said, you have Murdered an Infant, which never saw the Light. This is your Sin.
And Doubtless, they were not few or small Sins, for which God left you unto
This. You had long before, been guilty of those Impious both Omissions and
Commissions, which gave the Devil at last a very entire Possession of you. O
Consider of them all; and especially Trouble your own Soul, for your Unbelief
in Rejecting the Savior of it. You have sat long under the Gospel; but you
have Refused, yea you have Crucified the blessed Redeemer, who therein besought
you to be Reconciled unto God. How should the Remembrance of this be to you, as
the Wormwood and the Gall, and cause your Soul to be Humbled in you.

I am to tell you, Next, That your Case is very sad. Look round about, and say,
Is there any Sorrow like your Sorrow? Your House; you have Troubled it, and it
is turned upside down by what you have done; and, what Anguish, what Horror,
have you filled the Hearts of your scattered Children with? Your Name; you have
Blemished it, it must Rot, without a Gravestone among Civil People,and you
must hereafter be known by this Description, The Man that Murdered his Wife.
Your Body; it has undergone the pains of Chains and Gaols, and there is a
little more pain reserved for it, before it feed the Worms. But above all, your
SOUL, your Soul, is brought into Dangers too affrighting to be patiently
thought upon. What is it that the Word of God, pronounces upon the Murderer? No
Murderer has Eternal Life. It says, The Murderer shall not Inherit the Kingdom
of God. It says, The Murderer shall have his portion in the Lake that burns
with fire and Brimstone. Surely, Thy very Heart must be moved out of its place,
to hear of such an End as this, which indeed will never have an End What think
you of Changing your Fetters, for the Chains of Darkness, in the Dismal Vault
below? What think you of changing your Prison, your Dungeon, for the Outer
Darkness, in which there is gnashing of Teeth for eevermore! Truly, it becomes
you to lay your self in the Dust, and cry out, Woe is unto me, that I have
Sinned!

I may tell you Thirdly, That your TIME is very short. You may not Entertain
the least Thought of having your Life now prolonged in the world; the very
World, will be defiled if you continue in it. Were there a City of Refuge among
us, which you were fled into, yet we ought to fetch you thence, and see you
made a Sacrifice. The Great God has Required this concerning you; Let him
hasten to the Pit, Let no man stay him; and you must before this Day S^'nnight
be gone, thither, Whence you cannot Return. As it was said unto a better man
than you, Set thy House in order, for thou shall Die and not Live. Thus, I would
say to you, that cannot possibly set your Desolate House in order any more, Set
thy Soul in order, for thou shall Die before this Week expire, Undone man, where
shall thou be within a few Hours? Though this Day Se'nnight, you should Roar,
Lord, Lord, One Sabbath more! or, Lord, Lord, One Sermon more, and one Season
more! it will be in vain for ever and ever.

And yet let me tell you, Lastly, That there is a May be of Mercy for you. Though
with Cain, you have been a Murderer; yet let not the outcry of Cain be with
you, My sin is greater than can be forgiven. You may be made a Manasseh, for
Blessedness, as you have been such an one for Wickedness. A Pardon is to be
had, if you slight it not; and how should that mel^ your very Heart within you?

In an English Plantation, that is not far from New England, a while ago, there
were two or three Men^ Condemned to D^, as I have heard, for Piracy. After
their Condemnation they broke Prison, and fled into the Woods; from whence,
after some weeks, they returned of their own Accord, and Surrendered themselves
unto the Authority, saying, We got away only that we might have time to make
our peace with God, and get the pardon of our Sins assured unto us, which through
Grace, we have done, and now we tender our Lives, to satisfy the Justice of
the Law. The Judges were so pleased with this Ingenuity, that first they
bestowed a Reprieve on them, and then procured a Pardon for them*

For your part, you are utterly and for ever incapable of a Pardon, from the
Hands of Men; but were you in earnest about it, you might yet get a Pardon from
the Hands of God without flying any whither, but unto the Horns of the Altar,
the Lord Jesus for it.

One which Died of Bleeding had that Expression about the Blood of the Lord
Jesus, One Blood kills me and another saves me. Truly, as the Blood of the
person whom you have Murdered calls for your Death, so the Blood of our dearest
Jesus will bespeak no less than eternal Blessedness for you, if by impenitence
you put it not away. Our Lord said once to one that was Hanging on a Tree, Thou
shall be with me in Paradise. You may go from the Gallows to a Kingdom, if
after your abominable doings, you yet will but consent unto the Terms of the
New Covenant.

But I must acq^aint you, that the only Remedy for you, is to carry a
distressed Soul unto the Lord Redeemer, who is Exalted to be a Prince and
Savior; O look unto him, whose call unto us is, Look unto me! Look unto Him,
and Sigh, and say, Lord, grant unto me, both Repentance and Remission of sins.

And while you are thus looking to Him, study to do some Remarkable Thing for
the Honor and Glory of God, and for the warning of such as are walking in
those ways, which have brought you to this, That Men clap their Hands at you,
and hiss (...) of your place. This is the least you (...) do by way of
Gratitude unto Him (...) has made you so capable of a Pardon (...) you are.

I have done. But O that you man not be Hard-hearted any more! (...) have the
Name of STONE; God forbid, that you should have the qualilities and properties
of a Stone, in your obduration. May these Words (...) as deep into your^heart
as your (...) did into the Throat of your (...) Wife! may the God of (...)
therefore take away from you the (...) of stone, and at the same time give you
the white Stone of Absolution from (...) many thousands of Sins, with which you
stand charged in the Books of hi^ Remembrance.

And may the good God sanctify the condition of this Man unto us all; that all
of us may learn to Abhor and Avoid Sin, and be thankful for the Grace without
which, Lord, what should the very best of us all Degenerate unto!

FINIS.
THE Character and Carriage and Execution of Hugh Stone.
THe foregoing Sermon having been Preached unto the Guilty Murderer, I thought
it my Duty to observe what operation the Truth and Word of God might have upon
him; and to answer his own desires, that I would assist him in the last minutes
of his life; nor was I altogether ignorant that the Labors that the Famous
Perkins used with Prisoners, were so successful, as to encourage those that
should make an Example of them.

I have hardly met with so unintelligible a man, as this Hugh Stone. He could
and would frequently speak very well, but with many very Reasonabl^ things
which he uttered, he mingle as great Impertinencies. I know no whether the use
of his Reason were not sometimes disturbe^ by, the Horror of his mind; for he
thought himself sometimes haunte^ with the Ghost of his Murdered Wife. But his
Conversation in the Prison before his Condemnation, was in diverse things very
Scandalous; and I could wish there had been more exactness in his Repentance
afterward. His Passions upon any Provocation were so inordinate, as that we
did not wonder to see what he was come unto. And as on the one side, I never
saw a Man express less fear of Dying, so on the other, I never heard a Man
express more care about every Trifle, which he counted himself concerned in.

There was a Minister that walked with him to his Execution; and I shall insert
the principal Passages of the Discourse between them; in which the Reader may
find or make something useful to himself, what ever it were to the Poor Man who
was more immediately concerned in it.

Minister. I am come to give you what Assistance I can, in your taking of the
Steps, which your eternal Wea^ or Woe, now depends upon the well or ill taking
of.


Hugh Stone, Sir, I Thank you, and I beg you to do what you can for me.


Min. Within a very few Minutes your immortal Soul must appear before God the
Judge of all. I am heartily sorry* you have lost so much time since your first
Imprisonment: you (...) need use a wonderful Husbandry of the little piece of
an Inch (...) remains. Are you now prepared to stand before the Tribunal of
(...)


H. S. I hope I am.


Min. And what Reaso^^ (...) that Hope?


H. S. I find all my Sins made so ^i^ter to me, that if I were to have (...)
given me this Afternoon, to Live such a Life, as I have Lived heretofore, I
would not accept of it; I had rather Die.


Min. That is well, if it be True. But suffer me a little to search into the
Condition of your Soul.

Are you sensible, That you were Born a Sinner? That the Guilt of the First Sin
committed by Adam, is justly charged upon you? And that you have hereupon a
Wicked Nature in you, full of Enmity against all that is Holy, and Just, and
Good? For which you deserved to be destroyed, as soon as you first came into
this World.


H. S. I am sensible of this.


Min. Are you further sensible, (...) you have Lived, a very ungodly Life? That
you are guilty of thousands of Actual Sins, every one of which deserves the
Wrath and Curse of God, both in this Life, and that which is to come?


H. S. I am sensible of this also


Min. But are you sensible, That ^ou have broken all the Laws of God? You know
the Commandments. Are you sensible, That you have broken every one of Them.


H. S. I cannot well answer to that. My Answer may be liable to some
Ex^eptions. -- This I own, I have broken every Commandment on the Account
mentioned by the Apostle James; That he who breaks one is Guilty of all, But
not otherwise.


Min. Alas, That you know your self no better than so! I do affirm to you, that
you have particularly broken every one of the Commandments* and you must be
sensible of it.


H. S. I cannot see it.


Min. But you must Remember, That the Commandment is Exceeding Broad; it
reaches to the Heart as well as the Life: it includes Omissions as well as
Commissions, and it at once both Requires and Forbids. But I pray, make an
experiment upon any one Commandment, in which you count your self most
Innocent: and (...) whether you do not presently conf^s your self Guilty
thereabout. I may not leave this point slightly passed ever with you.


H. S. That Commandment, Thou shall not make to thy self any Graven Image; How
have I broken it?


Min. Thus: You have had undue I^ages of God in your Mind a thousand times. But
more than so; that Commandment not only forbids our using the Inventions of Men
in the Worship of God, but it also requires our ^sing all the Institutions of
God. Now have not you many and many a time turned your back upon some of those
glorious Institutions?


H. S. Indeed, Sir, I confess it? I see my sinfulness greater than I thought it
was.


Min. You ought to see it. God help you to see it! There is a boundless Ocean
of it. And then for that SIN, which has now brought a shameful Death upon you,
it is impossible to Declare the Aggravations of it; hardly an Age will show the
like. You have professed your sel^ Sorry for it!


H. S. I am heartily so.


Min. But your Sorrows must be after a godly Sort. Not merely because of the
miseries which it has brought on your outward Man, but chiefly for the Wrongs
and Wounds therein given to your own Soul; and not only for the Miseries you
have brought on your self, but chiefly for the Injuries which you have done to
the Blessed God.


H. S. I hope my Sorrow lies there.


Min. But do you Mourn without Hope*


H. S. I thank God, I do not.


Min. Where do you see a Door of Hope?


H. S. In the Lord Jesus Christ, who has died to save Sinners.


Min. Truly, There is no other Name by which we may be saved? The Righteousness
of the Lord Jesus Christ, is that alone, in which you may safely anon appear
before the Judgment Seat of God. And that Righteousness is by the mavelous
and infinite Grace of God, offered unto you. But do you find, that as you have
no Rightetousness, so you have no Strength? that you cannot of your self move
or stir, toward the Lord Jesus Christ, though you justly perish if you do not
Run unto Him? that it is the Grace of God alone which must enable you to accept
of Salvation from the Great Savior?


H. S. Sir, my Case in short is This, I have laid my self at the Feet of the
Lord Jesus Christ for my Salvation; and had it not been for His mere Grace and
Help, I had never been able to do That. But there I have laid and left my self;
I have nothing to plead, why he should accept of me. If He will do it I am
happy, but if He will not, I am undone for ever; it had been good for me that I
never had been Born.


Min. And you must justify Him if He should Reject you. You surprise me, with
at once giving me so much of the Discourse, which all this while I have been
laboring for* I can add but this! The good Lord make you sincere in what you
say!

-- Your Crime lay in Blood; and your Help also, That lies in Blood. I am to
offer you the Blood of the Lord Jesus Christ, as that in which you may now have
the Pardon of all your sins. Now you may try the sincerity of your Faith in the
Blood of the Lord Jesus for a Pardon, by This. Have you an Hope in that Blood,
for all the other saving effects of it? shall I expl^in what I mean?


H. S. Do Sir.


Min. The Blood of the Lord Jesus, (...) not only Sin Pardoning Blood, but
(...) Soul-Purifying and Heart-softening ^^ood. It embitters all Sin unto the
(...), that it is applied unto, and (...) every lust in such a Soul. Are are
you desirous of this?


H. S. With all my Heart?


Min. The Lord make you so. The Lord Seal your Pardon, in that Blood, which is
worth ten thousand Worlds!


But what will you do for that God, who has given you these hopes of a Pardon?
you must with a Holy ingenuity now do something for the Honor of that God,
whom you have sinned so much against.

H. S. What' shall I do?


Min. Why, Confess and Bewail the Sins that have undone you, and publicly
Advise, and Exhort, and Charge all that you can, to take heed of such evi^
wages.


H. S. I will endeavor to do it ^s God shall help me.


Min. I pray tell me plainly what special Sin, do you think it was, t^a^ laid
the first Foundation of your D^struction? where did you begin to lea^^ God* and
Ruin your self?


H. S. It was Contention in my F^mily. I had been used unto something of
Religion: and I was once careful about the Worship of God, not only with my
Family, but in secret also. But upon Contention between me and my wife, I left
off the ways of God, and you see what I am come to.


Min. I would pray you to Vomit up all Sin, with a very hearty detestation. You
are going (if I may so speak) to disgorge your Soul; if you do not first cast
up your Sin, if your Soul and your Sin come away together you cannot but know
something of the dismal condition which it must pass into. O what cause have
you to fa^^ out with Sin forever? it has been your only Enemy. Here is the only
Revenge which you may allow in your self. You must now bear any Mu^^ce against
any one man in the World, (...) forgive even those that have done (...) the
greatest Injuries. Only upon (...), be as revengeful as you can: (...) ^ould
have you like Samps^n so to (...) taking of a just Revenge,


H S. I hope I shall.


Min. Well, we are now but a very few paces from the place, where you must
breath your last. You are just going to take a most awful Step, which has this
most Remarkable in it, That it cannot be twice taken. If you go wrong now, it
cannot be Recalled throughout the Days of a long Eternity. I can but commit
you into the Arms of a Merciful Redeemer, that he may keep you from a
Miscarriage, which cannot be recal'd and redressed throughout eternal Ages. The
Lord show unto you the Path of Life!


Attend unto these, as the last words that I may speak before the Prayer, with
which I am immediately to take a long Farewell of you. You are now just going to
be Confirmed for ever. If the Great God presently find you under the power of
Prejudice against any of His Truths and Ways, or of Enmity against what has
His blessed

Name upon it, you shall be fixed, and settled, and confirmed in it, until the
very Heavens be no more. But they are very Terrible Plagues and Pains, which
you may be sure will accompany this everlasting Disposition of your Soul.

On the other side, If God now find your Soul, under the power of Inclinations
to Love Him, Fear Him, Serve Him; and to esteem the Lord Jesus above a thousand
Worlds; you shall then be Confirmed in the perfection of such a Temper, and of
all the Joy, that must Accompany it. Which of these is the Condition that I now
leave you in.

H. S. Sir, I hope the latter of them.


Min. The Good God make it so; and grant that I may find you at the Right hand
of the Lord Jesus, in the Day of his Appearing. May this Ladder prove as a
Jacobs Ladder for you, and may you find the Angels of the Lord Jesus ready here
to convey your departing Soul into the Presence of the Lord.


After this Discourse; ascending the Ladder, he made the following Speech.

The Last Speech of Hugh Stone.
YOung Men and Maids; observe the Rule of Obedience to your Parents; and
Servants to your Masters, according to the Will of God, and do the Will of your
Masters: If you take up wicked ways, you set open a Gate to your Sins, to lead
in bigger afterward; thou can not do any thing but God will see thee altho^
thou think thou shall not be catched, thou think to hide thy self in
Secret, when as God in Heaven can see see th^e, though thou have hid it from
Man. And when thou go to Thievery, thy wickedness is discovered, and thou
ar^ found Guilty. O Young Woman that is Married, and Young Man, look on (...)
here; be sure in that Solemn Engagement, you are obliged one to another;
Ma^^iage ^s an Ordinance of God, have a care of ^reaking that Bond of
Marriage-Vnion; if the Husband provoke his Wife, and cause a Difference, he
sins against God; and so does she, in such Carriage; for she is bound to be an
Obedient Wife. O you Parents that give your Children in Marriage, remember what
I have to say, you must take notice when you give them in Marriage, you give
them freely to the Lord, and free them from that Service and Command you ought
to have, yet you ought to have a tender regard to them. O thou that take no
care to lead thy life civilly and honestly, and then Committest that Abominable
Sin of Murder, here is this Murderer, look upon him; and see how many are come
with their eyes to behold this man, that abhors himself before God; that is the
Sin that I abhor my self for, and defire you take Example by me; there are here
a great many young people, and O Lord, that they may be thy Servants! Have a
care, do not sin; I will tell you, that I wish I never had had the opportunity
to do such a Murder; if you say, when a person has provoked you, I will kill
him: It Is a thous^nd to one, but the next time you will do it. Now I Commit my
self into the Hands of Almighty God.

His Prayer.
O Lord our Good God; thou art a Merciful God, and a Gracious and Loving
Father; Alas, that thou should Nourish up Children that have (...) against
Thee! O Lord, I must confess, thou gave me opportunity to read thy Written
Word; Thou art also my Crea^or and Preserver; but, Lord, I have not done
according to the Offers of thy Grace; thou have not hid from me the
opportunities of the Good Things and Liberties of thy House and Ordinances, but
I have waxed wanton under the Enjoyment of them. I have given thee just cause
to provoke thee to Anger, and thou have left me to Shame, not only on my self
but on my Relations. O Lord God I do confess that I have sinned against thee,
and done all these Iniquities against thee, and before thine eyes. Lord, I have
sinned especially against thee; pardon my Sins of Youth; Lord, pardon this
bloody Sin I stand here Guilty of* O Lord, hide not thy face from me; I humbly
beg it of thee: for there is no man (...) Redeem his Brothers Soul, but only
the Blood of Jesus Christ must do it. Let it be sufficient to satisfy for my
poor Soul. I h^^e not done any thing that thou should be pleased to show me
thy Love, or that I should have any thing from thee, but only Everlasting
Misery. I am unworthy to come to thee; yet Lord, for thy Mercies S^^e have pity
on me. Now I am coming (...) Judgment, Lord, let the Arms of thy Mercy Receive
my Soul, and let my sin^ be Remitted; Good Lord, let not my sin^ which Condemn
me here in this world, rise up to Condemn me in the World to come though they
have Condemned me in this world, show mercy, Lord, when I come be fore thy
Iudgment-Seat. If my Soul be not humbled, Lord, humble it; let my Petition be
acceptable in Heaven thy Holy Mountain. I am unworthy to come into thy
Presence, yet O let me come into thy Kingdom; and deliver my Soul from Blood
Guil^iness, in the Blood of Jesus Christ* O let my wounded Soul mourn for my
sin that has brought me here, Sin brings Ruin to the poor Soul; woe is unto me
for mine Iniquity. If I had gone to Prayer in the morning when I committed this
sin, Lord God, thou would have kept back my hands from shed^ing innocent
Blood: O Gracious God, Remember thou me in Mercy; let me be an Object of thy
pity and not of thy wrath; the Lord hear me and pardon my Sins. Take care of my
poor Children. I have scattered them like straggling sheep flying before the
Wolf; pity the poor Children that go like so many Lambs that have l^st their
Keeter; that they may not come to such a Death as I do (...) Lord, for the sak^
of Jesus Christ, and the Righteousness o^ thy Son, accept my Soul, and receive
me into the Arms of thy mercy; that I may enjoy Everlasting Rest. Pardon all my
sins; and let the Prayers of all those that have put up their Petitions for me,
be accepted for the sake of Jesus Christ. Now I am coming, now I am coming,
thou may say, I called to thee, and thou would not come; I must say, my sin
brought me here, O the World, and the corrupt nature of man, that has proved my
ruin! O Lord, Good Lord, let me enjoy Rest for my Soul. The desire of my Soul
is to be with thee, in thy Kingdom, let me have a share in that Kingdom. Now is
the time, Lord Jesus; the Grave is opening its mouth; I am now living, though
dead in Stn, let my prayers be heard in heaven thy holy place; thy hands has
made me, and I know thou can Save me; hide not thy face from me; and affect
the hearts of thy people with this sad Ob^^ct, that they may labor to serve
thee betimes, and may not give themselves up to profaneness and Wickedness,
especially that Sin of Drunkenness, which is an in let of all Ab^minations.

[When thou have thy head full of Drink, the Remembrance of God is out of thy
heart and thou art unprepared to commit thy self and Family unto God; thou art
unfit to come into Gods Presence. I have cause to (...) out an^ be ashamed of
it, that I am guilty of it, because. I gave may to that Sin m^re than any
other, and then God did leave me to practice wickedness, and to Murder that
dear Woman, whom I should have taken a great deal of Contentment in, which if I
had done, I had not been here to suffer this Death.]

Thou art Holy, Just, and Good, and therefore O Lord have mercy on me, for the
sake of thy Son pity me, now Lord, I am coming. O that I could do thee better
Service.

[Many of you that behold me, I know, wish you never had seen me here.]

Lord, Receive my Soul into a better place, if it be thy blessed will, it is a
day of great Trouble with me; my Soul is greatly Troubled; give me one Glimpse
of Comfort in thy Kingdom; by and by let me have one dram of thy Grace. Accept
of me now at this time, it is the last time; Good* Lord, d^ny me not, give me,
as the W^man, of Sam^ri^, a Taste of that Living Wa^er that my Soul may Thirst
no more. I beg it for the sake of Jesus Christ. Amen.

After this, he was by the Prayers of a Minister then present, Recommended unto
the Divine Mercy. Which being done ^he poor man poured out a few broken
Ejaculations, in the midst of which he was turned over, into that Eternity
which we must leave him in.

The Speech of Hugh Stone, in the Prison, the morning before his Execution.
When Young People are Married they make use of Prayer in their Families, and
when they Pray, they do believe there is Sincerity and Affection in their
Prayer; but when Differance between a Man and his Wise does arise, then that
does occasion hindrance of Prayer in their Family; and when Prayer is wholly
omitted, it lets in all confusion; and every evil work: He said. That he used
to Pray in his Family, but when he did pray, it was in a formal manner, but now
from the Consideration of Eternity that he was going into, he was made the more
Con^iderate in his Prayers that he made, and did hope that now he had the
Spirit of Prayer in his Praying.

FINIS.
TO Contribute a little further unto the Design of this Book, I shall here
Annex Two Articles of Observations, extracted from an Hitherto-Reserved
Collection of MEMORABLE PROVIDENCE. I have Recorded them in such Words (and
the Rest in such Ways) as these.

Article. I.
Act. XXVIII. 4. A Murderer -- Vengeance suffers not to live.
AMong all the perpetrators of the more hideous and enormous Impieties in the
world, there is no person more Abhorred by the Lord, than the Murderer (...)
and there is none so much pursued by the Lord as that bloody Monster is. Those
Children of Cain, that rob their innocent Neighbors of their lives, usually
^^dure first an Hell in their own Co^^^^nces, by which Mark upon them, they are
made more incapable of avoiding the Halter which they are worthy of, and that
Halter is but a Sling out of which their guilty Souls are hurled into a
further, a lasting, an endless Hell. very trivial are the occasions and
pretenses for which often this piece of Devilism is committed. No greater
provocations truly, than what the two Brothers at Pad^a had, between whom there
Issued first Quarrel and then a Murder, only from this Original, that on a
certain evening together, one was wishing for Oxen as many as the Stars, the
other was wishing for A Pasture as large as the Firmament. But the Expectations
of its Concealment scarce ever escape a Lamentable Dissappointment in them who
are so vain as to promise unto themselves a Secrecy and Impunity in this
Villanny; for a ^^essus will find the very Swallows to Chirr^p out his Murder
of his Father. Nor can a Temporal Recompense for this atrocious I^iquity
ordinarily be avoided by the (...) Repentance it self; besides the V^ngeance of
eternal fire, which without (...) ^nevitably follows thereupon. (...) his soul
sw^^ away to Eternity in his blo^^

To the innumerable Exemples of these things, which all Ages do admire, Let
these be added.

EXEMPLE. I.
The First Murderer of his Neighbor in New England (as I take it) was one
Billington at Plymouth in the year 1630. He shot a poor man that he was a
mortal enemy unto, and expected that for want of Power or of People in that
Infant Plantation he should have evaded the execution due to him for his
Capital Offense* but Justice inflicted has deserved death upon him.

Exemple, II.
One Mary Martin, her Father going away from hence to England, had left her in
the House of one Mr. Mitten, a Married man, who became so enamoured of her as
that he attempted her Chastity* Such was her weakness and Folly, that she^
yielded unto the vile Temptations; though with such Reluctancies, that begging of
God for deliverance from the wicked ^ollic^atio^^, she pleaded, If ever she
were over^^^en again, she would leave her self unto his (...), to be made a
public Exemple, Howev^^ (...) governing her self, nor Remem^^^ng her promise,
with the ^^me Sin a third time was she overtaken. Afterward going to Service
in Boston, she found her self to have conceived; but living with a favorable
Mistress, who would not allow any Suspicion or Suggestion of her Dishonesty,
and thinking her self unable to bear the shame or grief of the Discovery, she
wholly concealed it until the Time of her Delivery. Being then alone by her
self in a dark room she used violence to destroy the Child, once and again,
before she effected the unnatural Ba^barity. Hereupon she wrapped up the Infant
in her Chest for fifteen days until her Master and Mistress went aboard the
ship which they were Transporting themselves to England. On this Occasion she
was put to remove unto another House where some that before had apprehended,
now perceived that she had lately been delivered of a C^^ld. They charging it
upon her, she at first denied the Murder, and said, It was still-born, but
upon search it was found in her chest, and she being made to touch the Face of
it, before the Jury, the blood came fresh thereinto; whereupon she confessed
the whole Tru^^ (...) her imprisonment and at her (...) the carried her self so
Exceeding ^^^^^^penitently, that the observers had great Hopes of her true
Repentance. But this was particularly remarkable, That as she acknowledged her
Twice Essaying to kill her Insant before she could make an end of it; so,
through the unskilfulness of the Hangman, they were ^ain to turn her off the
Ladder Twice before she co^id expire.

Exemple. III.
An English Ship sailing from some-where about the Mouth of the Streig^ts, was
manned with some cruel Miscreants, who quarrelling with the M^^ter and some of
the Officers, turned them all into the Longboat, with a small quantity of
provisions, about an hundred Leagues to the westward of the Spanish Coast.
These fellows in the mean while sail for New England, where as Providence
would have it, the Master and his afflicted Company in the Longboat arrived
too; all except one who died of their Barbarous usage. His countenance was now
become terrible unto them, who though they had Es^aped the Sea, yet Vengeance
would not suffer them to live ashore, (...) his Instance, and complaint they
were ^pprehended, and the Ringleaders of this ^^^derous Piracy had a Sentence
of Death (...) on them. The horrors which attended the Cheef of these
M^^^^actors in his D^ing hours were such as exceedingly astonished the
beholders. Though he was a very stout man, yet now his Tremblings and Agonies
were inexpressible. One speech let fall by him was, I have been amongst drawn
sword, flying bullets, roaring Canons, amidst all which I never knew what fear
meant; but now I have apprehensions of the dreadful wrath of God in the other
world, which I am going into, my soul within me is amazed at it. Loud cries the
spilt blood of a Brother;
He kills himself that slayes another.
Clamitat ad Caelum vox Sanguinis.


Article. II.
Isa. LV. 7. Let the wicked forsake his way and the unrighteous man his
thoughts, and let him return unto the Lord and He will have mercy, and to our
God, for He will abundantly pardon.
It was once the affectionate Outcry of a C^ndemned but a Converted and a
Comforted Malefactor, God is a great forgiver, God is a great forgiver! It is
indeed rarely seen that Bad livers to, ever become Sincere Paenitents in Old
Age. When the Devils have had a Possession of many years, they plead a sort of
Praescription against the Holy Spirit of God, and make their interest so
strong, that very Extraordinary must be the Influences of the Grace that shall
destroy it. Scripture seems to pronounce a sinner of an hundred years old to be
cursed, and Experience commonly discovers a Sinner of Fifty years old to be
hardened beyond all recovery. The Generality of them that are brought home to
God under the constant Dispensations of the Gospel, will find that between
Fifteen and Thirty is the Age in which most of the Elect become Called ones.
But as nothing is more Sovereign than the Free Grace of God, He calls both Whom
and When he will; and He leaves many Civil and Moral- people in their,
Unbelief, when He Renewes the Worst of men, and those that not only have done
evil an hundred times, but likewise an hundred years been in the rebellious
Tents of the Ungodly; So nothing is more glorious than that Free Grace which
pardons without bounds, and forgives the Sins which no Conscience has vigor
enough to describe all the Aggravations of. Let no man that begins to have sad
Thoughts about the State of his own soul, ^espair of Mercy from God in Christ;
it reaches even to, she Chief of Sinners. It is for a Cain to roar, My sin is
greater than can be forgiven! but perphaps his Despair was not inferior to his
Murder, and, Austin well replied upon him, mentiris, Cain, Cain, Thou lie.
The Temp^er that once told thee; It Is too soon, may now tell thee, It Is too la^e
to repent; and thou may have in thy Thoughts the Voice which once a
flagitious man had in his Ears, a little before he dyed, No Mercy, No Mercy*
But When he speaks hard unto thee, believe him not. Come, and Confess and
forsake all thy sins, and thou shall have mercy. Come, and cast the Burdens of
a Guilty and Wretched soul upon the Lord Jesus, and thou shall have Rest. Unto
the Greatest and the Oldest Sinners, yet, Return unto me, says the Lord.

Exemple, I.
A while since, there dyed at Lancaster, a man whose name was Richard Lenten,
arrived in age to so many years above an hundred, That he had lived in Wedlock
with his wife for Sixty three years, and yet she was Thirty five years younger
than himself; and he was able to follow his toils at Husbandry, very livelily
but about a month before his End.

This man had been all his days a poor ignorant carnal and sottish man, and
unacquainted with the very Principles of his Ca^echism, after he had satt under
so many hundreds of Sermons as he had: Nevertheless, when he was about an
hundred years old, God blessed the Ministry of His Word unto this man's
awakening; and he became a diligent Enquirer after the things of the life to
come, and a Constant Serious Attender on all that was Religious. He arrived
unto such measures of a well-informed Devotion, that the Church which was very
strict in the terms of their Communion, yet received him into their Fellowship
about Two years before he died* Wherein he continued under a good Character, so
long as he continued in the World.

Exemple. II.
There dwelt at a Village in this Country, one who dyed in December 1688. This
man had been remarkable for his bad Life, till he had spent fifty years in the
lewd and rude Courses if notorious Ungodliness. Though he had the Benefit of a
christian and pious Education, yet he had shaken off all the yokes which that
had laid upon him. He became a foul-mouthed Scoffer at all good men and good
things; and a great mocker of Church Members in particular. The Vices of
Drunkenness and Swearing and Lying made the Characters of his Conversation.
Sabbath-Breaking and Promise-breaking, made him infamous among honest people,
and his Disobedience to his Parents was not unequal to the rest of his
miscarriages. Original Sin, in the furthest efforts of it, filled his whole
man, and his whole way, for half an hundred years; at which age he left the
world; and he had sat under and sinned against the means of Grace all this
while. But yet, which you will admire to hear! Yet this enormous liver was
judged to be converted unto God some few weeks before he died, The great God so
blessed and owned the Ministry which he enjoyed, that the Efficacy of it on
him, became conspicuous to Astonishment. He became a serious Paenitent, and so
devout, so pensive, that every one saw a New Creature in him. He mourned for
all his former faults, and caused his Complaints to reach unto the Plague of
his Heart as the Root of all. He reformed what was amiss in him, and applied
himself with an exceeding Vigor to the Savior, for the Salvation of his soul.
While the Grace of God was thus beginning its Impressions on him, he fell
mortally sick, and it was not long before he passed out of this world with a
mavelous Assurance of his Interest in a better.

It were Endless to reckon up the extraordinary Expressions that fell from him,
and Behaviors that he had in the sick and last days of his life; but some of
them were such as these.

-- O (said he) What a wonder of Mercy is it to my soul, that God halh not cast
me immediately into Hell, and given me no Time to repent, or to beg for an
Heart to Repent! But (...) Mercy has spared a great Sinner.

-- The stoutest man (said he) that ever lived, should he but seriously think
on ETERNITY, and have no Christ to fly unto, it will so sink the the Heart of
him, that he could never bear it; but the Lord will show Mercy to my distressed
soul.

He gave himself wholly to Prayer, and would excuse Watchers from sitting with
him, that he might be at leisure for Communion with God alone. Sometimes he
would give a start as he lay, and being asked the Reason of it, he said, O I
have a great work to do! and but a little time to do it!

The Conflicts which he endured in his Spirit were unutterable, under which,
he^ day and night kept wrestling with God for His Mercy. One morning his
Brother enquiring of him how he did, he replied, O I have had as doleful a
night as ever man had, I have had three great enemies this night encountering
with me; the World, the Flesh, and the Devil. I have been this night, both in
Hell and in Heaven; and I can truly say with David, all this night long I have
watered my couch with my ^^ars, but as the day broke, my Savior came and
vanquished the Devil, and told him that he had no right in me, for He had
Redeemed with His own Blood.

To his Father once he said, I have felt a great work on my distressed soul;
This your son was lost and is found, was dead and is alive. Doleful nights have
I seen; the Thoughts of my sins did sorely oppress me, when I would be crying
to my dear Savior for His mercy, He would seem not to pity me, but to say,
Thou have been a servant of the Devil and of thy Lust, and do thou now come
to me? I have been calling to thee, and thou have been hardening thy heart at
my Calls, and do thou expect mercy after all? And then the Devil would put
in, saying, Thou have been my Vassal so long, thy Cries for Mercy are now all
too late. I have also seen the face of an Angry God, and that is the most
terrible thing that was ever seen. I then found no s^ay for my distressed soul,
but Free-mercy! Free-mercy! The Lord now put under me His everlasting Arms, and
gave me an heart still to pray and say, Lord Jesus, Mercy for Thy own sake,
Mercy for thy Name's sake! My Redeemer would say, Thou art a great sinner and
an old sinner! The Answer of my soul was, Truth, Lord, but even such sinners
have already found mercy at thy hands, I come to thee, for with thee the
fatherless find mercy.

-- He would break forth into very High Expressions; his great Comfort was
fetched from that Promise in Man. 11. 28. Come to Me -- and I will give you
rest. He would now cry out, O the Riches of Free Grace! There are thousands of
thousands, and ten thousand times ten thousand, in the third Heaven, rejoicing
over a great and an (...) sinner coming to Glory! O glorify Free Grace for
ever. -- He would say, O blessed Sickness, blessed sickness! what a friend have
thou been to me! and now Welcome Death! or Wecome Life, what my dearest
Redeemer please. O that I could declare to my Relations and my Neighbors! yea
that I could declare to Kings and Worlds what the Lord has done for my soul! --
He would reflect on the Humiliation of the Lord Jesus Christ, with an amazed
and a transported soul; he would break forth into a great Adoration of it, and
say, O this wonderful mercy to undone sinners! He would also make that one of
his Admirations, O the glorious work of faith, which does role it self on
Christ alone! [ He bewailed it with a peculiar Bitterness, That he had been for
the change of Government. But (...) said, he believed that God would restore
(...) us, the judges as at the first, and the counselors as at the beginning,
and pastors according to His own heart. He was likewise much concerned about
the Interest of Christ in the world; and about the Success of the Prince of
Orange, whose glorious Expedition we had then by the edges, a small notice of,
he talked in strains that seemed surprisingly prophetical.] His counsil to
every one was, To make their Calling and Election sure. And he would often say,
O I am an old sinner* and and but a young Convert! I am fifty years old, and
have lived but seven weeks all this whi^^.

To his Brethren he said, You are care full about a Garment for me under my
weakness this winter, but Brothers, I have a better Garment than you can
provide for me; the long white Robe of the^ Righteousness of Jesus Christ, will
cover me all over.

He kept praying and praising, and singing psalms till his end came; and then
being taken speechless and senseless, his friends apprehended they should hear
him speak no more. Thus he lay for diverse hours drawing on; but at length he
just came to himself again, and sprang up in his bed, spreading his arms
abroad, as though going to leap into the Arms of a Redeemer, and Shouting, O my
friends, Heaven rings all over at this! They wonder at this, a great and an old
sinner coming to Heaven! Behold, in my father's house are many mansions; if it
had not been so, my Savior would not have said it, But He is gone to prepare a
place for one, O the Riches of Grace! O glorify Free Grace for ever more! And
so he went away to the Rest of God.

Despair not. That alone will mercy bar To faults that like the Sands and
Mountains are.

FINIS.
ERRATUM.
Page, 46. Line, 14. r. Day of Grace


