A BRIEF RELATION OF THE STATE OF New England, From the Beginning of that
PLANTATION To this Present Year, 1689.

In a Letter to a Person of Quality.

LICENCED, July 30th. 1689.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Baldwine, near the Black Bull in the Old Bailey,
1689.

A BRIEF RELATION OF THE STATE OF New England.
HONORED SIR,
I Have received yours, wherein you desire me to give you a Brief Account of
the past and present State of New England, which in as few words as I can, and
as straits of time will permit me, I shall endeavor your Satisfaction in.

New England contains that Tract of Land which is between forty and forty five
Degrees of Northern Latitude; It was for some time known by the name of the
Northern Plantation; but King Charles the First (then Prince of Wales) gave it
the name of New England.

The first settlement of the English there, was in the year 1620, viz. at New
Plymouth.

New England differs from other Foreign Plantations, in respect of the Grounds
and Motives, inducing the First Planters to remove into that American Desert;
other Plantations were built upon Worldly Interests, New England upon that
which is purely Religious; for although they did, and do agree (as is evident
from their Printed Confession of Faith) with all other Protestant Reformed
Churches; and more especially with England, in Matters of Doctrine, and in all
Fundamental Points of Faith; yet as to the Liturgy, Ceremonies, and
Church Government by Bishops, they were, and are Non-conformists: It was
grievous to them to think of living in continual difference with their
Protestant Brethren in England; upon which account they resolved on a peaceable
SECESSION into a corner of the World; and being desirous to be under the
Protection of England, about twenty worthy Gentlemen obtained a Charter from
King Charles the First, bearing date from the year 1628. which gives them
Right to the Soil, for they hold their Titles of Lands, as of the Manor of
East-Greenwich in Kent, and in Common SOCAGE, which, notwithstanding, they
purchased their Lands of the Indians, who were the Native Proprietors: By their
mentioned Charter, they are Empowered to Elect yearly their own Governor, and
Deputy Governor, and Magistrates, as here in London, and in other Towns
Corporate, the Freemen choose their Lord Mayors, Mayors, Aldermen, etc.

They have also Power to make such Laws, as shall be most proper and suitable
for the Plantation: Nevertheless, as an acknowledgment of their dependence on
England, by their Charters, they are obliged not to make any Laws, which shall
be repugnant to the Laws in England.

Also, the fifth part of all Oar, of Gold or Silver, found in that Territory,
belongs to the Crown of England.

The Report of this Charter, did encourage many very deserving persons to
Transplant themselves, and their Families, into New England; Gentlemen of
Ancient and Worshipful Families, and Ministers of the Gospel, then of great
fame here in England, Tradesmen, Artificers, and Planters, to the Number of
about four thousand did in twelve years time go thither.

The hazards they run, and the difficulties which they encountered with, in
subduing a Wilderness, cannot be easily expressed in a large Tract: But the
Almighty God, by a wonderful Providence, carried them through all.

In the year 1637, they were in imminent danger of being cut off by the
barbarous Heathen; but when it came to a War, mighty numbers of the Indians
were slain, by a few of the English, which caused a terror of God to fall upon
the Heathen round about; so that after the Pequod Indians were subdued, there
was peace in the Land for forty eight years together; and being settled under a
good and easy Government, the Plantation increased, and prospered wonderfully;
yea, so as cannot be parallelled in any History: never was place brought to
such a Considerableness in so short a time; that which was, not long since, a
howling Wilderness, in few years time, became a pleasant Land, wherein was
abundance of all things meet for Soul and Body, which can be imputed to nothing
else, but to their Religion, the Gospel bringing a fullness of Blessings along
with it: Some have observed, that since the year 1640, more Persons have
removed out of New England, than have gone thither. Nevertheless, the four
thousand, who did, between that and the year 1620, transplant themselves into
New England, are so marvelously increased, as that, if the Computation fail
not, they are now become more than Two hundred thousand Souls.

There are Towns and Villages, on the Seacoasts, from Long Island to Boston,
which is Three hundred English Miles, and the like from Boston to Pemmaquid,
which is Two hundred Miles more.

In the year 1662, Conecticot Colony, as also Read Island, with the Plantations
thereunto belonging, had Charters granted to them by King Charles the Second,
being much of the same Tenor with the Patent of the Massachusetts, whereby these
Colonies were made distinct Government.

In the year 1675, the Indians began a second War with the English; the Issue
of which was, that whole Nations of them were destroyed.

Never did men show greater Courage and Bravery in their Encounters with the
Barbarous Heathen, than they did. Although it must be acknowledged that the
Indians advantages were such, as they could not have been overcome, if God had
not fought against them, by sending the Evil Arrows of Famine, and Mortal
Diseases among them. I have often thought of an Expression of an Indian there:
We could easily be too hard for the English, but (said he? striking on his
Breast) The Englishmens God makes us afraid here.

As long as they enjoyed their first Government, no Enemies could stand before
them; but since that they have not been able to subdue an hundred Indians, who
did the last year commit some outrages among them, having been (as I am
credibly insormed) designedly provoked thereunto by some Injuries done unto
them by those then in Power, who intended the Ruin of the English, and
Advancement of the French Interest in that Territory.

As for your Enquiry, By what means they came to be deprived of their Charters,
Rights and Liberties; please to understand, that in the year 1683, a Quo
Warranto was issued out against them, and with the Notification thereof by the
then King's Order there was a Declaration published, enjoining those few
particular Persons mentioned in the Quo Warranto, to make their defense at
their own particular Charge, without any help by a public Stock: By this it
was easy to see that some Persons were resolved to have the Charters
condemned, quo jure quaque injuria: Nevertheless, the Governor and Company
appointed an Attorney to appear, and answer to the Quo Warranto, in the Court
of King's Bench.

The Prosecutors not being able to make any thing of it there, a new Suit was
Commenced by a Scire facias, in the High Court of Chancery.

But tho they had not sufficient time given them to make their Defense, yet
Judgment was entered against them for Default in not appearing; when it was
impossible, considering the remote distance of New England from
Westminster Hall, that they should appear in the time allowed.

Thus illegally was the Charter of the Massachusetts Colony wrested from them:
as for the Colonies of Plymouth, Conecticot, and Road Island, there was never
any Judgment against them, nor any Surrender; but by a mere Rape, in the year
1686, their Charters and Privileges were violently taken from them.

Since that time the Country has mightily declined, and gone to ruin daily,
not being now like the place it was Five Years ago, which is not much to be
wondered at, considering the Intolerable Oppressions they have been Laboring
under, since their Charters were Ravished from them.

In the Year 1686. Sir Edmond Andros, was sent by the late King James to New
England; with a Commission absolutely destructive to the fundamentals of the
English Government, Impowering him with Four more (none of them chosen by the
People) to Levy Money, and make Laws, nay, and in case of War in the
Plantations to send as many of the Inhabitants as he would, two Thousand Miles
out of the Country: This Commission being Illegal and so in it self void, the
People not being able to Continue longer under those Oppressions, did this last
Spring assert their English Liberties, Rights and Privileges, and Unanimously
Declare for the Prince of Orange, and the Parliament of England.

And it is greatly to be observed, that as long as New England enjoyed their
Charters for more than Fifty Years together, they never put the Crown of
England to a Penny Charge; which is more than can be said of any other Foreign
Plantations dependant on England.

But since they have been under a Government not by Charters, but by
Commission, the Country has been Chargeable, and less Beneficial to the Kings
Revenue than in former times.

It has indeed been objected, that in New England they did many Years a go
Transgress the Act of Navigation. But the Trasgression of some few particular
Persons ought not to be charged as the fault of the Government there, who did
in the Year 1663, make a Law that the Act of Navigation should be Strictly
observed, and their Governors are Sworn to see that Law Executed, and have to
the uttermost of their power been careful therein.

Many other Things have been suggested against New England, he most of which
having no footsteps of Truth in them, but being the Malicious Inventions of the
Tobijahs and Sanballats of the Age, are not worth mentioning.

Not but the People there being but Men, have had their failings as well as
other Men in all places of the World. The only thing (so far as I can learn)
which can with any Coluor of Truth be justly reflected on them as a great
fault, is that in some matters relating to Conscience and difference of
opinion, they have been more rigid and severe than the Primitive Christians or
the Gospel does allow of.

Yet this is to be said in their behalf, that things are reported worse than
indeed they were, and that now many Leading Men, and the generality of the
People are of a more moderate Temper.

I know many that have a great Interest there, do abhor the Spirit of
Persecution as much as any Men in the World.

It is certainly for the Interest of England, that New England be encouraged;
and preserved in all their Rights, Privileges and Properties, and those ill
Men who have given or shall give contrary advice (notwithstanding all their
vain pretenses to the contrary) have and will prejudice the Interest of the
Crown more than they are, or ever were, or can be able to make amends for:
which I evince by the Arguments following.

I. The Kings Revenue, all things considered, is as much or more augmented by
New England, than by any other of the Foreign Plantations. This will seem to
some a strange Assertion: But consider what I say, and then judge if it be not
true. The other American Plantations cannot well subsist without New England;
which is by a Thousand Leagues nearer to them than either England, or Ireland;
so that they are supplied with Provisions, Beef, Pork, Meal, Fish, etc. And
also with the Lumber Trade, Deal Boards, Pipe-Staves, etc. chiefly from New
England.

Also the Carribbe Islands have their Horses from thence. It is then in a
greater part by means of New England that the other Plantations are made
prosperous and beneficial; they pay Customs in the Plantations for the Goods
they Export from thence into New England, and when those Goods are brought into
England, they pay the same again the Second time, by which means not a little
is contributed to the Crown.

Some Manufactures there are amongst them, but not a Twentieth part of what the
Country has need of, or is consumed there, most of their Clothing as to
Woollen and Linen, all sorts of Upholstery Wares, Haberdashers and Silk Wares,
Stuffs, Silks, etc. they have from England; and make returns in Plate, Pieces
of Eight, Beaver, Moose and Deer Skins, Oil, and Iron, all which, but the
Bullion, the Country affords.

Also by Sugars and Tobacco, Indico, and indeed all the Product of the other
Plantations, which with their own Vessels they fetch and transport to England.

II. I know not whether in the World there be a better place for shipping, nor
can I say how many, (but many hundreds there are) hundreds of Vessels of their
own building do belong to the Country, (besides great Numbers built and sold
into England,) for they yearly build many good Ships, some of which for London,
and other places in England. The Country abounds with Pine-Trees, Excellent
Cedars, and Oak for building of Ships, and Ship-Masts in abundance; by those
that are proper Judges, the best in the World, and come yearly from thence for
the Use of the King's Ships.

And it has been affirmed by knowing Men in Navigation and Building, that
whenever the King of England pleases, he may in New England on such easy Rates
as is scarce imaginable, build Navies of Ships: There being no better Timber in
the World, and in such quantities as are inexhaustible, and in such convenient
Places, as if God and Nature had adapted these vast Timbers for the said use;
which is worth consideration, for that Timber is generally wanting in England,
and in Ireland; what is, is too far from Waters and Places fit for Carriage,
and the East-Land Oak is spungy and unfit.

III. The English born in New England, have the true inherent Spirit of the
Old, apt and fit for Martial Employs; and as an addition to their Natural
Courage and Sobriety, are well instructed in Martial Discipline.
All the Inhabitants from sixteen to sixty Years in each Town, are by the Law
and constant Custom of the Country to bear Arms, if occasion shall require, and
that they may be fit so to do,

They have in each Town and Village their Training-days, eight Times every
Year, wherein they are exercised in Military Discipline, that so they may be
expert in War, on all occasions, for their own Defense, and Service of their
Prince; who will find whenever he shall please for to command, and
commissionate them, that they are able (by the Blessing of God) to secure and
enlarge his Dominions, and to bring their French Neighbors into an entire
Subjection to the Crown of England.

And from this Consideration it was, that the French Ministers, (who all the
World knows had a mighty Ascendent over White Hall, in the Two Late Kings
Reigns) ceased not in their Negotiations, until amongst other Articles agreed
on; One was, that in Case of a War betwixt England and France, there shall be a
Neutrality in the Plantations: They wisely foreseeing, that if the King of
England, should arm and commission his Subjects in New England, the Frenchmen
in those parts could not stand before them.

In the Time of the Late Protector Cromwell, they did by order from England,
take several Forts from the French, which by King Charles the Second were
restored to them again; no ways to the Honor or Interest of the English Nation.

And it is hoped, His Majesty and the High Court of Parliament, will put that
value upon New England, as so vast a Tract of Land and Body of People deserve
from a Government on which they depend, and are so great and useful a Member,
as they have manifested themselves to be: And that in so Eminent a manner as
calls for Protection, Encouragement, and Restoration to all their Rights,
Privileges and Proprieties, and what Additions more, as in His Majesty great
Wisdom, shall be thought fit for his Service, the Protestant Religion and the
good of that People; who on the 18th. of April, 1689. Unanimously rose in Arms,
and after having seized upon their Illegal Governor, and the rest of their
Oppressors; declared for the Prince of Orange, and the Parliament of England,
the Protestant Religion and their Ancient Constitution, and to this day do keep
the Country for our Present Sovereigns, King William and Queen Mary, against
King Lewis, and the Abdicated King James, waiting His Majesty's Commands, etc.

Which Declaration is in the words following: WE do therefore seize upon the
Persons of those few Ill Men, which have (been next unto our sins) the Grand
Authors of our Miseries, resolving to secure them, for what Justice, Orders
from his Highness, with the English Parliament shall direct, lest, e're we are
aware, we find (what we may fear, being on all sides in danger) our selves to
be by them given away to a Foreign Power, before such Orders can reach unto us,
for which Orders we now humbly wait; in the mean time firmly believing, that we
have endeavored nothing but what mere Duty to God and our Country calls for at
our hands: We commit our Enterprise to the Blessing of him, who hears the Cry
of the oppressed, and advise all our Neighbors for whom we have thus ventured
our selves, to join with us in Prayers, and all just Actions for the Defense of
the Land.

The twelfth Article of New England is the Key of the New World America; if the
French King had got it into his Possession, he might soon have made himself
Master of America, and this in all Probability would have been done this
Summer, if the New Englanders in and about Boston, penetrating into the Designs
carrying on, had not risen as one Man, and seized Sir E. A. (who is as of a
French Extract, so in the French Interests; being sent to New England by the
Late King James, with an Illegal and Arbitrary Commission) and those ill Men
who joined with him in his Tyranny.

All men do acknowledge, that those brave Souls whom God has so wonderfully
assisted, and spirited to preserve Londonderry, (and perhaps thereby to save
all Ireland) by securing it, and declaring for King William and Queen Mary,
deserve great Favor and Protection from the Government.

And the same must be acknowledged due unto the People of New England, and more
especially, when it is considered of what Value and Consequence to England, New
England is, and that they so early as it were, rescued the Country out of the
hands of the French, even before they knew the Prince of Orange was King of
England, and that at a Time when they knew no more, than that His Highness was
landed in England, with a design to endeavor the delivering the Kingdom, and
the Churches of God from Popery, Slavery and Arbitrary Power, which as they
looked upon as an Heroic and Glorious Undertaking; so they also accounted it
their Duty to embark themselves in the same Cause; though they knew not what
the Issue of so mighty a Work would be; which has caused some Persons of no
Mean Figure to say, These People deserve His Majesty's and the Nations Respect,
Countenance, and Speedy Restitution of all their Rights, and to be enabled by
His Majesty's Commissions to prosecute the War against France in America, which
they are capable to do without any considerable Charge to the Government.

And indeed New England, has upon the best Accounts which can be mentioned,
outdone all America.

For there they have erected an University, which began in the year 1642,
wherein things are managed, pro more Academiarum in Anglia: Several Persons of
more than ordinary Learning; yea, and many scores of able Ministers, of the
Gospel, have there had their Education.

There by the Statutes of the College, none is to be admitted, before he can
write Latin in a pure Style, and translate any ordinary Greek Author.

It is customary with them, every Morning in the Colledge-Hall, to read a
Chapter out of the Hebrew Bible, and at Night a Chapter out of the Greek
Original.

The Tutors there instruct their Pupils in Logic, Natural and Moral
Philosophy, Metaphysics, Geography, Astronomy, Arithmetic, Geometry, etc. and
the Learned Men there have a corresponding communication with other Learned Men
in diverse parts of the World, where the Reformed Religion is professed, and by
them highly reverenced for their Learning and Sobriety; an Instance of which
appears by the following Letter, written by the Eminent Mr. Kick, to the
Queen's Majesty that now is, in February last, by way of Supplication for New
England.

To Her Royal Highness the Princess of Orange, etc.
May it please your Royal Highness,
THE great and good God, who ^^th foretold us in the Scriptures, that a great
and wonderful Deliverance shall be wrought for his Church in the latter days,
when the Mountain of Zion shall be exalted in the top of the Mountains, seems
to have designed to m^^^ use of His Highness the Prince of Orange, and Your
Royal Highness, as Instruments in that glorious Deliverance: Having already
done such mavelous things in England by His Highness, in order to that great
Work; insomuch, that the Eyes of all the Protestant Churches, and People of
God, are this day toward His Highness, and Your Royal Highness, as Instruments
in God's Hand for the further carrying on of the Deliverance of his Church,
from the cruel Sufferings and Oppressions it is under in most parts of World.
For which reason I have taken the boldness to become Your. Royal Highnesses
humble Remembrancer, on the behalf of the People, and Church of God in New
England: Who about Seventy years since forsook their own Native Country, and
went into that howling Wilderness, that they might enjoy the Liberty of their
Consciences in the Worship of God. They are a People indeed not much taken
notice of, yet a People by and for whom God has done great things, and by
whose assistance the English Colonies and Plantations in America, and the
West India Islands may be much profited; and in case of War with France, many
of the French Colonies, in those parts, may be reduced to the Obedience and
Interest of the English Nation. They have erected a University amongst them,
that has produced very many able Divines, who have been very Instrumental in
the Conversion of many, of the Indians, to the Christian Faith, having for the
furtherance of that good Work, Translated the Bible into the Indian Tongue

Their Confession of Faith and Church Discipline, I have made bold to present
to Your Royal Highness, that you may see they are Orthodox. This People had a
Patent granted them by King James, to choose their own Governors, and to make
their own Laws, (not repugnant to the Laws of England) wh^^^ Patent was
Ratified to them by King Charles the First and Second, and so continued until
the late ill Mode of Quo Warranto's came up, and that they had one sent to them
about their Patent. For the defending of which, they stood a Trial at
Westminster Hall, and cast the King; but the King caused it to be brought to a
Review, and by Stratagems used then in such like Cases, forced a Judgment
against the said Patent; and thereupon took away all their Privileges, and
Imposed a Governor, and new Laws upon them, which they exceedingly much groan
under. And although I am satisfied, that so soon as they shall come to hear of
the great and wonderful things that God has done in England by His Highness,
for the Restoring of Charters and Privileges, they will then Address
themselves to Your Highnesses, seeking the Restoration of theirs; yet in regard
they are so many thousand Miles distant, it will be long e're it come to their
knowledge.

Therefore I have adventured on their behalf (having had a Correspondency with
the said People many years, and knowing how much they will suffer, if their new
Governor be not speedily removed) to give Your Royal Highness the trouble of
these Lines, praying to God that He will please to move your Heart to take the
First opportunity to help them to the Restoration of their Ancient Patent,
Privileges and Liberties: That they and all the Churches of God may have
reason to own His Highness, and Your Royal Highness, as Healers of their
Breaches, and Restorers of Paths to dwell in: And to rejoice in the Goodness of
God in fulfilling that Promise, of making Kings to be Nursing Fathers, and
Queens to be Nursing Mothers to his Church. I humbly beg your Royal Highnesses
Pardon for the trouble of these Lines, and take leave to subscribe my self,

GREAT MADAM, Your Royal Highnesses Most Obedient and Most humble Servant
ABRAHAM KICK.
Hague the First of February, 1689. S. N.

Nay, I will be bold to say, that New England has outdone the whole World;
for among the Indians, who a while since were mere Heathens, there are not only
many Congregations of them, who are converted to the Christian Faith, and the
Protestant (which is the only True) Religion: But no less than Four and twenty
of those Heathens, are now not only Christians, but Preachers of the Gospel of
Jesus Christ. And I challenge the whole World to produce me the like Instance,
as more fully appears by the following Relation, abstracted out of a Letter
written about two years since from Boston, by the Reverend Mr. Mather,
President of the College there, at the request, and unto the famous Dr. John
Leusden, Hebrew Professor in the University of Vtricht, and since translated
into diverse Languages in New England. The whole Bible has been translated into
the Indian Language, and there also printed: It Is above forty five years since,
that truly pious and godly Man, Mr. John Elliot, Minister of the Church at
Rocksborough (a Mile from Boston) being warmed with a Compassionate and Holy
Zeal for the Conversion of the Americans, set himself to learn the Indian
Tongue, that he might the more easily, and successfully open to them the
Mysteries of the Gospel; on account of which he has been (not undeservedly)
called the Apostle of the American Indians. This Reverend Person was he that,
with indefatigable Labor and Study, translated the whole Bible into the Indian
Tongue, and also several English Treatises of Practical Divinity and Catechisms.

About Twenty eight years since he gathered a Church of Converted Indians, in a
Town called Natick. These poor Indians were brought to such a sense of God and
Religion, that they confessed their Sins with Tears, and professed their Faith
in Christ; and afterward they and their Children were Baptized, and they were
Solemnly joined together in a Church Covenant: And Mr. Elliot was the first
that Administered the Lords Supper to them. The Minister of that Church is now
an Indian named Daniel.

Besides this Church at Natick, among our Inhabitants in the Massachusetts
Colony, there are Four Indian Assemblies; where the Name of the True God, and
Jesus Christ, is solemnly called upon. And these Four Assemblies have American
Preachers: Mr. Elliot formerly Preached to them once in Fourteen Days; but now
being Weakened with his Labors, and in the Eighty Sixth Year of his Age, does
not Preach to them more than once in Two Months.

About Fifty Miles from Boston is another Church consisting only of Converted
Indians; in an Indian Town, called Marshippang, the first Minister of which was
an Englishman, who being skilful in the American Language, Preached the Gospel
to them in their own Tongue; but this Minister is lately Dead, and they now
have an Indian Preacher.

There are besides that, Five Assemblies of Indians professing the Name of
Christ, not far distant from Marshippang, which have Indian Preachers, and also
are Preached unto in their own Language once every weak by Mr. John Cotton, Son
of the Famous Mr. John Cotton, sometimes Minister of the Church at Boston. In
Plymouth Colony of the Inhabitants of Saconet there is a great Congregation of
those who for distinctions sake, are called Praying Indians; Because they Pray
to God in Christ.

Not far from a Promontory called Cape Cod, are Six Assemblies of Heathens who
are to be reckoned as Catechumeni; amongst whom are Six Indian Preachers. Mr.
Samuel Treat Minister of a Church at East Ham, Preaches to these Congregations
in their own Language.

There are amongst the Islanders of Mantucket, a Church, with a Minister who
was lately a Heathen, and several meetings of Catechumeni, who are instructed
by the Converted Indians.

In the Island of Martha, which is about Twenty Two Miles long, are two
American Churches planted, which are more Famous than the rest, for that over
one of them presides an Ancient Indian Minister, called Hiacooms: John
Hiacooms, Son of the said Indian Minister, also Preaches the Gospel to his
Contrymen in (...) Church: in that place John Tockinosh, a Converted Indian
Teaches.

In these Churches Ruling Elders of the Indians are joined to the Ministers:
The Ministers were chosen by the People, and when they had Fasted and Prayed,
Mr. Elliott and Mr. Cotton laid their hands on them, so that they were solemnly
Ordained.

All the Congregations of the Converted Indians, (the Catechumeni and those
that are in Church Order) every Lords Day meet together, the Minister always
beginning with Prayer, and without a Form, because from the heart; when the
Ruler of the Assembly has ended his Prayer, the whole Cogregation of Indians,
praise God with Singing; in which many of them are excelling. After the Psalm,
he that Preaches reads a place of Scripture, and Expounds it, gathers Doctrins
from it, proves them by Scripture and reasons, and infers use from them after
the manner of the English, of whom they have been taught: Then another Prayer
to God in the Name of Christ concludes the whole Service, in which manner they
meet twice every Lord's Day; they observe no Holy Days, but the Lord's Day,
except upon some extraordinary occasion; and then they solemnly set apart whole
Days, either in giving thanks, or fasting and praying with great fervor of Mind.

Before the English came into these Parts, these Barbarous Nations were
altogether ignorant of the true God; hence it is, that in their Prayers and
Sermons, they use English Words and Terms.

He that calls upon the most Holy Name of God, says, Jehovah, or God, or Lord;
and also they have Learned, and borrowed many other Theological Phrases from
the English.

There are six Churches of Baptized Indians in New England, and eighteen
Assemblies of Catechumeni, professing the Name of Christ.

Of the Indians there are four and twenty who are Preachers of the Word of God,
and there are also four English Ministers who Preach the Gospel in the Indian
Tongue, and there are many of the Indians Children, who have learned by heart
the Catechism; either of that samous Divine Mr. Will. Perkins, or that put
forth by the Assembly of Divines at Westminster, and can in their own
Mother Tongue answer to all the questions in it.

Thus Sir I have endeavored to gratify your request with as much Brevity as
the Subject will admit, and exceeding the Bounds of a Letter, am forced to be
so prolix, and the rather for that most of what I have written is upon my own
knowledge, Truth (and the rest undeniable fact) though not the twentieth Part
of the Truths might be said of the Almighty's most wonderful blessing and
prospering New England, and his Gospel among the Heathen there, which to me
looks like the Beginnings of the fulfilling those many Prophecies in Holy Writ
concerning them.

And after all this, I cannot but admire there should be (as you say there is)
any Man in England, who owns but even the bare name of a Protestant, at such a
time as this, when God seems to have begun the Reformation of the whole World,
and eminently to appear for the True Reformed Religion, should be an Enemy unto
such a People as are in New England, and their Discipline, as to the Religious
Worship: When as to all knowing and unprejudiced persons, its consonant to the
practice of the Primitive Church, and of the Reformed Churches throughout the
World: Which one would think should not find an Enemy among any sort of
Christians, but those called Papists, or else among such, as Papist like can
give up their Religion, Rights, Liberties, and Properties, nay, their very
Senses to the conduct of their Fellow Creatures.

FINIS.
Books lately Printed for R. Baldwin.
THE History of the most Illustrious William, Prince of Orangc: deduced from
the first Founders of the Ancient House of Nassau: Together with the most
Considerable Actions of this Present Prince. Fourteen Papers, viz. 1. A Letter
from a Gentleman in Ireland, to his Fri^nd in London, upon occasion of a
Pamplet, Entitled, A Vindication of the present Government of reland, under
his Excellency Richard Earl of Tyrconnel. 2. A Letter from a Freeholder, to the
rest of the Freeholders of England, and all Others, who have Votes in the
Choice of Parliament M^^. 3. An Enquiry into the Reasons for Abrogating the
Test imposed on all Members of Parliament. Offered by S. Ox. 4. Reflections on
a late Pamphlet, Entitled, Parlimentum Pacificum, Licensed by the Earl of
Sunderland, and printed at London in March 1688. 5. A L^tter to a Dissenter,
upon occasion of his Majesty's Gracious Declaration of Indulgence. 6. The
Anatomy of an Equivalent. 7. A Letter from a Clergyman in the City, to his
Friend in the Country, containing his Reasons for not reading the Declaration.
8. An Answer to the City Minister's Letter, from his Country Friend. 9. A
Letter to a Dissenter from his Friend at the Hague, concerning the Penal Laws,
and the Test; showing, that the Popular Plea for Liberty of Conscience, is not
concerned in that Question. 10. A plain Account of the Persecution laid to the
Charge of the Church of England. 11. Abbey and other Church Lands, not Assured
to such Possessors as are Roman Catholics; Dedicated to the Nobility and
Gentry of that Religion. 12. The King's Power in Ecclesiastical matters truly
Stated. 13. A Letter of several French Ministers fled into Germany upon the
account of the Persecution in France, to such of their Brethren in England as
approved the King's Declaration touching Liberty of Conscience. Translated from
the Original in French. 14. Popish Treatise not to be Fely'd on: In a ^^tter
from a Gentleman at York, to his Friend in the Prince of Orange 's Camp:
Addressed to all Members of the next Parliament. The Way to Peace amongst all
Protestants: Being a Letter of Reconciliation sent by Bishop Ridley to Bishop
Hooper, with some Observations upon it. By Samuel Johnson. Purgatory proved by
Miracles: Collected out of Roman Catho^ick Authors. With some remarkable
Histories relating to British, English and Irish Saints. With a Preface
concerning Miracles By S. Johnson. An Historical Relation of several Great and
Learned Fomanists who did embrace the Protestant Beligion, with their Reasons
for their Change delivered in their own words. Collected chiefly from most
eminent Historians of the Roman Persuasion. To which is added, a Catalogue of
sundry great Persons of the Roman Catholic Religion, who have all along
opposed the Tenets of the Church of Rome. The Character of a Trimmer: His
Opinion of, 1. The Laws and Government. 2. Protestant Religion. 3. The Papists.
4. Foreign Affairs. By the Honorable Sir W. Coventry. A Seasonable Discourse,
showing the Unreasonableness and Mischiefs of Impositions in Matters of
Religion, recommended to serious Consideration. By Mr. Andr. Marvel, a late
Member of the Honorable House of Commons. The Revolter. A Trage-Comedy acted
between the Hind and Patter, and Religio Laici, etc. The Absolute Necessity of
Standing by the Present Government: or a View of what both Churchmen and
Dissenters must Expect, if by their Unhappy Divisions Popery and Tyranny should
return again. An Impartial Relation of the Illegal Proceedings against St. Mary
Magdalen College in Oxon, in the Year of our Lord 1687, containing only
Matters of Fact as they occurred. Collected by a Fellow of the said College.

