A Faithful ACCOUNT OF A Great Engagement, Which lately happened Betwixt Their
Majesty's Ship THE PEMBROOKE, Two French Men of War, UPON THE Coast of France.
WITH A particular Relation of the Famous Encounter, that was betwixt our
English, Seamen, that Landed there, and Five Hundred of the French Militia.
Also, An Account of the Plunder; etc. and other particulars.
Licensed, And Entered according to Order, 1690.
Honored Father,
ACcording to my Promises of sending you an Account of any thing that should
occur remarkable, during my being on Board the Pembroke, I herewith send the
Particulars of a late Action as follows: We having been, for some time,
cruising on the French Coast, on the Eleventh of this instant, about Five in
the Morning, we espied a Ship steering for some Place on the Coast of Normandy;
upon which, the Captain immediately commanded all Hands aloft, for the hoisting
up the broad Sheet, and to make all the sail possible we could toward her: But
before we could come up with her, she ran ashore upon the Sands, near a Place
called St. Valeires: We manned out a Tender, and a great Longboat, and sent
them in after her, in order to have brought her off: When they came up with
her, she briskly defended herself for some time; but after about half an hours
dispute, the French quitted their Ship, and swam to Shore, to the Number of
about Forty. After which, our Men immediately boarded the Ship, and found her
deeply laden with Hides, Tallow, Cotton, Wool, and a great quantity of fine
Frizes; in all, to the value of about Five Thousand Pounds sterling; most of
which, with the help of our Boats and Tenders, we brought off; but before we
could clear the Ship, and bring her off, the Country, Militia, or
Train'd-Bands, Horse and Foot, came down upon us, to the Number of Four or Five
Hundred: But it being a Tide of ebb, which was much spent, the Per^^^^^^ could
not bare enough of us, for their Cannon to protect us; so we were forced to
quit the Ship, after having set her on Fire in sight of the French Forces.

The next day (being the Twelfth Instant) we weighed, and stood directly for
the Coast of Deipe, in Normand, (which place, as likewise the whole Dukedom,
was formerly in Possession of the English,) having Advice of a French Man of
War of Twenty Six Guns, that was on this Coast; about Two in the Afternoon we
descried her, and made all the sail we could to come up with her; which she
perceiving, stood near to two small Castles, or Forts, that are near the Mouth
of Deipe. Our Captain encouraging his Men, we engaged the French Frigate, though
so near the Forts, from whence they sired likewise, but wit^ little or no
effect. After an hou^ and halfs Engagement with the French Man of War, (during
which time, our Officers and Seamen in general behaved themselves with a great
deal of Courage, Resolution, and Bravery, like true English Spirits; and we
having in that time killed a great many of her Men, at last) she was forced to
run directly under the two Forts, by whose Guns she was protected, or else we
had certainly taken her, for she was much disabled.

After this, we were for standing off to Sea again; but understanding that
there were a great (...) Fi^^^-Men upon the Coast, we went in pursuit of them;
and after some time spent in chasing of them, we took three of the largest and
best of them; but there were nine or ten more, which ran on shore, under the
Protection of their Forts, who fired hotly upon us, so that we could not bring
any more of them off. We expect to cruise some time longer upon these Coasts;
and whatever else shall fall out, during our continuance here, worth remark, I
shall not fail of giving you an Account; whom am,

SIR, Your Dutiful Son, C. M.

London: Printed for R. Hayhurst. 1690.


