Pietas in Patriam:

THE LIFE OF HIS EXCELLENCY Sir William PHIPS, Knt.

Late Captain General, and Governor in Chief of the Province of the
Massachuset-Bay, New England. Containing the Memorable Changes Undergone, and
Actions Performed by Him.

Written by one intimately acquainted with Him.

Discite Virtutem ex Hoe, verumque Laborem. LONDON: Printed by Sam. Bridge in
Austin-Friers, for Nath. Hiller at the Princes-Arms in Leaden Hall Street, over
against St. Mary-Ax, 1697.

To his Excellency the Earl of Bellomont, Baron of Coloony in Ireland, General
Governor of the Province of Massachusetts in New England, and the Provinces
annexed.
May it please your Excellency.
THE Station in which the Hand of the God of Heaven has disposed His Majesty's
Heart to place your Honor, does so manifestly entitle your Lordship to this
ensuing Narrative, that its being thus Presented to your Excellencies Hand is
thereby both Apologized for and Justified. I believe, had the Writer of it,
when he Penned it, had any Knowledge of your Excellency, he would himself have
done it, and withal would have amply and publicly Congratulated the People of
New England, on account of their having such a Governor, and your Excellency
on account of your being made Governor over them. For though as to some other
things it may possibly be a place to some Persons not so desirable, yet I
believe this Character may be justly given of them, that they are the best
People under Heaven; there being among them, not only less of open Profaneness,
and less of Lewdness, but also more of the serious Profession, Practice, and
Power of Christianity in proportion to their number, then is among any other
People upon the Face of the whole Earth. Not but I doubt, there are many bad
Persons among them, and too many distempered Humors, perhaps even among those
who are truly good. It would be a wonder, if it should be otherwise; for it
has of late Years on various accounts, and some very singular and unusual
ones, been a Day of sore Temptation with that whole People. Nevertheless, as I
look upon it as a Favor from God to those Plantations that he has set your
Excellency over them, so I do account it a Favor from God to your Excellency,
that he has committed and trusted in your Hand, so great a part of his
peculiar Treasure and precious Jewels, as are among that People. Besides, that
on other accounts the Lord Jesus has more of a visible Interest in New
England, then in any of the outgoings of the English Nation in America. They
have at their own Charge not only set up Schools of lower Learning up and down
the Country; but have also erected an University, which has been the happy
Nursery of many useful, Learned, and excellently accomplished Persons. And
moreover, from them has the blessed Gospel been Preached to the poor barbarous
savage Heathen there, and it has taken such root among them, that there were
lately four and twenty Assemblies in which the Name of the Lord Jesus was
constantly called on, and celebrated in their own Language. In these things New
England outshineth all the Colonies of the English in those goings down of the
Sun. I know your Excellency will Favor and Countenance their University, and
also the Propagating of the Gospel among the Natives; for the Interest of
Christ in that Part of the Earth is much concerned in them. That the God of the
Spirits of all Flesh would abundantly replenish your Excellency with a suitable
Spirit for the Service to which he has called your Lordship, that he would
give your Honor a prosperous Voyage thither, and when there, make your
Excellency a rich Blessing to that People, and them a rejoicing to your
Excellency, is the Prayer of

April 27. 1697. My Lord, Your Excellencies most Humble Servant. Nath. Mather.

THE CONTENTS OF THE SECTIONS.
SEct. 1. The Introduction. The Authors Ends in Writing this Remarkable
History, Page 1. Sect. 2. Some great Men with whom Sir William Phips might be
paralleled. An Account of his Birth in New England, and his Parentage, 3. Sect.
3. He was early inspired with great Hopes. Yet puts himself Apprentice to a
Shipwright. He Marries a Merchants Widow. Builds a Ship. Saves his Neighbors
from the cruelty of the Indians, 5. Sect. 4. He strangely foretells his future
Advancement. An Account of his Genius and Disposition. He goes to Sea in quest
of a Spanish Wreck. Sails to England for Assistance. Is made Captain of one of
the Kings Frigates, 6. Sect. 5. His Conduct and Courage when his Men Mutiny'd.
He gets Intelligence of the Place where the Spanish Wreck lay. Sails to England
again for farther help, 7. Sect. 6. His admirable Patience, Diligence, etc. in
prosecuting his Business. Returns to Port de la Plata in America. Happily finds
out the Wreck which had been cast away Fifty Years before. An Account how he
fished and brought up two and thirty Tuns of Silver, besides Gold and Jewels.
His Seamen Mutiny. He quiets them. Brings his Treasure, being about 300000 l.
Sterling to London. His Honesty both to his Employers, and to his Seamen. He is
Rewarded, and Knighted, Page 10. Sect. 7. His generous Temper, and great Love
to his Native Country. Some Account of the sad State of New England, by the
loss of its Charter, and by an ill Governor. Sir William Phips his endeavors
at Court to serve New England. He is made High Sheriff of that Country. Sails a
second time to the Wreck, with Sir John Narborough, 15. Sect. 8. A large
Account of New-Englands Sufferings and Oppressions under their bad Governor.
For redress whereof Sir William Phips makes a Voyage to England. King James
offers him the Government of New England on Terms which He could not accept. He
returns to New England. Finds his Country in new troubles from the Indians.
News is brought thither of the Prince of Orange's Success in England. An
Account how the Revolution was brought about in New England, their Governor
imprisoned, etc. 19. Sect. 9. Sir William Phips joins himself to a Church in
New England. His own Account of his Conversion to God, Page 26. Sect. 10. His
great Zeal to serve his Country. His Expedition against the French at L'Acady,
and Nova Scotia. He recovers that Country from them, Anno 1690. 30. Sect. 11. A
large Account of his Expedition against the French at Canada with a Fleet of 32
Ships, in the same Year. The Story out of Bradwardine of an Angel and Hermit,
that traveled together, 32. Sect. 12. Bills of Credit passed a little while in
New England instead of Money. Some farther Matters relating to the Canada
Expedition. A wonderful Relation of a Shipwreck, and how some of the Men were
strangely preserved: With the great hardships and difficulties they underwent
for six or seven Months, 43. Sect. 13. Sir William Phips makes a Voyage to
England, to obtain help for another Expedition against Canada. His Reasons
presented to the King, 52. Sect. 14. Some Account of Mr. Increase Mather 's
Negotiations at White Hall on the behalf of New England. Sir William Phips
joins with him. A new Charter is obtained. Sir William is made Captain General
and Governor of New England. He and Mr. Mather return home, 54. Sect. 15. How
wisely and uprightly Sir William governed New England, Page 62. Sect. 16. A
remarkable History of the strange Witchcrafts and Possessions in New England,
66. Sect. 17. Governor Phips raises an Army, and marches against the
Indians. Builds a Fort to bridle them. They sue for Peace, and own Subjection
to the Crown of England. His laborious endeavors for his Country. His Care to
send a Preacher to the Indians. He dispatches a Frigate to St. John 's against
the French. The Indians assisted by the French make a new War, 82. Sect. 18. A
Description and Character of Governor Phips, 88. Sect. 19. The Predictions of
an Astrologer concerning Sir William. And the Event, 96. Sect. 20. Governor
Phips, as good as he was, yet met with some Enemies. They Article against Him
at White Hall. The King sends for Him. He Sails to England where he meets with
Favor, and was like to have soon returned Governor of New England. But Dies
at London, and is there Buried, and with Him, Great Hopes and Designs for the
good of both Englands; some of which are recounted, 99. Sect. 21. Some farther
Things by way of Character and Elogy. A Poem upon his Death, 105.
THE Author of the following Narrative, is a Person of such well known
Integrity, Prudence and Veracity, that there is not any cause to Question the
Truth of what he here Relates. And moreover, this Writing of his is adorned
with a very grateful Variety of Learning, and does contain such surprising
workings of Providence, as do well deserve due Notice and Observation. On all
which accounts, it is with just Confidence recommended to the Public by

April 27. 1697. Nath. Mather, John How, Matthew. Mead.


THE LIFE Of His Excellency Sir William PHIPS, Knt. LATE GOVERNOR OF New
England.
SECTION I.
IF such a Renowned Chemist, as Quercetanus, with a whole Tribe of Laborers in
the Fire, since that Learned Man, find it no easy thing to make the common
part of Mankind believe, That they can take a Plant in it is more vigorous
Consistence, and after a due Maceration, Fermentation and Separation, extract
the Salt of that Plant, which, as it were, in a Chaos, invisibly reserves the
Form of the whole, with its vital Principle; and, that keeping the Salt in a
Glass Hermetically sealed, they can, by applying a Soft Fire to the Glass, make
the Vegetable rise by little and little, out of its Ashes, to surprise the
Spectators with a notable Illustration of that Resurrection, in the Faith
whereof the Jews returning from the Graves of their Friends, pluck up the Grass
from the Earth, using those Words of the Scripture thereupon, Your Bones shall
flourish like an Herb: It Is likely, that all the Observations of such Writers,
as the incomparable Borellus, will find it hard enough to produce our Belief,
that the Essential Salts of Animals, may be so prepared and Preserved that an
Ingenious man, may have the whole Ark of Noah in his own Study, and raise the
fine shape of an Animal out of it is Ashes, at his pleasure: and, that by the
like Method, from the Essential Salts of Humane Dust, a Philosopher may,
without any Criminal Necromancy, call up the Shape of any Dead Ancestor from
the Dust whereinto his Body has bin Incinerated. The Resurrection of the Dead,
will be as Just, as Great an Article of our Creed, although the Relations of
these Learned Men, should pass for Incredible Romances: But yet there is an
Anticipation of that Blessed Resurrection, carrying in it some Resemblance of
these Curiosities, which is performed, when we do in a Book, as in a Glass,
reserve the History of our Departed Friends, and by bringing our Warm
Affections unto such an History, we Revive, as it were out of their Ashes, the
True Shape of those Friends, and bring to a fresh View, What was Memorable and
Imitable in them. Now, in as much as Mortality has done its part upon a
Considerable Person, with whom I had the Honor to be Well-acquainted, and a
Person, as Memorable for the Wonderful Charges which befell him, as Imitable for
his Virtues and Actions under those Charges, I shall endeavor with the
Chemistry of an Impartial Historian to raise my Friend so far out of his Ashes
as to show him again unto the World, and if the Character of Heroic Virtue be
for a Man to deserve well of Markind, and be great in the Purpose and Success
of Essays, to do so, I may Venture to Promise my Reader such Example of Heroic
Virtue, in the Story whereto I Invite him, that he shall say, it would have bin
little short of a Vice in me, to have withheld it from him. Nor is it any
Partiality for the Memory of my Deceased Friend or any other Sinister Design
whatsoever, that has Invited me to this Undertaking; but I have undertaken this
Matter from a sincere Desire, that the Ever-Glorious Lord JESUS CHRIST may have
the Glory of his Power and Goodness, and of his Providence in what he did for
such a Person, and in what He disposed and Assisted that Person to Do for Him.
Now, May He assist my writing, even He that prepared the Subject, whereof I am
to write!

SECT. 2.
SO obscure was the Original of that Memorable Person, whose Actions I am going
to relate, that I must, in a way of Writing, like that of Plutarch, prepare my
Reader for the Intended Relation, by first searching the Archives of Antiquity
for a Parallel. Now, because we will not Parallel him with Eumenes, who, though
he were the Son of a poor Carrier, became a Governor of Mighty Provinces; Nor
with Marius, whose mean Parentage did not hinder his becoming a Glorious
Defender of his Country, and Seven Times the chief Magistrate of the chiefest
City in the Universe: Nor with Iphicrates, who became a Successful and Renwoned
General of a Great People, though his Father were a Cobbler: Nor with
Dioclesian, the Son of a poor Scrivener: Nor with Bonosus, the Son of a poor
Schoolmaster, who yet came to sway the Scepter of the Roman Empire: Nor
lastly, will I compare him to the more late Example of the Celebrated Mazarini,
who though no Gentleman by his Extraction, and one so sorily Educated, that he
might have wrote Man, before he could write at all; yet as^ended unto that
Grandeur, in the Memory of many yet living, as to Umpire the most Important
Affairs of Christendom: We will decline looking any further in that Haemisphere
of the World, and make the Hue and Cry throughout the Regions of America, the
New World, which He, that is becoming the subject of our History, by his
Nativity, belonged unto. And in America, the first that meets me, is Francisco
Pizarro, who, though a Spurious Offspring, exposed when a Babe, in a
Church Porch, at a sorry Village of Navarre, and afterward employed while he
was a Boy, in keeping of Cattle, yet, at length, stealing into America, he so
thrived upon his Adventures there, that upon some Discoveries, which with an
handful of Men, he had in a Desperate Expedition made of Peru, he obtained the
King of Spain's Commission for the Conquest of it, and at last, so incredibly
enricht himself by the Conquest, that he was made the first Viceroy of Peru,
and created Marquess of Anatilla.

To the Latter and Highest Part of that Story, if any thing hindered His
Excellency Sir WILLIAM PHIPS from affording of a Parallel, it was not the want
either of Design, or of Courage, or of Conduct in himself, but it was the Fate
of a Praemature Mortality. For my Reader now being satisfied, That a Person's
being Obscure in his Original, is not always a Just Prejudice to an Expectation
of Considerable Matters from him; I shall now inform him, That this our PHIPS
was Born Feb. 2. A. Dom. 1650. at a despicable Plantation on the River of
Kennebeck, and almost the furthest Village of the Eastern Settlement of
New England. And as the Father of that Man, which was as great a Blessing as
England had in the Age of that Man, was a Smith, so a Gun-Smith, namely, James
Phips, once of Bristol, had the Honor of being the Father to him, whom we
shall presently see, made by the God of Heaven, as Great a Blessing to
New England, as that Country could have had, if they themselves had pleased.
His fruitful Mother, yet living, had no less than Twenty Six Children, whereof
Twenty One were Sons; but aequivalent to them all was WILLIAM, one of the
youngest, whom his Father dying, left young with his Mother, and with her he
lived, keeping of Sheep in the Wilderness, until he was Eighteen Years Old; at
which Time, he began to feel some further Dispositions of Mind from that
Providence of God which took him from the Sheepfolds, from following the Ewes
great with young, and brought him to feed his People. Reader, Enquire no
further who was his Father? Thou shall anon see, that he was, as the Italians
express it. A Son to his own Labors!

SECT. 3.
HIS Friends earnestly solicited him to settle among them in a Plantation of
the East; but he had an Unaccountable Impulse upon his Mind, persuading him, as
he would privately hint unto some of them, That he was Born to Greater Matters.
To come at those Greater Matters, his first Contrivance was to bind himself an
Apprentice unto a Ship-Carpenter for Four Years; in which Time, he became a
Master of the Trade, that once in a Vessel of more than Forty Thousand Tuns,
Repaired the Ruins of the Earth. He then betook himself an Hundred and Fifty
Miles further a Field, even to Boston, the chief Town of New England; which
being a Place of the most Business and Resort in those parts of the World; he
expected there more commodiously to pursue the Spes Majorum and Meliorum, Hopes
which had Inspired him. At Boston, where it was that he now learnt, first of
all, to Read and Write; be followed his Trade for about a Year; and, by a
laudable Deportment, so recommended himself, that he Married a Young
Gentlewoman of Good Repute, who was the Widow of one Mr. John Hull, a well-bred
Merchant, but the Daughter of one Captain Roger Spencer, a Person of good
Fashion, who having suffered much damage in his Estate, by some unkind and
unjust actions, which he bore with such Patience, that for fear of thereby
injuring the Public, he would not seek satisfaction, Posterity might
afterward see the reward of his patience, in what Providence has now done for
one of his own Posterity. Within a little while after his Marriage, he Indented
with several persons in Boston, to build them a Ship at Sheeps-coat River, two
or three Leagues Eastward of Kennebeck; where having Lanched the Ship, he also
provided a Lading of Lumber to bring with him, which would have been to the
advantage of all concerned. But just as the Ship was hardly finished, the
barbarous Indians on that River, broke forth into an Open and Cruel War upon
the English; and the miserable People, surprised by so sudden a storm of Blood,
had no Refuge from the Infidels, but the Ship now finishing in the Harbor.
Whereupon, he left his intended Lading behind him, and instead thereof, carried
with him, his Old Neighbors and their Families, free of all Charges to Boston;
So, the First Action that he did, after he was his own Man, was to Save his
Fathers House, with the rest of the Neighborhood, from Ruin; but the
Disappointment which befell him from the Loss of his other Lading, plunged his
Affairs into greater Embarassments with such as had employed him.

SECT. 4.
BUT he was hitherto, no more than beginning to make Scaffolds for further and
higher Actions! He would frequently tell the Gentlewoman his Wife, That he
should yet be Captain of a King's Ship; That he should come to have the Command
of better Men than he was now accounted himself; And, That he should be Owner
of a Fair Brick-House in the Green-Lane of North-Boston; and, That it may be,
this would not be all that the Providence of God would bring him to. She
entertained these Passages with a sufficient Incredulity; but he had so serious
and positive an Expectation of them, that it is not casie to say, what was the
Original thereof. He was of an Enterprizing Genius, and naturally disdained
Littleness: But his Disposition for Business was of the Dutch Mould, where,
with a little show of Wit, there is as much Wisdom demonstrated, as can be
shown by any Nation. His Talent lay not in the Airs, that serve chiefly for the
pleasant and sudden Turns of Conversation; but, he might say, as Themistocles,
Though he could not play upon a Fiddle, yet he knew how to make a little City
become a Great One. He would prudently contrive a weighty Undertaking, and then
patiently pursue it unto the End. He was of an Inclination, cutting rather like
a Hatchet, than like a Razor; he would propose very Considerable Matters to
himself, and then so cut through them, that no Difficulties could put by the
Edge of his Resolutions. Being thus of the True Temper, for doing of Great
Things, he betakes himself to the Sea, the Right Scene for such Things; and
upon Advice of a Spanish Wreck about the Bahama's, he took a Voyage thither;
but with little more success, than what just served him a little to furnish him
for a Voyage to England; whither he went in a Vessel, not much unlike that,
which the Dutchmen stamped on their First Coin, with these Words about it,
Incertum quo Fata ferant. Having first informed himself, that there was another
Spanish Wreck, wherein was lost a mighty Treasure, hitherto undiscovered, he
had a strong Impression upon his Mind, that He must be the Discoverer; and he
made such Representations of his Design at White Hall, that by the Year 1683,
he became the Captain of a King's Ship, and arrived at New England, Commander
of the Algier-Rose, a Frigate of Eighteen Guns, and Ninety five Men.

SECT. 5.
TO Relate all the Dargers through which he passed, both by Sea and Land, and
all the Tiresome Trials of his Patience, as well as of his Courage, while Year
after Year, the most vexing Accidents imaginable, delayed the Success of his
Design, it would even Tire the patience of the Reader: For very great was the
Experiment that Captain Phips made of the Italian Observation, He that cannot
suffer both Good and Evil, will never come to any great Preferment. Wherefore I
shall supersede all Journal of his Voyages to and fro, with reciting one
Instance of his Conduct, that showed him to be a Person of no contemptible
Capacity. While he was Captain of the Algier-Rose, his Men growing weary of
their unsuccessful Enterprise, made a Mutiny, wherein they approached him on
the Quarter Deck, with Drawn Swords in their Hands, and required him to join
with them in Running away with the Ship, to drive a Trade of Pyracy on the
South Seas. Captain Phips, though he had not so much of a Weapon, as an
Ox-Goad, or a Jaw Bone in his Hands, yet like another Shamgar or Sampson, with
a most undaunted Fortitude, he rushed in upon them, and with the Blows of his
bare Hands, Felled many of them, and Quelled all the Rest. But this is not the
Instance which I intended: That which I intend is, That (as it has been related
unto me) One Day, while his Frigate lay Careening, at a desolate Spanish
Island, by the side of a Rock, from whence they had laid a Bridge to the Shore,
the Men, whereof he had about an Hundred, went all but about Eight or Ten, to
divert themselves, as they pretended, in the Woods: Where, they all entered into
an Agreement, which they Signed in a Ring, That about seven a Clock that
Evening, they would seize the Captain, and those Eight or Ten, which they knew
to be True unto him, and leave them to perish on this Island, and so be gone
away unto the South Sea to seek their Fortune. Will the Reader now imagine,
that Captain Phips having Advice of this Plot, but about an Hour and half
before it was to be put in Execution, yet within Two Hours brought all these
Rogues down upon their Knees, to beg for their lives? But so it was! For these
Knaves considering, that they should want a Carpenter with them in their
Villainous Expedition, sent a Messenger to fetch unto them the Carpenter, who
was then at Work upon the Vessel; and unto him they showed their Articles,
telling him what he must look for, if he did not subscribe among them. The
Carpenter being an honest Fellow, did with much importunity, prevail for one
half hours Time to consider of the Matter; and returning to Work upon the
Vessel, with a Spy by them set upon him, he feigned himself taken with a Fit of
the Cholick, for the Relief whereof he suddenly run unto the Captain in the
Great Cabin for a Dram; where, when he came, his business was only in brief,
to tell the Captain of the horrible Distress which he was fallen into; but the
Captain bid him as briefly, return to the Rogues in the Woods, and Sign their
Articles, and leave him to provide for the Rest. The Carpenter was no sooner
gone, but Captain Phips calling together the few Friends (it may be seven or
eight) that were left him aboard, whereof the Gunner was one, demanded of them,
whether they would stand by him in the Extremity, which he informed them was
now come upon him; whereto they replied, They would stand by him, if he could
save them; And he Answered, By the help of God, he did not fear it. All their
Provisions had been carried a shore to a Tent, made for that purpose there;
about which they had placed several Great Guns to defend it, in case of any
Assault from Spaniards, that might happen to come that way. Wherefore Captain
Phips, immediately ordered those Guns to be silently Drawn and Turned; and so,
pulling up the Bridge, he charged his Great Guns aboard, and brought them to
Bear on every side of the Tent. By this Time the Army of Rebels comes out of
the Woods; but as they ^rew near to the Tent of Provisions, they saw such a
change of Circumstances, that they cried out, We are Betrayed! and they were
soon confirmed in it, when they heard the Captain with a stern Fury call to
them, Stand off, ye Wretches at your Peril! He quickly saw them cast into a
more than ordinary confusion, when they saw Him ready to Fire his Great Guns
upon them, if they offered one Step further than he permitted them: And, when
he had signified unto them his Resolve to abandon them unto all the Desolation
which they had purposed for him; he caused the Bridge to be again laid, and his
Men begun to take the Provisions aboard. When the Wretches beheld what was
coming upon them, they fell to very humble Entreaties; and at last, fell down
upon their Knees, protesting, That they never had any thing against him, except
only his unwillingness to go away with the King's Ship upon the South Sea
Design: But upon all other Accounts, they would choose rather to Live and Die
with him, than with any Man in the World; however, since they saw how much he
was dissatisfied at it, they would insist upon it no more, and humbly begged
his Pardon. And when he judged, that he had kept them on their Knees long
enough, he having first secured their Arms, received them aboard; but he
immediately weighed Anchor, and arriving at Jamaica, he Turned them off. Now
with a small Company of other Men, he sailed from thence to Hispaniola, where,
by the Policy of his Address, he fished out of a very old Spaniard, (or
Portuguese) a little advice about the true Spot where lay the Wreck, which he
had been hitherto seeking, as unprosperously, as the Chemists have their
Aurifick Stone: That it was upon a Reef of Shoals, a few Leagues to the
Northward of Port de la Plata, upon Hispaniola, a Port so called, it seems,
from the Landing of some of the Ship-wreck'd Company, with a Boat full of
Plate, saved out of their Sinking Frigate: Nevertheless, when he had searched
very narrowly the Spot, whereof the Old Spaniard had advised him, he not
hitherto exactly lit upon it. Such Thorns did vex his Affairs, while he was in
the Rose-Frigat; but none of all these things could retund the Edge of his
Expectations to find the Wreck; with such Expectations he returned then into
England, that he might there better furnish himself to Prosecute a New
Discovery; for though he judged, he might, by proceeding a little further, have
come at the right Spot, yet he found his present Company too ill a Crew to be
confided in.

SECT. 6.
SO proper was his Behavior, that the best Noble Men in the Kingdom, now
admited him into their Conversation; but yet he was opposed by powerful
Enemies, that Clogged his Affairs with such Demurrages, and such
Disappointments, as would have wholly Discouraged his Designs, if his Patience
had not bin Invincible. He who can wait, has what he desires. This his
Indefatigable Patience, with a proportionable Diligence, at length overcame the
Difficulties that had bin thrown in his way; and prevailing with the Duke of
Albemarl, and some other Persons of Quality, to fit him out, he set Sail for
the Fishing-Ground, which had bin so well baited, half an Hundred Years before:
And as he had already discovered his Capacity for business, in many
considerable Actions, he now added unto those Discoveries, by not only
providing all, but also by inventing many of the Instruments necessary to the
prosecution of his intended Fishery. Captain Phips arriving with a Ship and a
Tender, at Port de la Plata, made a stout Canoo of a stately Cotton Tree, so
large as to carry Eight or Ten Oars, for the making of which Periaga (as they
call it) he did, with the same industry that he did every thing else, employ
his own Hand and Adse, and endure no little hardship, lying abroad in the Woods
many Nights together. This Periaga, with the Tender, being Anchored at a place
convenient, the Periaga kept Busking to and again, but could only discover a
Reef of Rising Shoals thereabouts, called The Boilers, which Rising to be
within Two or Three Foot of the Surface of the Sea, were yet so steep, that a
Ship striking on them, would immediately sink down, who could say, how many
Fathom? into the Ocean. Here they could get no other Pay for their long peeping
among the Boilers, but only such as caused them to think upon returning to
their Captain, with the bad News of their total Disappointment. Nevertheless,
as they were upon the Return, one of the Men looking over the side of the
Periaga, into the calm Water, he spied a Sea Feather, growing as he judged, out
of a Rock; whereupon they bad one of their Indians to Dive, and fetch this
Feather, that they might however carry home something with them, and make, at
least, as fair a Trinmph as Caligula's. The Diver, bringing up the Feather,
brought therewithal a surprising story, That he perceived a Number of Great
Guns in the Watery World where he had found his Feather; the Report of which
Great Guns exceedingly astonished the whole Company; and at once, turned their
Despondencies for their ill success, into Assurances, that they had now lit
upon the True spot of Ground which they had been looking for; and they were
further confirmed in these Assurances, when upon further Diving, the Indian
fetched up a Sow, as they styled it, or a Lump of Silver, worth perhaps, Two or
Three Hundred Pounds. Upon this they prudently Buoyed the place, that they
might readily find it again; And they went back unto their Captain, whom for
some while, they distressed with nothing but such Bad News, as they formerly
thought they must have carried him: Nevertheless they so slipped in the Sow of
Silver, on one side under the Table, where they were now sitting with the
Captain, and hearing him express his Resolutions to wait still patiently upon
the Providence of God under these Disappointments, that when he should look on
one side, he might see that Odd Thing before him. At last he saw it; seeing it,
he cried out with some Agony, Why? What is this? Whence comes this? And then,
with changed Countenances, they told him how, and where they got it: Then, said
he, Thanks be to God! We are made; And so, away they went, all hands to Work;
wherein they had this one further piece of Remarkable Prosperity, that whereas,
if they had first fallen upon that part of the Spanish Wreck, where the Pieces
of Eight had been stowed in Bags among the Ballast, they had seen a more
laborious, and less enriching time of it: Now, most happily, they first fell
upon that Room in the Wreck, where the Bullion had been stored up; and they so
prospered in this New Fishery, that in a little while they had, without the
loss of any Man's Life, brought up Thirty Two Tuns of Silver; for it was now
come to measuring of Silver by Tuns. Besides which, one Adderly of Providence,
who had formerly been very helpful to Captain Phips in the Search of this
Wreck, did upon former Agreement meet him now, with a little Vessel here; and
he, with his few hands, took up about Six Tuns of Silver; whereof nevertheless,
he made so little use, that in a year or two, he died at Bermudas, and as I
have heard, he ran Distracled some while before he died. Thus did there once
again, come into the Light of the Sun, a Treasure which had been half an
Hundred Years groaning under the Waters: And in this time, there was grown upon
the Plate, a Crust like ^imestone, to the thickness of several Inches; which
Crust being broken open, by Irons contrived for that purpose, they knocked out
whole Bushels of rusty Pieces of Eight, which were grown thereinto. Besides
that incredible Treasure of Plate in various forms, thus fetched up, from seven
or eight Fathom under Water, there were vast Riches of Gold and Pearls and
Jewels, which they also lit upon; and indeed, for a more Comprehensive Invoice,
I must but summarily say, All that a Spanish Frigate uses to be enricht withal.
Thus did they continue Fishing till their Provisions failing them, 'twas time
to be gone; but before they went, Captain Phips caused Adderly and his Folk to
swear, That they would none of them Discover the place of the Wreck, or come to
the Place any more till the next Year, when he expected again to be there
himself. And it was also Remarkable, that though the Sows came up still so
fast, that on the very last Day of their being there, they took up Twenty, yet
it was afterward found, that they had in a manner wholly cleared that Room of
the Ship, where those Massy things were Stowed.

But there was one extraordinary Distress which Captain Phips now found himself
plunged into: For his Men were come out with him upon Seamens Wages, at so much
per Month; and when they saw such vast Litters of Silver Sows and Pigs, as they
call them, come on Board them, at the Captains Call, they knew not how to bear
it, that they should not share all among themselves, and be gone to lead a
short life and a merry, in a Climate, where the Arrest of those that had hired
them, should not reach them. In this terrible Distress, he made his Vows unto
Almighty God, that if the Lord would carry him safe home to England, with what
he had now given him, to suck of the abundance of the Seas, and of the
Treasures hid in the Sands, he would for ever Devote himself unto the Interests
of the Lord Jesus Christ, and of his People, especially in the Country which he
did himself Originally belong unto. And he then used all the obliging Arts
imaginable, to make his Men true unto him, especially by assuring them, that
besides their Wages, they should have ample Requitals made unto them; which if
the rest of his Employers would not agree unto, he would himself distribute his
own share among them. Relying upon the Word of One, whom they had ever found
worthy of their Love, and of their Trust, they declared themselves Content: But
still keeping a most careful Eye upon them, he hastened back for England, with
as much Money as he thought he could then safely Trust his Vessel withal; not
counting it safe to supply himself with necessary Provisions at any nearer
Port, and so return unto the Wreck, by which delays, he wisely feared lest all
might be lost, more ways than one. Though he also left so much behind him, that
many from diverse parts made very considerable Voyages of Gleanings after his
Harvest: which came to pass by certain Bermudians, compelling of Adderly's Boy,
whom they spirited away with them, to tell them the exact place where the Wreck
was to be found. Captain Phips now coming up to London, in the Year 1687. with
near Three Hundred Thousand Pounds sterling aboard him, did acquit himself with
such an Exemplary Honesty, that partly by his fulfilling his Assurances to the
Scamen, and partly by his exact and punctual Care to have his Employers
defrauded of nothing that might conscientiously belong unto them, he had less
than sixteen Thousand pounds left unto himself: As an acknowledgment of which
Honesty in him, the Duke of Albemarl made unto his Wife, whom he never saw, a
Present of a Golden Cup, near a Thousand Pound in value. The Character of an
Honest Man, he had so merited in the whole Course of his Life, and especially
in this last act of it, that this, in conjunction with his other serviceable
Qualities, procured him the Favors of the Greatest Persons in the Nation; And
He that had been so diligent in his Business, must now stand before Kings, and
not stand before mean Men, There were indeed, certain mean Men, if base,
little, dirty Tricks will entitle Men to Meanness, who urged the King, to seize
his whole Cargoe, instead of the Tenths, upon his first Arrival; on this
pretense, that he had not been rightly informed of the True state of the Case,
when he Granted the Patent, under the Protection whereof these particular Men
had made themselves Masters of all this Mighty Treasure; but the King replied,
That he had been rightly informed by Captain Phips of the whole matter, as it
now proved, and that it was the slanders of one then present, which had, unto
his Damage, hindered him from harkening to the Information: Wherefore he would
give them, he said, no Disturbance, they might keep what they had got; but
Captain Phips, he saw, was a Person of that Honesty, Fidelity and Ability, that
he should not want his Countenance. Accordingly the King, in consideration of
the Service done by him, in bringing such a Treasure into the Nation, conferred
upon him the Honor of Knighthood; And if we now reckon him, A Knight of the
Golden Fleece, the Style might pretend unto some circumstances that would
justify it. Or call him, if you please, The Knight of Honesty; for it was
Honesty with Industry, that Raised him; and he became a Mighty River, without
the running in of Muddy Water to make him so. Reader, Now make a Pause, and
behold, One Raised by God!

SECT. 7.
I am willing to Employ the Testimonies of others, as much as may be, to
support the Credit of my History: And therefore, as I have hitherto related ^o
more than what there are Others enough to avouch; Thus I shall choose the Words
of an Ingenious Person Printed at London some Years ago, to express the Sum of
what remains, whose Words are these, It has always been Sir William Phips's
Disposition to seek the Wealth of his People with as great Zeal and
Unweariedness, as our Publicans use to seek their Loss and Ruin. At first it
seems, they were in hopes to gain this Gentleman to their Party, as thinking
him Good-natured, and easy to be flattered out of his Understanding; and the
more, because they had the advantage of some, no very good Treatment that Sir
William had formerly met with, from the People and Government of New England.
But Sir William soon showed them, that what they expected would be his
Temptation to lead them into their little Tricks, he embraced as a Glorious
Opportunity to show his Generosity and Greatness of Mind; for, in Imitation of
the Greatest Worthies that have ever been, he rather chose to join in the
Defense of his Country, with some Persons, who formerly were none of his
Friends, t^a^ become the Head of a Faction, to its Ruin and ^esolation. It
seems this Noble Disposition of Sir William, joined with that Capacity and good
Success wherewith he has been attended, in Raising himself by such an
Occasion, as it may be, all things considered, has never happened to any before
him, makes these Men apprehensive; -- And it must needs heighten their trouble
to see, that he neither has, nor does spare himself, nor any thing that is
near and dear unto him, in promoting the Good of his Native Country.

When Sir William Phips was per ardua and aspera, thus Raised into an Higher
Orb, it might easily be thought that he could not be without Charming
Temptations to take the way on the left hand. But as the Grace of God kept him
in the midst of none of the strictest Company, unto which his Affairs daily led
him, from abandoning himself to the lewd Vices of Gaming, Drinking, Swearing
and Whoring, which the Men that made England to sin, debauched so many of the
Gentry into, and he deserved the salutations of the Roman Poet: Cum Tu, inter
scabiem tantam, and Contagia Lucri,
Nil parvum sapias, and adhuc Sublimia cures:


Thus, he was worthy to pass among the Instances of Heroic Virtue for that
Humility that still Adorned him: He was Raised, and though he prudently
accommodated himself to the Quality whereto he was now Raised, yet none could
perceive him to be Lifted up. Or, if this were not Heroic, yet I will Relate
one Thing more of him, that must certainly be accounted so. He had in his own
Country of New England, met with Provocations, that were enough to have
Alienated any man Living that had no more than Flesh and Blood in him, from the
Service of it; and some that were Enemies to that Country, now lay hard at him
to join with them, in their Endeavors to Ravish away their Ancient Liberties.
But this Gentleman had studied another way to Revenge himself upon his Country,
and that was to serve it, in all ^ts Interests, with all of his, even with his
Estate, ^^s Time, his Care, his Friends, and his very Life! The Old Heathen
Virtue of PIETAS IN PATRIAM, or, LOVE TO ONES COUNTRY, he turned into
Christian; and so notably exemplified it, in all the Rest of his Life, that it
will be an Essential Thread which is to be now interwoven into all that remains
of his History, and his Character. Accordingly though he had the Offers of a
very Gainful Place among the Commissioners of the Navy, with many other
Invitations to settle himself in England, nothing but a Return to New England
would content him. And whereas the Charters of New England being taken away,
there was a Governor Imposed upon the Territories with as Arbitrary, and as
Treasonable a Commission perhaps, as ever was heard of; a Commission, by which
the Governor, with Three or Four more, none of whom were chosen by the People,
had Power to make what Laws they would, and Levy Taxes, according to their own
Humors, upon the people; and he himself had Power to send the Best men in the
Land, more than Ten Thousand miles out of it, as he pleased: And in the
Execution of his Power, the Country was every day suffering Intolerable
Invasions upon their Proprieties, yea, and the Lives of the Best Men in the
Territory began to be practiced upon: Sir William Phips applied himself to
Consider what was the most significant Thing that could be done by him for that
poor people, in their present Circumstances. Indeed, when King James offered,
as he did, unto Sir William Phips an Opportunity to Ask what he pleased of Him,
Sir William Generously prayed for nothing but This, That New England might have
its Lost Privileges Restored. The King then Replied, Any Thing but that!
whereupon he set himself to Consider what was the Next Thing, that he might Ask
for the service, not of himself but of his Country. The Result of his
Consideration was, That by Petition to the King, he Obtained, with Expense of
some Hundreds of Guinea's, a Patent, which constituted him The High Sheriff of
that Country; Hoping, by his Deputies. in that Office, to supply the Country
still with Conscientious Juries, which was the Only Method that the
New-Englanders had left them, to secure any thing that was Dear unto them.
Furnished with this Patent after he had in Company with Sir John Narborough,
made a Second Visit unto the Wreck (not so advantageous as the former, for a
Reason already mentioned) in his way he Returned unto New England, in the
Sumaner of the Year 1688. able, after Five Years Absence, to Entertain his Lady
with some Accomplishment of his Predictions; and then Built himself a Fair
Brick House in the very place, which we foretold, the Reader can tell how many
Sections ago. But the Infamous Government then Rampant there, found a way
wholly to put by the Execution of this Patent; yea, he was like to have had his
Person assassinated in the face of the Sun, before his own Door, which, with
some further Designs then in his Mind, caused him, within a few Weeks to take
another Voyage for Ergland.

SECT. 8.
IT Would require a long Summers-Day to Relate the miseries which were come,
and coming in upon poor New England, by reason of the Arbitrary Government then
Imposed on them; A Government wherein, as Old Wendover says of the Time, when
Strangers were domineering over Subjects in England, Judicia committebantur
Injustis, Leges Exlegibus, Pax Discordantibus, Justitia Injuriosis; and Foxes
were made the Administrators of Justice to the Poultrey; yet some Abridgement
of them is necessary for the better understanding of the Matters yet before us.
Now, to make this Abridgment Impartial, I shall only have Recourse unto a
Little Book, Printed at London, under the Title of The Revolution of
New England Justisied; wherein we have a Narrative of the Grievances under the
Male Administrations of that Government, written and signed by the chief
Gentlemen of the Governor's Council; together with the Sworn Testimonies of
many Good men, to prove the Several Articles of the Declaration, which the
New-Englanders published against their Oppressors. It is in that Book
demonstrated.

That, the Governor neglecting the Greater Number of his Council, did Adhere
principally to the Advice of a few Strangers, who were persons without any
Interest, in the Country, but of Declared Prejudice against it, and had plainly
laid their Designs to make an Unreasonable Profit of the poor people: and four
or five persons had the Absolute Rule over a Territory, the most Considerable
of any belorging to the Crown.

That when Laws were proposed in the Council, tho the major part at any time
Dissented from them, yet, if the Governor were positive, there was no fair
Counting the Number of Counselors Consenting, or Dissenting, but the Laws were
immediately Engrossed, published and Executed.

That, This Junto made a Law, which prohibited the Inhabitants of any Town, to
meet about their Town-Affairs, above once in a year; for fear, you must Note,
of their having any opportunity to Complain of Grievances.

That they made another Law, requiring all Masters of Vessels, even Shallops,
and Wood-boats to give Security, that no Man should be Transported in them,
except his name had been so many Days posted up: whereby the Pockets of a few
Leeches had been filled with Fees, but the whole Trade of the Country
destroyed; and all Attempts to obtain a Redress of these Things obstructed; And
when this Act had been strenuously opposed in Council at Boston, they carried
it as far as New York, where a Crew of them enacted it.

That, without any Assembly, they Levied on the People, a penny in the pound of
all their Estates, and Twenty-pence per Head, as Poll-money, with a penny in
the Pound for Goods Imported, besides a Vast Exeise on Wine, Rum and other
Liquors.

That, when among the Inhabitants of Ipswich, some of the Principal Persons
modestly gave Reasons, why they could not choose a Commissioner to Tax the
Town, until the King should first be Petitioned for the Liberty of an Assembly,
they were committed unto Gaol for it, as an High Misdemeanour, and were denied
an Habeas Corpus, and were dragged many Miles out of their own County to answer
it at a Court in Boston; where Jurors were picked for the Turn, that were not
Freeholders, nay, that were mere sojourners; and when the Prisoners pleaded the
Privileges of Englishmen, That they should not be Taxed without their own
consent, they were told, That those things would not follow them to the ends of
the earth: As it had been before told them in open Council, no one in the
Council contradicting it, You have no more Privileges left you, but this, that
you are not bought and sold for Slaves: And in fine, they were all fined
severely, and laid under great Bonds for their Good Behavior; besides all
which, the hurgry Officers extorted Fees from them that amounted unto an
Hundred and Threescore Pounds, whereas in England, upon the like Prosecution,
the Fees would not have been Ten Pounds in all. After which fashion the
Townsmen of many other Places were also served.

That These Men giving out, That the Charters being lost, all the Title that
the People had unto their Lands, was lost with them; they began to compel the
People every where, to take Patents for their Lands: And accordingly Writs of
Intrusion were issued out against the chief Gentlemen in the Territory, by the
Terror whereof, many were actually driven to Petition for Patents, that they
might quietly enjoy the Lands that had been fifty or sixty Years in their
possession, But for these Patents, there were such exorbitant Prices demanded,
that Fifty Pounds could not purchase for its Owner, an Estate not worth Two
Hundred, nor could all the Money and Movables in the Territory have defrayed
the Charges of Patenting the Lands, at the Hands of these Crocodiles: besides
the considerable Quit-Rents for the King. Yea, the Governor caused the Lands
of particular persons to be measured out, and given to his Creatures: And some
of his Council Petitioned for the Commons belonging to several Towns; and the
Agents of the Towns, going to get a voluntary Subscription of the Inhabitants
to maintain their Title at Law, they have been dragged Forty or Fifty Miles, to
answer as Criminals at the next Assizes; the Officers, in the mean time,
extorting three Pounds per Man, for fetching them.

That, if these Harpies, at any Time, were a little out of Money, they found
ways to Imprison the best men in the Country; and there appeared not the least
Information of any Crime exhibited against them, yet they were put unto
Intolerable Expenses by these Greedy Oppressors, and the Benefit of an Habeas
Corpus not allowed unto them.

That pack't and picked Juries were Commonly made use of, when under a
Pretended Form of Law, the Trouble of some Honest and Worthy Men, was aimed at;
and these also were hurried out of their own Counties to be tried, when Juries
for the Turn, were not like to be found there. The Greatest Rigor being used
still toward the soberest sort of people whilst in the mean time the most
horrid Enormities, in the World committed by Others, were overlooked.

That, The public Ministry of the Gospel, and All Schools of Learning, were
discountenanced unto the Utmost.

And several more such abominable things, too notorious to be denied, even by a
Randolphian impudence it self, are in that Book proved against that unhappy
Government. Nor did that most Ancient Set of the Phoenician Shepherds, who
scrued the Government of Egypt into their Hands, as Old Manethon tells us, by
their Villainies, during the Reigns of those Tyrants, make a Shepherd more of an
Abomination to the Egyptians in all after-Ages, than these Wolves under the
Name of Shepherds have made the Remembrance of their French Government, an
Abomination to all Posterity among the New-Englanders: A Government, for which,
now, Reader, as fast as thou will, get ready this Epitaph: Nulla quaesita
Scelere Potentia diuturna.

It was under the Resentments of these Things, that Sir Williom Phips, returned
into England, in the year 1688. In which Twice-Wonderful-Year, such a
Revolution was wonderfully accomplished upon the whole Government of the
English Nation, that New England, which had been a Specimen of what the whole
Nation was to look for, might justly hope for a share in the General
Deliverance. Upon this Occasion Sir William offered his best Assistances unto
that Eminent Person, who a little before this Revolution, betook himself unto
White Hall, that he might there lay hold on all Opportunities to procure some
Relief unto the Oppressions of that afflicted Country. But seeing the
New-English Affairs in so able an Hand, he thought the best Stage of Action for
him would now be New England it self; and so with certain Instructions from
none of the least considerable Persons at White Hall, what Service to do for
his Country, in the Spring of the Year 1689 he hastened back unto it. Before he
left London, a Messenger from the Abdicated King tendered him the Government of
New England, if he would accept it: But as that excellent Attorney General Sir
William Jones, when it was proposed that the Plantations might be Governed
without Assemblies, told the King, That he could no more Grant a Commission to
levy Money on his Subjects there, without their consent by an Assembly, than
they could Discharge themselves from their Allegiance to the English Crown. So
Sir William Phips thought it his Duty to refuse a Government without an
Assembly, as a thing that was Treason in the very Essence of it, and instead of
Petitioning the succeeding Princes, that his Patent for High Sheriff might be
rendered Effectual, he joined in Petitions, that New England might have its own
Old Patent so Restored, as to render Ineffectual that, and all other Grants
that might cut short any of it is Ancient Privileges. But when Sir William
arrived at New England, he found a New Face of Things; For about an Hundred
Indians in the Eastern parts of the Country, had unaccountably begun a War upon
the English, in July, 1688. and though the Governor then in the Western Parts,
had immediate Advice of it, yet he not only delayed and neglected all that was
necessary for the Public Defense, but also when he at Last returned, he
manifested a most Furious Displeasure against those of the Council, and all
others that had forwarded any one thing for the security of the Inhabitants;
while at the same time, he dispatched some of his Creatures upon secret Errands
unto Canada, and set at Liberty some of the most Murderous Indians which the
English had seized upon.

This Conduct of the Governor, which is in a Printed Remonstrance of some of
the Best Gentlemen in the Council, complained of, did extremely dissatisfy the
Suspicious People: Who were doubtless more extreme in some of their Suspicions,
than there was any real Occasion for: But the Governor at length raised an
Army of a Thousand Erglish to Conquer this Hundred Indians; and this Army,
whereof some of the chief Commanders were Papists, underwent the Fatigues of a
Long, and a cold Winter, in the most Caucasaean Regions of the Territory, till,
without the Killing of One Indian, there were more of the poor People Killed,
than they had Enemies there Alive! This added, not a Little to the
Dissatisfaction of the People, and it would much more have done so if they had
seen what the World had not yet seen of the Suggestions made by the Irish
Catholics unto the Late King, published in the Year 1691, In the Account of
the State of the Protestants in Ireland, Licensed by the Earl of Nottingham,
whereof one Article runs in these Express Terms, That if any of the Irish
cannot have their Lands in Specie, but money in Lieu, some of them may
Transport themselves into America, possibly near New England, to check the
Growing Independants of that Country: Or if they had seen what was afterward
seen, in a Letter from K. James to His Holiness, (as they style His
Foolishness) the Pope of Rome; That it was his Full purpose to have Set up
Roman Catholic Religion, in the English Plantations of America: Tho after all,
there is cause to think, that there was more made of the Suspicions then flying
like Wildfire about the Country, than a strong Charity would have
Countenanced. When the People were under these Frights, they had got by the
Edges a Little Intimation of the then Prince of Orange's glorious Undertaking
to deliver England, from the Feared Evils, which were already felt by
New England; but when the Person, who brought over a Copy of the Princes
Declaration, was Imprisoned for bringing into the Country a Treasonable Paper,
and the Governor, by his Proclamation, Required all Persons, to use their
utmost-Endeavours to hinder the Landing of any whom the Prince might send
thither, This put them almost out of Patience. And One thing, that plunged the
more Considerate Persons in the Territory, into uneasy Thoughts, was the Faulty
Action of some Soldiers, who upon the Common Suspicions, deserted their
Stations in the Army, and caused their Friends to gather together here and
there in Little Bodies, to protect from the Demands of the Governor, their
poor Children and Brethren, whom they thought bound for a Bloody Sacrifice:
and there were also belonging to the Rose-Frigat some that Buzzed surprising
stories about Boston, of many mischiefs to be thence expected. Wherefore, some
of the Principal Gentlemen in Boston consulting what was to be done in this
Extraordinary Juncture, They all agreed that they would, if it were possible,
extinguish all Essays, in the People toward an Insurrection; in daily Hopes of
Orders from England for their Safety: but that if the Country People, by any
violent motions pushed the matter on so far, as to make a Revolution
unavoidable, Then, to prevent the shedding of Blood by an ungoverned Mobile,
some of the Gentlemen present, should appear at the Head of the Action, with a
Declaration accordingly prepared. By the eighteenth of April 1689. Things were
pushed on so far by the People, that certain Persons first Seized the Captain
of the Frigate, and the Rumor thereof running like Lightning through Boston,
the whole Town was immediately in Arms, with the most Unanimous Resolution
perhaps, that ever was known to have Inspired any People. They then seized
those Wretched Men, who by their innumerable Extortions and Abuses, had made
themselves the Objects of Universal Hatred; not giving over till the Governor
himself was become their Prisoner: The whole Action being managed without the
least Bloodshed or Plunder, and with as much Order as ever attended any Tumult,
it may be, in the World. Thus did the New-Englanders assert their Title to the
Common Rights of Englishmen; and except the Plantations are willing to
Degenerate from the Temper of True Englishmen, or except the Revolution of the
whole English Nation be condemned, their Action must so far be justified. On
their late Oppressors, now under just Confinement, they took no other
satisfaction, but sent them over unto White Hall, for the Justice of the King
and Parliament. And when the Day for the Anniversary Election, by their vacated
Charter drew near, they had many Debates into what Form they should cast the
Government, which was till then, Administered by a Committee for the
Conservation of the Peace, composed of Gentlemen, whose Hap it was to appear in
the Head of the late Action; But their Debates Issued in this Conclusion, That
the Governor and Magistrates, which were in Power, before the late Usurpation,
should Resume their Places, and apply themselves unto the Conservation of the
Peace, and put forth what Acts of Government the Emergencies might make needful
for them, and thus to wait for further Directions from the Authority of
England. So was there Accomplished a Revolution, which delivered New England
from grievous Oppressions, and which was most Graciously Accepted by the King
and Queen, when it was Reported unto Their Majesty's. But there were New
Matters for Sir William Phips, in a little while, now to think upon.

SECT. 9.
BEHOLD the great Things which were done by the Sovereign God, for a Person,
once, as little in his own Eyes, as in other Men's. All the Returns which he
had hitherto made unto the God of his Mercies, were but Preliminaries to what
remain to be Related. It has been the Custom in the Churches of New England,
still to expect from such Persons, as they admitted unto constant Communion
with them, That they do not only Publicly and Solemnly Declare their Consent
unto the Covenant of Grace, and particularly to those Duties of it, wherein a
particular Church State is more immediately concerned, but also first Relate
unto the Pastors, and by them unto the Brethren, the special Impressions which
the Grace of God has made upon their Souls in bringing them to this Consent. By
this Custom and Caution, though they cannot keep Hypocrites from their Sacred
Fellowship, yet they go as far as they can, to render and preserve themselves
Churches of Saints, and they do further very much Edify one another. When Sir
William Phips was now returned unto his own House, he began to bethink himself,
like David, concerning the House of the God, who had surrounded him with so
many Favors in his own; and accordingly he applied himself unto the North
Church in Boston, that with his open Profession of his hearty Subjection to the
Gospel of the Lord Jesus Christ, he might have the Ordinances and the
Privileges of the Gospel, added unto his other Enjoyments. One thing that
quickened his Resolution to do what might be in this Matter expected from him,
was a Passage which he heard from a Minister, Preaching on the Title of the
Fifty First Psalm: To make a public and an open Profession of Repentance, is a
thing not mis-becoming the greatest Man alive. It is an Honor to be found
among the Repenting People of God, though they be in Circumstances never so
full of Suffering. A famous Knight going with other Christians to be Crowned
with Martyrdom, observed, That his Fellow Sufferers were in Chains, from which
the Sacrificers had, because of his Quality, excused him; whereupon he
demanded, that he might wear Chains as well as they. For, said he, I would be a
Knight of that Order too; There is among our selves a repenting People of God,
who by their Consessions at their Admissions to His Table, do signalize their
being so; and Thanks be to God, that we have so little of suffering in our
Circumstances. But if any Man count himself grown too big to be a Knight of
that Order, the Lord Jesus Christ Himself, will one Day be ashamed of that Man!
Upon this Excitation, Sir William Phips made his Address unto a
Corgregational-Church, and he had therein One Thing to propound unto himself,
which few Persons of his Age, so well satisfied in Infant Baptism as he was,
have then to Ask for. Indeed, in the Primitive Times, although the Lawfulness
of Infant Baptism, or the Precept and Pattern of Scripture for it, was never so
much as once made a Question, yet we find Baptism was frequently delayed by
Persons, upon several superstitious and unreasonable Accounts, against which we
have such Fathers as Gregory Nazianzen, Gregory Nyssen, Basil, Chrysostom,
Ambrose, and others, employing a variety of Argument. But Sir William Phips had
hitherto delayed his Baptism, because the Years of his Childhood were spent
where there was no settled Minister, and therefore, he was now not only willing
to attain a good Satisfaction of his own Internal and Practical Christianity,
before his receiving that Mark thereof, but he was also willing to receive it
among those Christians, that seemed most sensible of the Bonds which it laid
them under. Offering himself therefore, first unto the Baptism, and then unto
the Supper of the Lord, he presented unto the Pastor of the Church, with his
own Handwriting, the following Instrument; which because of the Exemplary
Devotion therein expressed, and the Remarkable History which it gives of
several Occurrences in his Life, I will here Faithfully Transcribe it, without
adding so much as one Word unto it.

The First of God's making me sensible of my Sins, was in the year 1674. by
Hearing your Father Preach concerning, the Day of Trouble near. It pleased
Almighty God to smite me with a Deep sense of my miserable Condition, who had
Lived until then, in the World, and had Done nothing for God. I did then begin
to think What I should Do to be saved? and did bewail my Youthful Days, which I
had spent in vain: I did think that I would begin to mind The Things of God.
Being then some time, under your Father's Ministry, much troubled with my
Burden, but thinking on that Scripture, Come unto me, you that are weary and
heavy Laden, and I will Give you Rest. I had some Thoughts of Drawing as near
to the Communion of the Lord Jesus as I could, But the Ruins, which the Indian
Wars brought on my Affairs, and the Entanglements which my following the Sea,
laid upon me, hindered my pursuing the welfare of my own Soul, as I ought to
have done. At length God was pleased to smile upon my Outward Concerns. The
various Providence both Merciful and Afflictive, which attended me in my
Travels were sanctified unto me, to make me Acknowledge God in all my Ways. I
have Diverse Times been in Danger of my Life, and I have been brought to see
that I owe my Life to Him that has given a Life so often to me: I thank God, He
has brought me to see my self altogether unhappy, without an Interest in the
Lord Jesus Christ, and to close heartily with him, desiring Him to Execute All
His Offices on my Behalf. I have now, for some Time, been under serious
Resolutions, that I would avoid whatever I should know to be Displeasing unto
God, and that I would Serve Him all the Days of my Life. I Believe No man will
Repent the Service of such a Master. I find my self unable to Keep such
Resolutions, but my Serious Prayers are to the Most High, that He would enable
me. God has done so much for me that I am sensible, I owe my self to Him; To
Him would I give my self, and all that He has given to me. I cannot express His
Mercies to me. But, as soon as ever God had smiled upon me, with a Turn of my
Affairs, I laid my self under the VOWS of the Lord That I would set my self to
serve His People, and Churches here unto the Utmost of my Capacity. I have had
great Offers made me in England; But the Churches of New England were those,
which my Heart was most set upon. I knew, that if God had a People any where,
it was here: and I Resolved To Rise and fall with them; neglecting very Great
Advantages for my Worldly Intrest, that I might come and enjoy the Ordinances
of the Lord Jesus here. It has been my Trouble, that since I came home I have
made no more Have to get into the House of God, where I desire to be:
Especially having Heard so much about the Evil of that Omission. I can Do
little for God, but I desire to Wait upon Him in His Ordinances, and to Live to
His Honor and Glory. My being Born in a part of the Country, where I had not
in my Infancy enjoyed the First Sacrament of the New-Testement, has been
something of a Stumbling Block unto me. But though, I have had Profers of
Baptism elsewhere made unto me, I Resolved rather to Deferr it, until I might
enjoy it in the Communion of these Churches, And I have had awful Impressions
from those Words of the Lord Jesus, in Matthew. 8.38. Whosoever shall be ashamed
of me, and of my Words, of him also shall the Son of Man be ashamed. When God
had Blessed me with something of the World, I had no Trouble so Great as this;
Lest it should not be in Mercy; and I Trembled at Nothing more than being put
off with a Portion here. That I may make sure of Better Things I now offer my
self unto the Communion of this' Church of the Lord JESUS.

Accordingly on March 23. 1690. after he had in the Congregation of
North-Boston given himself up, first unto the Lord, and then unto His People,
he was Baptized, and so Received into the Communion of the Faithful there.

SECT. 10.
SEVERAL Times, about, before and after this Time, did I hear him express
himself unto this purpose: I have no need at all, to look after any further
Advantages for my self in this World; I may sit still at home, if I will, and
enjoy my Ease for the rest of my Life; but I believe that I should offend God
in my doing so: For I am now in the prime of my Age and Strength, and, I thank
God, I can undergo Hardship: He only knows how long I have to live; but I think
it is my Duty to venture my Life in doing of Good, before an useless Old Age
comes upon me: Wherefore I will now expose my self, while I am able, and as far
as I am able, for the Service of my Country: I was born for Others, as well as
my self. I say, many a time have I heard him so express himself: And agreeable
to this Generous Disposition and Resolution, was all the rest of his Life.
About this time New England was miserably Briar'd, in the Perplexities of an
Indian War; and the Salvages, in the East part of the Country, Issuing out from
their Inaccessible Swamps, had for many Months made their cruel Depredations
upon the poor English Planters, and Surprised many of the Plantations on the
Frontiers, into Ruin. The New-Erglanders found, that while they continued only
on the Defensive part, their People were thinned, and their Treasures wasted,
without any hopes of seeing a Period put unto the Indian Tragedies; nor could
an Army greater than Xerxes's have easily come at the seemingly contemptible
Handful of Tawnies, which made all this Disturbance; Or, Tamerlain, the
greatest Conqueror that ever the World saw, have made it a Business of no
Trouble to have Conquered them: They found; that they were like to make no
Weapons reach their Enswamped Adversaries, except Mr. Milton could have shown
them how To have plucked up the Hills with all their Load,
Rocks, Waters, Woods, and by their shaggy tops,
Vp-lifting, bore them in their hands, I herewith
The Rebel Host to'v overwhelmed --
So it was thought that the English Subjects, in these Regions of America,
might very properly take this occasion, to make an attempt upon the French, and
by Reducing them under the English Government, put an Eternal Period at once,
unto all their Troubles from the Frenchified Pagans. This was a Motion urged by
Sir William Phips, unto the General Court of the Massachuset-Colony; and he
then made unto the Court a brave Offer of his own Person and Estate, for the
Service of the Public in their present Extremity, as far as they should see
cause to make use thereof. Whereupon they made a First Essay against the
French, by sending a Naval Force, with about Seven Hundred Men, under the
Conduct of Sir William Phips, against L'Acady and Nova Scotia; of which Action
we shall give only this General and Summary Account; That Sir William Phips set
Sail from Nantascot, April 28. 1690. Arriving at Port Royal, May 11. and had
the Fort quickly Surrendered into his Hands by the French Enemy, who despaired
of holding out against him. He then took Possession of that Province for the
English Crown, and having Demolished the Fort, and sent away the Garrison,
Administered unto the Planters an Oath of Allegiance to King William and Queen
Mary, he left what Order he thought convenient for the Government of the Place,
until further Order should be taken by the Governor and Council of the
Massachuset-Colony, unto whom he returned May 30, with an acceptable Account of
his Expedition, and accepted a Place among the Magistrates of that Colony, to
which the Freemen had chosen him, at their Anniversary Election, two Days
before,

Thus the Country, once given by King James the First, unto Sir William
Alexander, was now by another Sir William, recovered out of the Hands of the
French, who had afterward got the Possession of it; and there was added unto
the English Empire, a Territory, whereof no Man can Read Monsieur Denys's
Description Geographique and Historique des Costs de l' Amerique
Septentrionale, but he must reckon the Conquest of a Region so Improvable, for
Lumber, for Fishing, for Mines, and for Furrs, a very considerable Service. But
if a smaller Service has, e'er-now, ever merited a Knighthood, Sir William was
willing to Repeat his Merits, by Actions of the greatest Service possible: Nil
Actum credens, si quid superesset agendum.

SECT. 11.
THE Addition of this French Colony to the English Dominion, was no more than a
little step toward a greater Action, which was first in the Design of Sir
William Phips, and which was, indeed, the Greatest Action that ever the
New-Englanders Attempted. There was a time, when the Philistines had made some
Inroads and Assaults from the Northward, upon the Skirts of Goshen, where the
Israelites had a Residence, before their coming out of Egypt, The Israelites,
and especially that Active Colony of the Ephraimites, were willing to Revenge
these Injuries upon their wicked Neighbors; they presumed themselves Powerful
and Numerous enough to Encounter the Canaanites, even in their own Country; and
they formed a brisk Expedition, but came off unhappy Losers in it; the Jewish
Rabbis tell us, they lost no less than Eight Thousand Men. The Time was not
yet come; there was more Have than good Speed in the Attempt; they were not
enough concerned for the Counsel and Presence of God in the Undertaking; they
mainly propounded the Plunder to be got among a People, whose Trade was that,
wherewith Beasts enriched them; so the Business miscarried. This History the
Psalmist going to recite, says, I will utter dark Sayings of old. Now that what
befell Sir William Phips, with his whole Country of New England, may not be
almost forgotten among the dark Sayings of old, I will here give the true
Report of a very memorable Matter.

It was Canada that was the chief Source of New-England's Miseries. There was
the main Strength of the French; There the Indians were mostly supplied with
Ammunition; Thence Issued Parties of Men, who uniting with the Salvages,
barbarously murdered many Innocent New-Enlanders, without any Provocation on
the New-English part, except this, that New England had Proclaimed King
William, and Q. Mary, which they said were Usurpers; And, as Cato could make no
Speech in the Senate, without that Conclusion, Delenda est Carthago; so it was
the general Conclusion of all that Argued sensibly, about the safety of that
Country, Canada must be Reduced. It then became the concurring Resolution of
all New England, with New York, to make a Vigorous Attack upon Canada at once,
both by Sea and Land.

And a Fleet was accordingly fitted out from Boston, under the Command of Sir
William Phips, to fall upon Quebeque, the chief City of Canada. They waited
until August for some Stores of War from England, whither they had sent for
that purpose, early in the Spring; but none at last arriving, and the Season of
the Year being so far spent, Sir William could not, without many
Discouragements upon his Mind, proceed in a Voyage, for which he found himself
so poorly provided. However, the Ships being taken up, and the Men on board,
his usual Courage would not permit him to Desist from the Enterprise; but he
set Sail from Hull near Boston, August 9. 1690. with a Fleet of Thirty two
Ships and Tenders; whereof one, called the Six Friends, carrying Forty Four
great Guns, and Two Hundred Men, was Admiral. Sir William dividing the Fleet
into several Squadrons, whereof there was the Six Friends, Captain Gregory
Sugars Commander, with Eleven more of the Admiral's Squadron, of which one was
also a Capital Ship, namely, The John and Thomas, Captain Thomas Carter
Commander; Of the Vice-Admirals, the Swan, Captain Thomas Gilbert Commander,
with Nine more; Of the Rear-Admirals, the America-Merchant, Captain Joseph
Eldridge Commander, with Nine more; and above Twenty Hundred Men on Board the
whole Fleet: He so happily managed his Charge, that they every one of them
Arrived safe at Anchor before Quebeck, although they had as dangerous, and
almost untrodden a Path, to take Vn-Piloted, for the whole Voyage, as ever any
Voyage was undertaken with. Some small French Prizes he took by the way, and
set up English Colors upon the Coast, here and there, as he went along; and
before the Month of August was out, he had spent several Days as far onward of
his Voyage, as between the Island of Antecosta, and the Main. But when they
entered the mighty River of Canada, such adverse Winds encountered the Fleet,
that they were Three Weeks dispatching the way, which might otherwise have been
gone in Three Days, and it was the Fifth of October, when a fresh Breeze coming
up at East, carried them along by the North Shore, up to the Isle of Orleans;
and then haling Southerly, they passed by the East end of that Island, with the
whole Fleet approaching the City of Quebeck. This loss of Time, which made it
so late before the Fleet could get into the Country, where a cold and fierce
Winter was already very far advanced, gave no very good Prospect of Success to
the Expedition; but that which gave a much worse, was a most horrid
Mismanagement, which had, the mean while, happened in the West. For a Thousand
English from New York, and Albany, and Connecticut, with Fifteen Hundred
Indians, were to have gone over-Land, in the West, and fallen upon Mount-Royal,
while the Fleet was to Visit Quebeck in the East; and no Expedition could have
been better laid than This, which was thus contrived. But those English
Companies in the West, marching as far as the great Lake that was to be passed,
found their Canoos not provided, according to expectation; and the Indians also
were [ How? God knows, and will one Day Judge!] dissuaded from Joining with the
English; and the Army met with such Discouragements, that they returned.

Had this Western Army done but so much as continued at the Lake, the Diversion
thereby given to the French Quartered at Mount-Royal, would have rendered the
Conquest of Quebeck ca^e and certain; but the Governor of Canada being
Informed of the Retreat made by the Western-Army, had opportunity, by the cross
Winds that kept back the Fleet, unhappily to get the whole Strength of all the
Country into the City, before the Fleet could come up unto it. However, none of
these Difficulties hindered Sir William Phips from sending on Shore the
following Summons, on Monday, the Sixth of October.

Sir William Phips Knight, General and Commander in Chief, in and over Their
Majesty's Forces of New England, by Sea and Land;
To Count Frontenac, Lieutenent-General and Governor for the French King, at
Canada; or in his Absence to his Deputy, or Him, or Them, in Chief Command at
Quebeck.
THE War between the Two Crowns of England and France, does not only
sufficiently Warrant, but the Destruction made by the French and Indians, under
your Command and Encouragement, upon the Persons and Estates of Their Majesty's
Subjects of New England, without Provocation on their part, has put them under
the Necessity of this Expedition, for their own Security and Satisfaction. And
although the Cruelties and Barbarities used against them, by the French and
Indians, might upon the present Opportunity, prompt unto a severe Revenge, yet
being desirous to avoid all Inhumane and Unchristian-like Actions, and to
prevent shedding of Blood, as much as may be;

I the aforesaid Sir William Phips, Knight, do hereby, in the Name, and in the
Behalf of Their Most Excellent Majesty's, William and Mary, King and Queen of
England, Scotland, France and Ireland, Defenders of the Faith; and by Order of
Their said Majesty's Government of the Massachuset-Colony, in New England,
Demand a present Surrender of your Forts and Castles, undemolished, and the
King's, and other Stores unimbezzelled, with a seasonable Delivery of all
Captives; together with a Surrender of all your Persons and Estates, to my
Dispose: Upon the doing whereof you may expect Mercy from me, as a Christian,
according to what shall be found for Their Majesty's Service, and the Subjects
Security. Which if you Refuse forthwith to do. I am come provided, and am
Resolved by the help of God, in whom I trust, by Force of Arms, to Revenge all
Wrongs and Injuries offered, and bring you under Subjection to the Crown of
England; and when too late, make you wish, you had accepted of the Favor
tendered.

Your Answer Positive in an Hour, returned by your own Trumpet, with the Return
of mine, is Required, upon the Peril that will ensue.

The Summons being Delivered unto Count Frontenac, his Answer was;

That Sir William Phips, and those with him, were Heretics, and Traitors to
their King, and had taken up with that Usurper, the Prince of Orange, and had
made a Revolution, which if it had not been made, New England and the French
had been all One; and that no other Answer was to be expected from him, but
what should be from the Mouth of his Cannon.

General Phips, now saw, that it must cost him Dry Blows, and that he must
Roar his Persuasions out of the Mouths of Great Guns, to make himself Master of
a City, which had certainly Surrendered it self unto him, if he had arrived but
a little sooner, and Summoned it before the coming down of Count Frontenac with
all his Forces, to command the oppressed People there, who would have been,
many of them, gladder of coming under the English Government. Wherefore on the
Seventh of October, the English, that were for the Land-Service, went on Board
their lesser Vessels, in order to Land; among which there was a Bark, wherein
was Captain Ephraim Savage, with sixty Men, that ran a Ground upon the
North-Shoar, near two Miles from Quebeck, and could not get off, but lay in the
same Distress that Scaeva did, when the Britans poured in their Numbers upon
the Bark, wherein he, with a few more Soldiers of Caesar's Army, were by the
disadvantage of the Tide, left ashore: The French, with Indians, that saw them
ly there, came near, and Fired thick upon them, and were bravely Answered; and
when two or three Hundred of the Enemy, at last planted a Field-Piece against
the Bark, while the Wind blew so hard, that no help could be sent unto his Men,
the General Advanced so far, as to Level two or three great Guns, conveniently
enough to make the Assailants Fly; and when the Flood came, the Bark happily
got off, without the hurt of one Man aboard. But so violent was the Storm of
Wind all this Day, that it was not possible for them to Land, until the Eighth
of October; when, the English counting every Hour to be a Week, until they were
come to Battle, vigorously got ashore, designing to enter the East End of the
City. The Smallpox had got into the Eleet, by which Distemper prevailing, the
number of Effective Men which now went ashore, under the Command of Lieutenant
General Walley, did not amount unto more than Fourteen Hundred; but Four
Companies of these were drawn out as Forlorns, whom, on every side, the Enemy
fired at; nevertheless, the English Rushing with a shout, at once upon them,
caused them to Run, as fast as Legs could carry them: So that the whole English
Army, expressing as much Resolution as was in Caesar's Army, when they first
landed on Britai^, in spite of all opposition from the Inhabitants, marched on
until it was dark, having first killed many of the French, with the loss of but
four Men of their own; and frighted about seven or eight Hundred more of the
French from an Ambuscado, where they lay ready to fall upon them. But some
thought, that by staying in the Valley, they took the way never to get over the
Hill: And yet for them to stay where they were, till the smaller Vessels came
up the River, before them, so far as by their Guns to secure the Passage of the
Army, in their getting over, was what the Council of War had ordered. But the
Violence of the Weather, with the General's being sooner plunged into the heat
of Action than was intended, hindered the smaller Vessels from attending that
Order. And this Evening, a French Deserter coming to them, assured them, that
Nine Hundred Men were on their March from Quebeck to meet them, already passed
a little Rivulet that lay at the end of the City, but seeing them Land so
suddenly, and so valiantly run down those that first Encountered them, they had
Retreated: Nevertheless, That Count Frontenac was come down to Quebeck, with no
fewer than Thirty Hundred Men to defend the City, having left but fifty
Soldiers to defend Mount Real, because they had understood, that the English
Army on that side, were gone back to Albany. Notwithstanding this dispiriting
Information, the common Soldiers did with much vehemence Beg and Pray, that
they might be Led on, professing, that they had rather lose their Lives on the
spot, than fail of taking the City; but the more wary Commanders, considered
how rash a thing it would be, for about Fourteen Hundred Raw Men, tired with a
long Voyage, to assault more than Twice as many Expert Soldiers, who were
Galli in suo sterquilinio, or Cocks Crowing on their own Dunghill. They were, in
truth, now gotten into the grievous Case, which Livy describes, when he says,
Ibi grave est Bellum gerere, ubi non consistendi aut procedendi locus;
quocunque aspexeris Hostilia sunt omnia; Look on one side or 'tother, all was
full of Hostile Difficulties. And indeed, whatever Popular Clamor has been
made against any of the Commanders, it is apparent, that they acted
considerately, in making a Pause upon what was before them; and they did a
greater kindness to their Soldiers than they have since been thanked for. But
in this time, General Phips and his Men of War, with their Canvas, Wings, flew
close up unto the West End of the City, and there he behaved himself with the
Greatest Bravery imaginable; nor did the other Men of War forbear to follow his
brave Example: who never discovered himself more in his Element, than when (as
the Poet expresses it,) The Slaughter-Breathing Brass grew hot, and spoke
In Flames of Lightning, and in Clouds of Smoke:


He lay within Pistol-shot of the Enemies Cannon, and beat them from thence,
and very much Battered the Town, having his own Ship shot through in an hundred
places, with four and twenty Pounders, and yet, but one Man was killed, and
only two mortally wounded aboard him, in this hot Engagement, which continued
the greatest part of that Night, and several hours of the Day ensuing. But
wondering, that he saw no Signal of any Effective Action ashore, at the East end
of the City, he sent that he might know the condition of the Army there; and
received Answer, That several of the Men were so frozen in their Hands and
Feet, as to be disabled from service, and others were apace falling sick of the
Smallpox. Whereupon he ordered them on Board immediately to refresh
themselves, and he intended then, to have renewed his Attack upon the City, in
the Method of Landing his Men in the face of it, under the shelter of his Great
Guns; having to that purpose, provided also, a consderable number of
well-shaped Wheel-Barrows, each of them carrying Two Petarraro's a piece, to
March before the Men and make the Enemy fly, with as much Contempt as
overwhelmed the Philistines, when undone by Foxes with Torches in their Tails;
(remembered in an Anniversary Diversion, every April, among the Ancient Romans,
taught by the Phenicians.)

While the Measures to be further taken, were debating, there was made an
Exchange of Prisoners, the English having taken several of the French in diverse
actions, and the French having in their Hands diverse of the English, whom the
Indians had brought Captives unto them. The Army now on Board, continued still
Resolute and Courageous, and on fire, for the Conquest of Quebeck, or if they
had missed of doing it by storm, they knew that they might, by possessing
themselves of the Isle of Orleans, in a little while, have starved them out.
Incredible Damage they might indeed, have done to the Enemy, before they
Embarked, but they were willing to preserve the more undefensible parts of the
Country, in such a condition, as might more sensibly encourage the Submission
of the Inhabitants, unto the Crown of England, whose Protection was desired by
so many of them. And still they were loath to Play for any lesser Game than the
immediate Surrender of Quebeck it self. But e're a full Council of War could
conclude the next steps to be taken, a violent Storm arose, that separated the
Fleet, and the Snow and the Cold became so extreme, that they could not
continue in those Quarters any longer.

Thus, by an evident Hand of Heaven, sending one unavoidable Disaster after
another, as well-formed an Enterprise, as perhaps was ever made by the
New-Englanders, most unhappily miscarried; and General Phips underwent a very
mortifying Disappointment of a Design, which his Mind was, as much as ever any,
set upon. He arrived Nov, 19. at Boston, where, although he found himself, as
well as the Public, thrown into very uneasy circumstances, yet he had this to
comfort him, That neither his Courage, nor his Conduct could reasonably have
been Taxed, nor could it be said that any Man could have done more than he did,
under so many Embarassments of his Business, as he was to fight withal. He also
relieved the uneasiness of his Mind, by considering, that his Voyage to Canada,
diverted from his Country an Horrible Tempest from an Army of Boss-Lopers,
which had prepared themselves, as it is affirmed, that Winter, to fall upon the
New-English Colonies, and by falling on them, would probably have laid no
little part of the Country desolate. And he further considered, That in this
matter, like Israel engaging against Benjamin, it may be, we saw yet, but the
beginning of the matter: And that the way to Canada now being learnt, the
foundation of a Victory over it might be laid, in what had been already done.
Unto this purpose likewise, he was heard sometimes applying the Remarkable
Story, reported by Bradwardine.

There was an Hermit, who being vexed with blasphemous Injections about the
Justice and Wisdom of Divine Providence, an Angel in Human Shape, invited him
to Travel with him, That he might see the hidden Judgments of God. Lodging all
Night at the House of a Man, who kindly entertained them, the Angel took away a
valuable Cup from their Host, at their going away in the Morning, and bestowed
this Cup upon a very wicked Man, with whom they Lodged the Night ensuing. The
third Night they were most lovingly Treated, at the House of a very Godly Man,
from whom, when they went in the Morning, the Angel meeting a Servant of his,
threw him over the Bridge into the Water, where he was drowned. And the Fourth,
being in like manner, most courteously Treated, at the House of a very Godly
Man, the Angel before Morning, did unaccountably kill his only Child. The
Companion of the Journey, being wonderfully offended at these things, would
have left his Guardian. But the Angel then thus addressed him, Understand now,
the secret Judgments of God! The first man that entertained us, did
inordinately affect that Cup, which I took from him; 'twas for the advantage of
his interior, that I took it away, and I gave it unto the impious man, as the
present reward of his good Works, which is all the reward that he is like to
have. As for our Third Host, the Servant which I slew, had formed a bloody
Design, to have slain his Master, but now, you see, I have saved the Life of
the Master, and prevented something of growth unto the eternal punishment of
the Murderer. As for our Fourth Host, before his Child was Born unto him, he
was a very liberal and bountiful Person, and he did abundance of good with his
Estate; but when he saw he was like to leave such an Heir, he grew covetous;
wherefore the Soul of the Infant is Translated into Paradise, but the occasion
of sin is, you see, mercifully taken away from the Parent.

Thus General Phips, though he had been used unto Diving in his time, would
say, That the things which had befallen him in this Expedition, were too deep
to be Dived into!

SECT. 12.
FROM The time that General Pen made his Attempt upon Hispaniola, with an Army
that, like the New English Forces, against Canada, miscarried after an
Expectation of having Little to Do, but to Possess and Plunder; Even to this
Day, the General Disaster which has attended, almost every Attempt of the
European Colones in America, to make any Considerable Encroachments upon their
Neighbors, is a matter of some close Reflection. But of the Disaster, which
now befell poor New England, in particular, every one will easily Conclude,
none of the least Consequences to have been, the Extreme Debts, which that
Country was now plunged into; there being Forty Thousand pounds, more or less,
now to be paid, and not a Penny in the Treasury to pay it withal. In this
Extremity, they presently found out an Expedient, which may serve as an
Example, for any People, in other parts of the World, whose Distresses may call
for a sudden supply of Money to carry them through any Important Expedition.
The General Assembly first passed an Act, for the Levying of such a sum of
Money as was wanted, within such a Term of Time, as was judged convenient; and
this Act was a Fund, on which the Credit of such a Sum, should be rendered
passable among the people. Hereupon, there was appointed an Able and Faithful
Committee of Gentlemen, who printed from Copper Plates, a just Number of Bills,
and Flourished, Indented, and Contrived them, in such a manner, as to make it
Impossible to Counterfeit any of them, without a Speedy Discovery of the
Counterfeit: besides which, they were all Signed by the Hands of Three,
belonging to that Committee. These Bills being of several Sums, from
Two-shillings, to Ten pounds, did confess the Massachuset-Colony, to be
Endebted unto the Person, in whose Hands they were, the Sums therein expressed;
and Provision was made, that if any particular Bills, were Irrecoverably Lost
or Torn, or Worn by the Owners, they might be Recruited without any Damage to
the whole in General. The public Debts to the Sailors and Soldiers, now upon
the point of Mutiny, (for, Arma Tenenti, Omnia dat, qui Justa negat!) were in
these Bills paid immediately: but that further Credit might be given thereunto,
it was Ordered that they should be Accepted by the Treasurer, and all Officers
that were Subordinate unto him, in all public Payments, at Five per cent. more
than the Value expressed in them. The People knowing that the Tax-Act, would,
in the Space of Two years at Least, fetch into the Treasury, as much as all the
Bills of Credit, thence emitted would amount unto, were willing to be furnished
with Bills, wherein, 'twas their Advantage to pay their Taxes, rather than in
any other Specie, and so the Sailors and Soldiers put off their Bills, instead
of Money, to those, with whom they had any Dealings, and they circulated
through all the Hands in the Colony, pretty Comfortably. Had the Government
been so Settled, that there had not bin any Doubt of any Obstruction, or
Diversion to be given to the Prosecution of the Tax-Act, by a Total Change of
their affairs, then Depending at White Hall, It Is very certain, that the Bills
of Credit had been better than so much ready Silver; yea, the Invention had
been of more Use to the New-Englanders, than if all their Copper Mines had been
opened, or the Mountains of Peru had been Removed into these parts of America.
The Massachuset Bills of Credit, had been like the Bank-Bills of Venice, where
though there were not, perhaps, a Ducat of Money in the Bank, yet the Bills
were esteemed more then Twenty per cent. better than Money, among the Body of
the People, in all their Dealings. But many People being afraid, that the
Government would in Half a year, be so Overturned, as to Convert their Bills,
of Credit altogether into Wast-paper, the Credit of them was thereby very much
impaired; and they, who first received them, could make them yield little more
than fourteen or sixteen shillings in the Pound; from whence there arose those
Idle Suspicions in the Heads of many more Ignorant and Unthinking Folks
concerning the Use thereof, which to the Incredible Detriment of the Province,
are not wholly laid aside unto this Day. However, this Method of paying the
Public Debts, did no less than save the Public, from a perfect Ruin: and
e're many Months were expired, the Governor and Council had the pleasure of
seeing the Treasurer burn before their Eyes, many a Thousand Pounds Worth of
the Bills, which had passed about until they were again Returned unto the
Treasury, but before their being returned, had happily and honestly, without a
farthing of silver Coin, discharged the Debts, for which they were intended.
But that which helped these Bills unto much of their Credit, was the generous
offer of many worthy men in Boston, to run the Risque of selling their Goods
reasonably for them: and of these, I think, I may say, that General Phips was
in some sort the Leader; who at the very Beginning, merely to Recommend the
Credit of the Bills unto other Persons, cheerfully laid down a Considerable
Quantity of ready Money for an equivalent parcel of them. And thus in a little
time, the Country waded through the Terrible Debts which it was fallen into: In
this, though unhappy enough, yet not so unhappy, as in the Loss of men, by
which the Country was at the some Time consumed. It Is True, there was very
Little Blood spilt in the Attacque made upon Quebeck; and there was a Great
Hand of Heaven seen in it. The Churches, upon the Call of the Government, not
only observed a General Fast through the Colony, for the Welfare of the Army
sent unto Quebeck, but also kept the Wheel of Prayer in a Continual motion, by
Repeated and Successive Agreements, for Days of Prayer with Fasting, in their
several Vicinities. On these Days the Ferventest Prayers were sent up to the
God of Armies, for the safety and success of the New-English Army gone to
Canada; and though I never understood that any of the Faithful did in their
Prayers arise to any assurance, that the Expedition should prosper in all
respects, yet they sometimes in their Devotions on these Occasions, uttered
their Persuasion, that Almighty God had heard them in this thing, that the
English Army should not fall by the hands of the French Enemy. Now they were
marvellously delivered from doing so; though the Enemy had such unexpected
Advantages over them, yea, and though the horrid Winter was come on so far,
that it is a Wonder the English Fleet, then Riding in the River of Canada,
fared any better than the Army which a while since, besieged Poland, wherein,
of seventy thousand Invaders, no less than forty thousand suddenly perished by
the severity of the cold, albeit it were but the Month of November with them.
Nevertheless, a kind of Camp-Fever, as well as the Smallpox, got into the
Fleet, whereby some Hundreds came short of Home. And besides this Calamity, it
was also to be lamented, That although the most of the Fleet arrived safe at
New England, whereof some Vessels indeed were driven off by Cross-Winds as far
as the West Indies, before such Arrival; yet there were three or four Vessels
which totally miscarried: One was never heard of, a second was Wrecked, but
most of the Men were saved by another in company; a third was Wrecked so, that
all the Men were either starved or drowned, or slain by the Indians, except
one, which a long while after, was, by means of the French, restored: And a
fourth, met with Accidents, which it may be, my Reader will, by and by
pronounce, not unworthy to have been Related.

A Brigantine, whereof Captain John Rainsford was Commander, having about
Threescore Men aboard, was in a very stormy Night, October. 28, 1690, stranded
upon the desolate and hideous Island of Antecosta, an Island in the mouth of
the Mighty River of Canada; but through the singular Mercy of God unto them,
the Vessel did not, immediately, stave to pieces, which if it had happened,
they must have, one way or another quickly perished. There they lay for diverse
days, under abundance of bitter Weather, trying and hoping to get off their
Vessel; and they solemnly set apart, one Day for Prayer with Fasting, to obtain
the smiles of Heaven upon them, in the midst of their Distresses; and this
especially, That if they must go ashore, they might not by any stress of Storm,
lose the Provisions which they were to carry with them. They were, at last
convinced, that they must continue no longer on Board, and therefore, by the
seventh of November, they applied themselves, all Hands, to get their
Provisions ashore upon the dismal Island, where they had nothing but a sad and
cold Winter before them; which being accomplished, their Vessel oversett so, as
to take away from them all expectation of getting off the Island in it. Here
they now built themselves Nine small Chimney-less things that they called
Houses; to this purpose employing such Boards and Planks as they could get from
their shattered Vessel, with the help of Trees, whereof that squalid Wilderness
had enough to serve them; and they built a particular Storehouse, wherein they
carefully Lodged and Locked the poor quantity of Provisions, which though
scarce enough to serve a very abstemious Company for one Month, must now be so
stinted, as to hold out six or seven, and the Allowance agreed among them could
be no better than for One Man, Two Biskets, half a pound of Pork, half a pound
of Flower, one Pint and a quarter of Pease, and two Salt Fishes per Week. This
little Handful of Men, were now a sort of Commonwealth, extraordinarily, and
miserably separated from all the rest of Mankind; (but I believe, they thought
little enough of an Vtopia:) Wherefore, they consulted and concluded such Laws
among themselves, as they judged necessary to their subsistence, in the doleful
Condition, whereinto the Providence of God had cast them; now -- penitus toto
divisos Orb.

They set up Good Orders, as well as they could among themselves and, besides
their daily Devotions, they Observed the Lord's Days, with more solemn
Exercises of Religion.

But it was not long before they began to feel the more mortal effects of the
Straits, whereinto they had bin Reduced: Their short Commons, Their Drink of
Snow-Water, Their Hard and Wet, and Smoaky Lodgings, and their Grievous Despair
of Mind, overwhelmed some of them, at such a Rate, and so ham-string'd them,
that sooner than be at the pains to go abroad, and cut their one Fuel, they
would ly after a Sottish manner in the Cold; these things quickly brought
Sicknesses among them. The first of their Number who Died, was their Doctor, on
the 20th of December; and then they dropped away, one after another, till between
thirty and forty of the sixty, were buried by their disconsolate Friends,
whereof every one looked still to be the next that should lay his Bones in that
Forsaken Region. These poor Men did therefore, on Monday the Twenty Seventh of
January, keep a Sacred Fast (as they did, in some sort, a civil one, every day,
all this while) to beseech of Almighty God, that his Anger might be turned from
them, That he would not go on to cut them off in his Anger, That the Extremity
of the Season might be mitigated, and, That they might be prospered in some
Essay to get Relief as the Spring should Advance upon them; and they took
Notice, That God gave them a Gracious Answer to every one of these Petitions.

But while the Hand of God was killing so many of this little Nation (and yet
incapable to become a Nation, for it was, Res unius A^tatis, populus virorum!)
they apprehended, that they must have been under a most uncomsortable Necessity
to kill One of their Company.

Whatever Penalties they Enacted for other Crimes, there was One, for which,
like that of Parricide among the Ancients, they would have promised themselves,
that there should not have been Occasion for any Punishments; and that was, the
Crime of Stealing from the Common-Stock of their Provisions. Nevertheless, they
found their Storehouse diverse times broken open, and their provisions
therefrom stolen, by diverse unnatural Children of the Leviathan, while it was
not possible for them to preserve their feeble Storehouse from the
Stone-Wall-breaking Madness of these unreasonable Creatures. This Trade of
stealirg, if it had not been stopped, by some exemplary Severity, they must in a
little while, by Lot or Force have come to have Canibally devoured One Another;
for there was nothing to be done, either at Fishing or Fowling or Hunting upon
that Rueful Island, in the Depth of a Frozen Winter; and though they sent, as
far as they could upon Discovery, they could not find, on the Island, any
Living thing in the World, besides themselves. Wherefore, though by an Act,
they made stealing to be so Criminal, that Several did Run the Gantlet for it,
yet, they were not far from being driven after all, to make One Degree and
Instance of it, Capital. There was a wicked Irishman among them, who had such a
Voracious Devil in him, that after diverse Burglaries upon the Storehouse,
committed by him, at last, he stole, and Eat with such a Pamphagous Fury, as to
Cram himself with no less than Eighteen Biskets, at one stolen meal, and he was
fain to have his Belly strok'd and Bathed before the Fire, lest he should
otherwise have burst. This Amazing and indeed murderous Villainy of the
Irishman, brought them all to their Wit's Ends, how to defend themselves from
the Ruin therein threatened unto them; and whatever methods were proposed, it
was feared, that there could be no stop given to his Furacious Exorbitancies,
any Way but One; He could not be past Stealing, unless he were past Eating too.
Some think therefore, they might have Sentenced the Wretch to Dye, and after
they had been at pains, upon Christian and Spiritual Accounts, to prepare him
for it, have executed the Sentence, by shooting him to Death: concluding
matters come to that pass, that if they had not shot him, he must have Starved
them unavoidably. Such an Action if it were done, will doubtless meet with no
harder a Censure, than that of the seven English men, who being in a Boat
carried off to Sea, from St. Christopher's, with but one Days Provision aboard
for Seventeen, Singled out some of their Number by Lot and slew them, and Eat
them; for which, when they were afterward accused of Murder, the Court, in
consideration of the inevitable Necessity, acquitted them. Truly, the
inevitable necessity of Starving, without such an Action, sufficiently grievous
to them all, will very much plead for what was done (whatever it were!) by
these poor Antecostians. And starved indeed, they must have been, for all this,
if they had not Contrived and Performed a very desperate Adventure, which now
remains to be Related. There was a very diminutive kind of Boat belonging to
their Brigantine, which they recovered out of the Wreck, and cutting this Boat
in Two, they made a shift with certain odd Materials preserved among them, to
lengthen it so far, that they could therein form a little Cuddy, where Two or
Three Men might be stowed, and they set up a little Mast, whereto they fastened
a little Sail, and accommodated it with some other little circumstances,
according to their present poor Capacity.

On the Twenty Fifth of March, Five of the Company Shipped themselves upon this
Doughty Fly-Boat, intending, if it were possible, to carry unto Boston, the
Tidings of their woeful Plight upon Antecosta, and by help from their Friends
there, to return with seasonable succors for the rest. They had not Sailed
long, before they were Hemmed in by prodigious Cakes of Ice, whereby their Boat
sometimes was horribly wounded, and it was a Miracle, that it was not Crushed
into a Thousand pieces, if indeed a thousand pieces could have been Splintred
out of so minute a Cock-Boat. They kept laboring, and fearfully
Weather-beaten, among enormous Rands of Ice, which would ever now and then rub
formidably upon them, and were enough to have broken the Ribs of the strongest
Frigate that ever ^ut the Seas; and yet the signal Hand of Heaven so preserved
this petty Boat, that by the Eleventh of April, they had got a quarter of their
way, and came to an Anchor under Cape St. Lawrence, having seen Land but once
before, and that about seven Leagues off, ever since their first setting out;
and yet, having seen the open and Ocean Sea, not so much as once, in all this
while, for the Ice that still encompassed them. For their support in this Time,
the little Provisions they brought with them, would not have kept them alive;
only they killed Seal upon the Ice, and they melted the upper pare of the Ice
for Drink; but fierce, wild, ugly Sea-Horses, would often so approach them upon
the Ice, that the fear of being devoured by them, was not the least of their
Exercises. The Day following, they weighed Anchor, betimes in the Morning; but
the Norwest Winds persecuted them, with the raised and raging Waves of the Sea,
which almost continually poured into them; and monstrous Islands of Ice, that
seemed almost as big as Antecosta it self, would ever now and then come athwart
them. In such a Sea they lived by the special assistance of God, until by the
thirteenth of April, they got into an Island of Land, where they made a Fire,
and killed some Fowl, and some Seal, and found some Goose-Eggs, and supplied
themselves with what Billets of Wood were necessary and carriageable for them;
and there they stayed until the seventeenth. Here, their Boat lying near a
Rock, a great Sea hove it upon the Rock, so that it was upon the very point of
oversetting, which if it had, she had bin utterly disabled for any further
service, and they must have called that Harbor by the Name, which, I think,
one a little more Northward bears, The Cape without Hope. There they must have
ended their weary days! But here, the good Hand of God again interposed for
them; they got her off, and though they lost their Compass in this Hurry, they
sufficiently Repaired another defective one, that they had aboard. Sailing from
thence, by the Twenty Fourth of April, they made Cape Brittoon; when a thick
Fog threw them into a new Perplexity, until they were safely gotten into the
Bay of Islands, where they again Wooded and Watered, and killed a few Fowl, and
catched some Fish, and began to reckon themselves as good as half way home.
They reached Cape Sables by the Third of May, but by the fifth, all their
Provision was again spent, and they were out of sight of Land; nor had they any
prospect of catching any thing that lives in the Atlantic: which, while they
were lamenting one unto another, a stout Halibut comes up to the top of the
Water, by their side; whereupon they threw out the Fishing-Line, and the Fish
took the Hook, but he proved so heavy, that it required the help of several
Hands, to hale him in, and a thankful Supper they made on it. By the seventh of
May, seeing no Land, but having once more spent all their Provision, they were
grown almost wholly hopeless of Deliverance, but then a Fishing Shallop of Cape
Ann, came up with them, fifteen Leagues to the Eastward of that Cape. And yet,
before they got in, they had so Tempestuous a Night, that they much feared
perishing upon the Rocks, after all: But God carried them into Boston Harbor
the Ninth of May, unto the great surprise of their Friends, that were in
Mourning for them: And there furnishing themselves with a Vessel fit for their
Undertaking, they took a Course in a few Weeks more to fetch home their
Brethren, that they left behind them at Antecosta.

But it is now time for us to return unto Sir William!

SECT. 13.
ALL this while CANAD A was as much written upon Sir William's Heart, as
CALLICE, they said once, was upon Queen Mary's. He needed not one to have been
his daily Monitor about Canada: It lay down with him, it rose up with him, it
engrossed almost all his Thoughts; he thought the subduing of Canada, to be the
greatest service that could be done for New England, or for the Crown of
England in America. In parsuance whereof, after he had been but a few Weeks at
Home, he took another Voyage for England, in the very depth of Winter, when
Satling was now dangerous; conflicting with all the Difficulties of a tedious
and a terrible Passage, in a very little Vessel, which indeed, was like enough
to have perished, if it had not been for the help of his Generous Hand aboard,
and His Fortunes in the bottom.

Arriving -- per tot Discrimina, at Bristol, he hastened up to London; and made
his Applications to Their Majesty's, and the Principal Ministers of State, for
assistance to Renew an Expedition against Canada, concluding his Representation
to the King, with such Words as these:

If Your Majesty shall graciously please to Commission and Assist me, I am
ready to venture my Life again in your Service. And I doubt not, but by the
Blessing of God, Canada may be added unto the rest of your Dominions, which
will (all circumstances considered) be of more advantage to the Crown of
England, than all the Territories in the West Indies are.

The Reasons here subjoined, are humbly Offered unto Your Majesty's
Consideration.
First, The Success of this Design, will greatly add to the Glory and Interest
of the English Crown and Nation; by the Addition of the Bever-Trade, and
securing the Hudson's Bay Company, some of whose Factories have lately fallen
into the Hands of the French; and increase of English Shipping and Seamen, by
gaining the Fishery of Newfoundland, and by consequence diminish the number of
French Scamen, and cut off a great Revenue from the French Crown.

Secondly, The Cause of the English in New England, their failing in the late
Attempt upon Canada, was their waiting for a Supply of Ammunition from England
until August; their long Passage up that River; the cold Season coming on; and
the Smallpox and Fevers being in the Army and Fleet; so that they could not
stay fourteen days longer; in which time probably they might have taken
Quebeck; yet, if a few Frigates be speedily sent, they doubt not of an happy
Success; the strength of the French being small, and the Planters desirous to
be under the English Government.

Thirdly, The Jesuits endeavor to seduce the Maqua's, and other Indians (as
is by them affirmed) suggesting the Greatness of King Lewis, and the inability
of King William, to do any thing against the French in those Parts, thereby to
Engage them in their Interests: In which, if they should succeed, not only
New England, but all our American Plantations, would be endangered by the Great
Increase of Shipping, for the French (built in New England at easy Rates) to
the Infinite Dishonor and Prejudice of the English Nation.

But now, for the Success of these Applications, I must entreat the Patience of
my Reader, to wait until we have gone through a little more of our History.

SECT. 14.
THE Reverend INCREASE MATHER, beholding his Country of New England in a very
Deplorable Condition, under a Governor that acted by an Iilegal, Arbitrary,
Treasonable Commission, and Invaded Liberty and Property, after such a manner,
as that no man could say any thing was his own, he did with the Encouragement
of the Principal Gentlemen in the Country, but not without much Trouble and
Hazard unto his own Person, go over to White Hall, in the Summer of the Year
1688. and wait upon King James, with a full Representation of their Miseries.
That King did give him Liberty of Access unto him, whenever he desired it, and
with many Good Words promised him to Relieve the Oppressed People in many
Instances that were proposed: But when the Revolution had brought the Prince
and Princess of Orange to the Throne, Mr. Mather having the Honor diverse Times
to Wait upon the King, he still prayed for no less a Favor to New England,
than the full Restoration of their Charter-Priviledges: And Sr. William Phips
happening to be then in England, very Generously joined with Mr. Mather, in
some of those Addresses: Whereto, his Majesty's Answers were always very
expressive of his Gracious Inclinations. Mr. Mather, herein assisted also, by
the Right Worshipful Sr Henry Ashurst, a most Hearty Friend of all such Good
Men, as those that once filled New England, solicited the Leading Men of both
Houses in the Convention-Parliament, until a Bill for the Restoring of the
Charters belonging to New England, was sully Passed by the Commons of England;
but that Parliament being Prorogued, and then Dissolved, all that Sisyphaean
Labor came to nothing. The Disappointments which afterward most wonderfully
Blasted all the hopes of the Petitioned Restoration, obliged Mr. Mather, not
without the Concurrence of other Agents, now also come from New England, unto
that Method of Petitioning the King for a New Charter, that should contain more
than all the Privileges of the Old; and Sir William Phips, now being again
returned into England, lent his utmost Assistance hereunto.

The King taking a Voyage for Holland, before this Petition was answered. Mr.
Mather, in the mean while, not only waited upon the greatest part of the Lords
of His Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, offering them a Paper of
Reasons for the Confirmation of the Charter-Priviledges granted unto the
Massachuset Colony; but also, having the Honor to be Introduced unto the
Queen; he assured Her Majesty, That there were none in the World better
affected unto Their Majesty's Government, than the People of New England, who
had indeed been exposed unto great Hardships for their being so; and entreated,
That since the King had referred the New-English Affair unto the Two Lord Chief
Justices, with the Attorney and Solicitor General, there might be granted unto
us, what They thought was Reasonable. Whereto the Queen replied, That the
Request was Reasonable; and that She had spoken diverse times to the King on the
behalf of New England; and that for Her own Part, She desired that the People
there, might not merely have Justice, but Favor done to them. When the King
was returned, Mr. Mather, being by the Duke of Devonshire brought into the
King's Presence on April 28. 1691. Humbly Prayed His Majesty's Favor to
New England; urging, That if their Old Charter-Priviledges might be restored
unto them, his Name would be Great in those Parts of the World, as long as the
World should stand; adding,

Sir,

Your Subjects there, have been willing to venture their Lives, that they may
enlarge Your Dominions; The Expedition to Canada, was a great and Noble
Undertaking.

May it Please Your Majesty, In your great Wisdom also, to consider the
circumstances of that People, as in Your Wisdom you have considered the
circumstances of England, and of Scotland. In New England they differ from
other Plantations; they are called Congregational and Presbyterian. So that
such a Governor will not suit with the People of New England, as may be very
proper for other English Plantations.

Two Days after this, the King, upon what was proposed by certain Lords, was
very inquisitive, whether He might without breach of Law, set a Governor over
New England; whereto the Lord Chief Justice, and some others of the Council,
answered, That whatever might be the Merit of the Cause, inasmuch as the
Charter of New England, stood vacated by a Judgment against them, it was in the
King's Power to put them under what Form of Government He should think best for
them.

The King then said, That He believed it would be for the Advantage of the
People, in that Colony, to be under a Governor appointed by Himself:
Nevertheless (because of what Mr. Mather had spoken to Him) He would have the
Agents of New England nominate a Person, that should be agreeable unto the
Inclinations of the People there; and notwithstanding this, He would have
Charter-Priviledges restored and confirmed unto them.

The Day following, the King began another Voyage to Holland; and when the
Attorney General's Draught of a Charter, according to what he took to be his
Majesty's Mind, as expressed in Council, was presented at the Council Board, on
the eighth of June, some Objections then made, procured an Order to prepare
Minutes for another Draught, which deprived the New-Englanders of several
Essential Privileges in their other Charter. Mr. Mather put in his Objections,
and vehemently protested, that he would sooner part with his Life, than consent
unto those Minutes, or any thing else, that should infringe any Liberty or
Privilege of Right belonging unto his Country; but he was answered, That the
Agents of New England were not Plenipotentiaries from another Sovereign State,
and that, if they would not submit unto the King's Pleasure in the settlement
of the Country, they must take what would follow.

The dissatisfactory Minutes were, by Mr. Mather's Industry, sent over unto the
King in Flanders; and the Ministers of State then with the King were earnestly
applied unto, that every mistake about the good Settlement of New England might
be prevented; and the Queen Her self, with Her own Royal Hand, wrote unto the
King, that the Charter of New England might either pass as it was drawn by the
Attorney General, or be deferred until His own Return.

But after all, His Majesty's Principal Secretary of State received a
Signification of the King's Pleasure, That the Charter of New England should
run in the Main Points of it, as it was now granted: Only there were several
Important Articles, which Mr. Mather by his unwearied Solicitations obtained
afterward to be inserted.

There were some now of the Opinion, That instead of submitting to this New
Settlement, they should, in Hopes of getting a Reversion of the Judgment
against the Old Charter, declare to the Mininisters of State, That they had
rather have no Charter at all, than such an one as was now proposed unto
Acceptance. But Mr. Mather, advising with many unprejudiced Persons, and Men of
the greatest Abilities in the Kingdom, Noblemen, Gentlemen, Divines, and
Lawyers, they all agreed, That it was not only a lawful, but all Circumstances
then considered, a needful Thing, and a part of Duty and Wisdom, to accept what
was now offered, and that a peremptory Refusal, would not only bring an
Inconveniency, but a Fatal, and perhaps a Final Ruin upon the Country; whereof
Mankind would lay the blame upon the Agents.

It was argued, That such a Submission was no Surrender of any thing; That the
Judgment, not in the Court of Kings Bench, but in Chancery against the Old
Charter, standing on Record, the Pattent was thereby Annihilated; That all
attempts to have the Judgment against the Old Charter, taken off, would be
altogether in vain, as Men and Things were then disposed.

It was further argued. That the Ancient Charter of New England, was in the
Opinion of the Lawyers, very Defective, as to several Powers, which yet were
absolutely necessary to the subsistence of the Plantation: It gave the
Government there no more Power, than the Corporations have in England; Power in
Capital Cases was not therein particularly expressed.

It mentioned not, an House of Deputies, or, an Assembly of Representatives;
the Governor and Company had thereby (they said) no Power to impose Taxes on
the Inhabitants, that were not Freemen, or to erect Courts of Admiralty.
Without such Powers, the Colony could not subsist, and yet the best Friends
that New England had, of Persons most learned in the Law, professed, that
suppose the Judgment against the Massachuset-Charter might be Reversed, yet, if
they should again Exert such Powers, as they did before the Quo Warranto
against their Charter, a new Writ of Scire Facias would undoubtedly be issued
out against them.

It was yet further argued, That if an Act of Parliament should have Reversed
the Judgment against the Massachuset-Charter, without a grant of some other
Advantages, the whole Territory had been, on many Accounts, very miserably
Incommoded: The Province of Main, with Hampshire would have been taken from
them; and Plymouth would have been annexed unto New York; so, that this Colony
would have been squeezed into an Atom, and not only have been rendered
Insignificant in it is Trade, but by having it is Militia also, which was vested
in the King, taken away, it is Insignificancies would have become, out of
measure, humbling; whereas now, instead of seeing any Relief by Act of
Parliament, they would have been put under a Governor, with a Commission,
whereby ill Men, and the King's and Country's Enemies, might probably have
crept into Opportunities to have done ten thousand ill Things, and have treated
the best Men in the Land, after a very uncomfortable Manner.

It was lastly, argued, That by the New Charter very great Privileges were
granted unto New England; and, in some respects greater, than what they
formerly enjoyed. The Colony is now made a Province, and their General Court,
has, with the King's Approbation, as much Power, in New England, as the King
and Parliament have in England. They have all English Liberties, and can be
touched by no Law, by no Tax, but of their own making. All the Liberties of
their Holy Religion are for ever secured, and their Titles to their Lands,
once, for want of some Forms of legal Conveyance, contested, are now confirmed
unto them. If an ill Governor should happen to be imposed on them, what Hurt
could he do to them? None, except they themselves pleased; for he cannot make
one Counselor, or one Judge, or one Justice, or one Sheriff to serve his
Turn: Disadvantages enough, one would think, to discourage any ill Governor
from desiring to be Stationed in those uneasy Regions. The People have a
Negative upon all the Executive Part of the Civil Government, as well as the
Legislative, which is a vast Privilege, enjoyed by no other Plantation in
America, nor by Ireland, no, nor hitherto by England it self. Why should all of
this Good be refused, or despised, because of somewhat not so Good attending
it? The Despisers of so much Good, will certainly deserve a Censure, not unlike
that of Causabon, upon some who did not value what that learned Man counted
highly valuable, Vix illis optari quid. quam pejus potest, quam ut fatuitate
sua fruantur: Much good may do them with their Madness! All of this being well
considered, Sir William Phips, who had made so many Addresses for the
Restoration of the Old Charter, under which he had seen his Country many Years
flourishing, will be excused, by all the World from any thing of a Fault, in a
most unexpected passage of his Life, which is now to be related.

Sir Henry Ashurst, and Mr. Mather, well knowing the agreeable Disposition to
do God, and the King, and his Country Service, which was in Sir William Phips,
whom they now had with them, all this while prosecuting his Design for Canada,
they did unto the Council Board, nominate Him, for the GOVERNOR of
New England. And Mr. Mather, being by the Earl of Nottingham introduced unto
His Majesty, said,

Sir,

I do, in the behalf of New England, most humbly thank your Majesty, in that
you have been pleased by a Charter, to restore English Liberties unto them, to
con(...) them in their Properties, and, to grant them some peculiar
Privileges. I doubt not, but that your Subjects there, will demean themselves
with that dutiful Affection and Loyalty to your Majesty, as that you will see
cause to enlarge your Royal Favors toward them. And I do most humbly thank
your Majesty, in that you have been pleased to give leave unto those that are
concerned for New England, to nominate their Governor.

Sir William Phips has been accordingly nominated by us, at the Council Board.
He has done a good Service for the Crown, by enlarging your Dominions, and
reducing of Nova Scotia to your Obedience. I know that He will faithfully serve
your Majesty to the utmost of his Capacity; and if your Majesty shall think sit
to confirm him in that Place, it will be a further Obligation on your Subjects
there.

The Effects of all this was, that Sir William Phips was now invested with a
Commission under the King's Broad-Seal to be Captain General, and Governor in
Chief, over the Province of the Massachuset-Bay in New England: Nor do I know a
Person in the World, that could have been proposed, more acceptable to the Body
of the People throughout New England, and on that score, more likely, and able
to serve the King's Interests among the People there, under the Changes, in
some things unacceptable, now brought upon them. He had been a Gideon, who had
more than once ventured his Life to save his Country from their Enemies; and
they now, with universal Satisfaction said, Thou shall Rule over us.
Accordingly, having, with Mr. Mather, kissed the King's Hand on January 3d.
1691. he hastened away to his Government; and arriving at New England, the
fourteenth of May following, attended with the Non-such-Frigate, both of them
were welcomed with the Loud Acclamations of the long shaken and shattered
Country, whereto they were now returned with a Settlement so full of Happy
Privileges.

SECT. 15.
WHEN Titus Flaminius had freed the poor Grecians from the Bondage which had
long oppressed them, and the Herald Proclaimed among them the Articles of their
Freedom, they cried out, A Savior! a Savior! with such loud Acclamations,
that the very Birds fell down from Heaven, astonished at the Cry. Truly, when
Mr. Mather brought with him unto the poor New-Englanders, not only a Charter,
which though in diverse points wanting what both he and they had wished for, yet
for ever delivers them from oppressions on their Christian and English
Liberties, or, on their Ancient Possessions, wherein ruining Writs of Intrusion
had begun to Invade them all, but also a GOVERNOR who might call New England
his own Country, and who was above most Men in it, full of Affection to the
Interests of his Country; the sensible part of the People, then caused the
sense of the Salvations thus brought them, to reach as far as Heaven it self.
The various little Humors then working among the People, did not hinder the
Great and General Court of the Province, to appoint a Day of Solemn THANKS
GIVING to Almighty God for Granting (as the Printed Order expressed it) a Safe
Arrival to His Excellency our Governor, and the Reverend Mr. Increase Mather,
who have industriously endeavored the Service of this People, and have brought
over with them, a Settlement of Government, in which Their Majesty's have
Graciously given us distinguishing Marks of Their Royal Favor and Goodness.

And as the Obliged People thus gave Thanks unto the God of Heaven, so they
sent an Address of Thanks unto Their Majesty's, with other Letters of Thanks
unto some Chief Ministers of State, for the Favorable Aspect herein cast upon
the Province.

Nor were the People mistaken, when they promised themselves all the Kindness
imaginable from this Governor, and expected, Under his shadow we shall live
easy among the Heathen: Why might they not look for Halcyon-days, when they
had such a Kings-Fisher for their Governor?

Governor Phips had, as every Raised and Useful Person must have, his envious
Enemies; but the palest Envy of them, who turned their worst Enmity upon him,
could not hinder them from confessing, That according to the best of his
Apprehension, he ever sought the good of his Country: His Country quickly felt
this on innumerable Occasions; and they had it eminently demonstrated, as well
in his promoting and Approving the Councils Choice of good Judges, Justices and
Sheriffs, which being once established, no Successor could remove them, as in
his urging the General Assembly to make themselves happy by preparing a Body of
Good Laws, as fast as they could, which being passed by him in his Time, could
not be nulled by any other after him.

He would often speak to the Members of the General Assembly, in such Terms as
these, Gentlemen, you may make your selves, as easy as you will for ever;
consider what may have any tendency to your welfare; and you may be sure that
whatever Bills you offer to me consistent with the Honor and Interest of the
Crown, I Will pass them readily; I do but seek Opportunities to serve you; had it
not been for the sake of this thing, I had never accepted the Government of
this Province; and when ever you have settled such a Body of good Laws, that no
Person coming after me, may make you uneasy, I shall desire not one Day longer
to continue in the Government. Accordingly, he ever passed every Act for the
welfare of the Province proposed unto him; and instead of ever putting them
upon Buying his Assent unto any good Act, he was much forwarder to give it,
than they were to ask it: Nor indeed, had the Hunger of a Salary, any such
Impression upon him, as to make him decline doing all possible Service, for the
Public while he was not sure of having any proportionable, or honorable
acknowledgments.

But yet he minded the Preservation of the King's Rights, with as careful and
faithful a Zeal, as became a good Steward for the Crown: And, indeed, he
studied nothing more, than to observe such a Temper in all things, as to
extinguish what others have gone to distinguish; even the Pernicious Notion of
a separate Interest. There was a Time, when the Roman Empire, was infested with
a vast number of Governors, who were infamous for Infinite Avarice and
Villainy; and referring to this Time, the Apostle John had a Vision of, People
killed with the Beasts of the Earth.

But Sir William Phips was none of those Governors; wonderfully contrary to
this wretchedness, was the Happiness of New England, when they had Governor
Phips, using the tenderness of a Father toward the People, and being of the
Opinion, Ditare magis esse Regium quam Ditescere, that it was a braver Thing to
enrich the People, than to grow rich himself. A Father, I said; and what if I
had said, an Angel too. If I should from Clemens Alexandrinus from Theodoret,
and from Jerome, and others among the Ancients, as well as from Calvin and
Bucan, and Peter Martyr, and Chemnitius and Bullinger, and a thousand more
among the Moderns, bring Authorities for the Assertion, That each Country and
Province, is under the special care of some Angel, by a singular Deputation of
Heaven assigned thereunto, I could back them with a far greater Authority than
any of them all. The Scripture it self does plainly assert it: And hence the
most Learned Grotius, writing of Commonwealths, has a passage to this purpose,
His singulis, suos Attributos, esse Angelos, ex Daniele, magno consensu, and
Judaei and Christiani veteres colligebant.

But New England had now, besides the Guardian-Angel, who more invisibly
intended it is welfare, a Governor, that became wonderfully agreeable
thereunto, by his whole Imitation of such a Guardian-Angel. He employed his
whole Strength, to guard his People from all Disasters, which threatened them
either by Sea, or Land; and it was remarked, that nothing remarkably Disastrous
did befall that People, from the Time of his Arrival to the Government, until
there arrived an Order for his leaving it: (Except one Thing which was begun
before he entered upon the Government:) But instead thereof, the Indians were
notably defeated, in the Assaults, which they now made upon the English, and
several French Ships did also very advantageously fall into his Hands; yea,
there was by his means a Peace restored unto the Province, that had been diverse
Years languishing under the Hectic Fever of a Lingering War.

And there was this one thing more, that rendered his Government the more
desirable; That whereas it is impossible for a mere Man to govern without some
Error, when ever, this Governor was advised of any Error in any of his
Administrations, he would immediately retract it, and revoke it, with all
possible ingenuity; so that if any occasion of just complaint arose, it was
usually his endeavor, that it should not long be complained of -- O, Faelices
nimium, sua si Bona, norant,
Nov-Angli. --


But having in a Parenthesis, newly intimated, that His Excellency, when he
entered on his Government, found one Thing, that was remarkably Disastrous begun
upon it: Of that one Thing, we will now give some Account.

Reader, prepare to be entertained, with as Prodigious Matters, as can be put
into any History! And let him that writes the next Thaumatographia Pneumatica,
allow to these Prodigies the chief Place among the wonders.

SECT. 16.
ABOUT the Time of our Blessed Lord's coming to Reside on Earth, we read of so
many possessed with Devils, that it is commonly thought the Number of such
Miserable Energumens was then increased above what has been usual in other
Ages; and the Reason of that Increase, has been made a Matter of some Enquiry.
Nowthough the Devils might herein design by Preternatural Operations to Blast
the Miracles of our Lord Jesus Christ, which Point they Gained among the
Blasphemous Pharisees; and the Devils might herein also design a villainous
Imitation of what was coming to pass in the Incarnation of our Lord Jesus
Christ, wherein God came to dwell in Flesh; yet I am not without suspicion that
there may be something further in the Conjecture of the Learned Bartholinus
hereupon, who says, It was Quod judaei praeter modum, Artibus Magicis dediti
Daemonem Advocaverint, the Jews, by the frequent use of Magical Tricks, called
in the Devils among them.

It is very certain, there were hardly any People in the World grown more fond
of Sorceries, than that unhappy People: The Talmuds tell us of the little
Parchments with Words upon them, which were their common Amulets, and of the
Charms which they muttered over Wounds, and of the various Enchantments which
they used against all sorts of Disasters whatsoever. It is affirmed in the
Talmuds, that no less than Twenty four Scholars in one School, were killed by
Witchcraft; and that no less than fourscore Persons were Hanged for Witchcraft
by one Judge in one Day. The Gloss adds upon it, That the Women of Israel had
generally fallen to the Practice of Witchcrafts; and therefore it was required.
That there should be still chosen into the Council, One skilful in the Arts of
Sorcerers, and able thereby to discover who might be guilty of those Black Arts
among such as were accused before them.

Now the Arrival of Sir William Phips to the Government of New England, was at
a Time, when a Governor would have had Occasion for all the Skill in Sorcerie,
that was ever necessary to a Jewish Councellor; A Time when Scores of poor
people had newly fallen under, a prodigious Possession of Devils, which it was
then generally thought had been by Witchcrafts introduced. It is to be
confessed and Bewailed, That many Inhabitants of New England, and Young people
especially, had been Led away with Little Sorceries, wherein they did Secretly
those Things that were not Right against the Lord their God; They would often
cure Hurts with Spells, and practice detestable Conjurations with Sieves, and
Keys, and Pease, and Nails and Horseshoes, and other Implements, to Learn the
Things, for which they had a forbidden and impious Curiosity. Wretched Books
had stolen into the Land, wherein Fools were instructed, how to become able
Fortune Tellers: Among which, I wonder that a blacker Brand is not set upon
that Fortune-telling Wheel, which that Sham-Scribler, that goes under the
Letters of R. B. has proposed in his Delights for the Ingenious, as an honest
and pleasant Recreation: And by these Books, the minds of many had been so
poisoned, that they studied this Finer Witchcraft; until, it is well, if some of
them were not betrayed, into what is grosser, and more sensible and Capital.
Although these Diabolical Divinations are more ordinarily committed perhaps all
over the whole World, than they are in the Country of New England, yet, That
being a Country Devoted unto the Worship and Service of the Lord JESUS CHRIST
above the Rest of the World. He signalized his Vengeance against these
wickednesses, with such extraordinary Dispensations, as have not been often
seen in others Places.

The Devils, which had been so played withal, and, it may be, by some few
Criminals more Explicitly engaged and employed, now broke in upon the Country,
after as aftonishing a manner, as was ever heard of. Some scores of People,
first about Salem, the Center and first Born, of all the Towns in the Colony,
and afterward in several other Places, were arrested with many Praternatural
Vexations upon their Bodies, and a variety of cruel Torments, which were
evidently inflicted from the Demons of the Invisible World. The People that
were infected and infested with such Demons, in a few Days Time, arrived unto
such a Resining Alteration upon their Eyes, that they could see their
Tormentors; they saw a Devil of a little Stature, and of a Tawny Color,
attended still with Specter, that appeared in more Humane Circumstances.

These Tormentors, tendered unto the Afflicted, a Book, requiring them to Sign
it, or to Touch it, at least, in token of their consenting to be Listed in the
Service of the Devil; which, they refusing to do, the Specter under the
command of that Blackman, as they called him, would apply themselves to Torture
them, with prodigious Molestations.

The afflicted Wretches were horribly Distorted and Convulsed; they were
Pinched Black and Blew; Pins would be run every where in their Flesh; they
would be scalded until they had Blisters raised on them; and a thousand other
things before Hundreds of Witnesses were done unto them, evidently
Praeternatural: For, if it were Praeternatural, to keep a rigid Fast, for Nine,
yea, for Fifteen Days together; or, if it were Praeternatural, to have ones
Hands tied close together, with a Rope to be plainly seen, and then by unseen
Hands presently pulled up a great way from the Earth, before a crowd of People:
Such Praeternatural Things were endured by them.

But of all the Praeternatural Things which befell these People, there were none
more unaccountable than those, wherein the praestigious Demons would ever now
and then cover the most Corporeal Things in the World, with a Fascinating Mist
of Invisibility. As now; A Person was cruelly assaulted by a Spectre, that, she
said, run at her with a Spindle, though no Body else in the Room could see
either the Spectre or the Spindle: At last in her Agonies, giving a snatch at
the Spectre, she pulled the Spindle away; and it was no sooner got into her
Hand, but the other Folks then present, beheld that it was indeed a real,
proper, Iron Spindle; which when they locked up very safe, it was nevertheless
by the Demons taken away to do farther Mischief.

Again; A Person was haunted by a most abusive Spectre, which came to her, she
said, with a Sheet about her, though seen to none but her self. After she had
undergone a deal of Teaze, from the Annoyance of the Spectre, she gave a
violent snatch at the Sheet that was upon it; where-from she tore a Corner,
which in her Hand, immediately was beheld by all that were present; a palpable
Corner of a Sheet: And her Father, which was now holding of her, caught, that
he might keep, what his Daughter had so strangely siezed; but the Spectre had
like to have wrung his Hand off, by endeavoring to wrest it from him: However
he still held it; and several times this odd Accident was renewed in the
Family. There wanted not the Oaths of good credible People, to these
particulars.

Also, It is well known, that these wicked Specter did proceed so far as to
steal several Quantities of Money from diverse People, part of which Individual
Money, was dropped sometimes out of the Air, before sufficient Spectators, into
the Hands of the Afflicted, while the Specter were urging them to subscribe
their Covenant with Death. Moreover, Poisons to the standers-by, wholly
Invisible, were sometimes forced upon the Afflicted; which when they have with
much Reluctance swallowed, they have swollen presently, so that the common
Medicines for Poisons have been found necessary to relieve them: Yea, sometimes
the Specter in the struggles, have so dropped the Poisons, that the Standers by
have smelt them, and viewed them, and beheld the Pillows of the miserable
stained with them.

Yet more, the miserable have complained bitterly of burning Rags run into
their forceably distended Mouths, and though no Body could see any such
Clothes, or, indeed any Fires in the Chambers, yet presently the scalds were
seen plainly, by every Body, on the Mouths of the Complainers, and not only the
Smell, but the Smoke of the Burning, sensibly filled the Chambers.

Once more; the miserable exclaimed extremely of Branding Irons heating at the
Fire, on the Hearth, to mark them; now though the standers-by could see no
Irons, yet they could see distinctly the Print of them in the Ashes, and smell
them too as they were carried by the not-seen Furies, unto the Poor Creatures
for whom they were intended; and those Poor Creatures were thereupon so
stigmatized with them, that they will bear the Marks of them to their Dying
Day. Nor are these the Tenth Part of the Prodigies that fell out among the
Inhabitants of New England.

Flashy People may Burlesque these Things, but when Hundreds of the most sober
People in a Country, where they have as much Mother-Wit certainly, as the rest
of Mankind, know them to be True, nothing but the absurd and froward Spirit of
Sadducism can Question them. I have not yet mentioned so much as one Thing that
will not be justified, if it be required, by the Oaths of more considerate
Persons than any that can ridicule these odd Phenomenon.

But the worst part of this astonishing Tragedy is yet behind; wherein Sir
William Phips, at last, being dropped, as it were from the Machin of Heaven, was
an Instrument of casing the Distresses of the Land, now so darkened by the Wrath
of the Lord of Hosts. There were very worthy Men upon the spot, where the
assault from Hell was first made, who apprehended themselves called from the
God of Heaven, to sift the business unto the bottom of it; and, indeed, the
continual Impressions, which the outcries and the havocks of the afflicted
People that lived nigh unto them, caused on their Minds, gave no little Edge to
this Apprehension.

The Persons were Men eminent for Wisdom and Virtue, and they went about their
enquiry into the matter as driven unto it, by a Conscience of Duty to God and
the World. They did in the first Place, take it for granted, that there are
Witches, or, wicked Children of Men, who upon Covenanting with, and
Commissioning of Evil Spirits, are attended by their Ministry to accomplish the
Things desired of them: To satisfy them in which Persuasion, they had not only
the Assertions of the Holy Scripture; Assertions, which the Witch-Advocates
cannot evade without shifts, too foolish for any Prudent, or too profane for
any Honest Man, to use; and they had not only the well-attested Relations of
the gravest Authors from Bodin to Bovet, and from Binsfeld to Bromhal and
Baxter, to deny all which, would be as reasonable as to turn the Chronicles of
all Nations into Romances, of Don Quixot, and the seven Champions; but they had
also an Ocular Demonstration in one, who a little before had been executed for
Witcheraft, when Joseph Dudley Esquire was the Chief Judge. There was one whose
Magical Images were found, and who confessing her Deeds, (when a Jury of
Doctors returned her, Compos Mentis) actually showed the whole Court, by what
Ceremonies used unto them, she directed her Familiar Spirits, how and where to
Cruciate the Objects of her Malice; and the Experiments being made over and
over again, before the whole Court, the Effect followed exactly, in the Hurts
done to People at a distance from her. The Existence of such Witches, was now
taken for granted by those good Men, wherein so far the generality of
reasonable Men have thought, they ran well; and they soon received the
Confessions of some accused Persons to confirm them in it; but then, they took
one thing more for granted, wherein it is now as generally thought they went out
of the Way. The Afflicted People vehemently accused several Persons in several
Places, that the Specter which afflicted them, did exactly resemble Them;
until the importunity of the Accusations did provoke the Magistrates to examine
them. When many of the accused came upon their Examination, it was found, that
the Demons, then a thousand ways abusing of the poor afflicted People, had
with a mavelous exactness represented them; yea it was found that many of the
accused, but casting their Eye on the afflicted, the afflicted, though their
Faces were never so much another way, would fall down and lie in a sort of a
swoon, wherein they would continue, whatever Hands were laid upon them, until
the Hands of the accused came to touch them, and then they would revive
immediately: And it was found, that varioukinds of natural Actions done by many
of the accused in or to their own Bodies, as Leaning, Bending, Turning Awry, or
Squeezing their Hands or the like, were presently attended with the like things
praeternaturally done upon the Bodies of the Afflicted, though they were so far
asunder that the Afflicted could not at all observe the Accused.

It was also found that the Flesh of the Afflicted was often Bitten, at such a
rate, that not only the Print of Teeth would be left on their Flesh, but the
very Slaver of Spittle too: And there would appear just such a set of Teeth, as
was in the Accused, even such as might be clearly distinguished from other
Peoples. And usually the Afflicted went through a terrible deal of seeming
Difficulties from the tormenting Specter, and must be long waited on, before
they could get a Breathing Space from their Torments, to give in their
Testimonies.

Now many good Men took up an Opinion, That the Providence of God would not
permit an Innocent Person to come under such a Spectral Representation; and
that a concurrence of so many Circumstances, would prove an Accused Person to
be in a Confederacy with the Demons thus afflicting of the Neighbors; they
judged, that except these Things might amount unto a Conviction, it would
scarce be possible ever to Convict a Witch; and they had some Philosophical
Schemes of Witcheraft, and or the Method and Manner, wherein Magical Poisons
operate, which further supported them in their Opinion.

Sundry of the Accused Persons were brought unto their Trial, while this
Opinion was yet prevailing in the Minds of the Judges, and the Juries, and
perhaps the most of the People in the County, then mostly Suffering; and though
against some of them that were Tried, there came in so much other Evidence of
their Diabolical Compacts, that some of the most Judicious and yet vehement
Opposers of the Notions then in Vogue, publicly declared, Had they themselves
been on the Bench, they could not have Acquitted them; nevertheless, diverse
were Condemned, against whom the chief Evidence was founded in the Spectral
Exhibitions.

And it happening, that some of the Accused coming to confess themselves
Guilty, their Shapes were no more seen by any of the Afflicted, though the
Confession had been kept never so Secret, but instead thereof the Accused
themselves became in all Vexations just like the Afflicted; this yet more
confirmed many in the Opinion, that had been taken up.

And another thing that quickened them yet more to Act upon it, was, That the
Afflicted were frequently entertained with Apparitions of Chosts at the same
Time, that the Specter of the supposed Witches troubled them: Which Christ's
always cast the Beholders into far more Consternation than any of the Specter;
and when they exhibited themselves, they cried out of being Murdered by the
Witchcrafts, or other Violences of the Persons represented in the Specter.
Once or Twice, these Apparitions were seen by others at the very same time that
they showed themselves to the afflicted, and seldom were they seen at all, but
when something unusual, and suspicious, had attended the Death of the Party
thus appearing.

The Afflicted People, many times, had never heard any thing before of the
Persons appearing in Ghost, or of the Persons Accused by the Apparitions; and
yet the Accused upon Examination have confessed the Murders of those very
Persons, though these Accused also knew nothing of the Apparitions, that had
come in against them; and the Afflicted Persons likewise without any private
Agreement or Collution, when successively brought into a Room, have all
asserted the same Apparations to be there before them: These Murders did seem
to call for an Enquiry.

On the other Part, there were many Persons of great Judgment, Piety, and
Experience, who from the beginning were very much dissatisfied at these
Proceedings; they feared, lest the Devil would get so far into the Faith of the
People, that for the sake of many Truths, which they might find him telling of
them, they would come, at length, to believe all his Lies, whereupon what a
Desolation of Names, yea and of lives also, would ensue, a Man might without
much Witcheraft be able to Prognosticate; and they feared, left in such an
extraordinary Descent of Wicked Spirits from their High Places, upon us, there
might such Principles be taken up, as, when put into Practice, would
unavoidably cause the Righteous to perish wi^h the Wicked, and procure the
Bloodshed of Persons like the Gibeonites, whom some learned Men suppose to be
under a false Pretense of Witcherast, by Saul exterminated.

However uncommon it might be, for guil^less Persons to come under such
unaccountable Circumstances, as were on so many of the Accused, they held, Some
things there are, which if suffered to be Common, would subvert Government, and
Disband and Ruin Humane Society, yet God sometimes may suffer such Things to
evene, that we may know thereby, how much we are beholden to him, for that
restraint which he lays upon the Infernal Spirits, who would else reduce a
World into a Chaos. They had already known of one at the Town of Groton,
hideously agitated by Devils, who in her fits, cried out much against a very
Godly. Woman in the Town, and when that Woman approached unto her, though the
Eyes of the Creature, were never so shut, she yet manifested a violent Sense of
her approach: But, when the Gracious Woman thus Impeached, had prayed earnestly
with and for this Creature; then instead of crying out against her any more,
she owned, that she had in all, been deluded by the Devil. They now saw, that
the more the Afflicted were Hearkened unto, the more the number of the Accused
increased; until, at last, many scores were cried out upon, and among them,
some, who by the Vnblameableness, yea and Serviceableness of their whole
Conversation, had obtained the Just Reputation of Good People among all that
were acquainted with them. The Character of the Afflicted likewise added unto
the common Distaste, for though some of them too, were Good People, yet others
of them, and such of them as were most Flippent at Accusing, had a far other
Character.

In fine, the Country was in a dreadful Ferment, and wise Men foresaw a long
Train of Dismal, and Bloody Consequences. Hereupon they first advised, that the
Afflicted might be kept asunder, in the closest Privacy; and one particular
Person, (whom I have cause to know) in pursuance of this Advice, offered
himself singly to provide Accommodations for any six of them, that so the
Success of more than ordinary Prayer with Fasting might with Patience, be
experienced, before any other Courses were taken.

And Sir William Phips arriving to his Government, after this ensnaring
horrible Storm was begun, did consult the neighboring Ministers of the
Province, who made unto His Excellency and the Council a return, (drawn up, at
their desire, by Mr. Mather the Younger as I have been informed) wherein they
declared.

We Judge, That in the Prosecution of These and all such Witcherafts, there is
need of a very Critical and Exquisite Caution. Lest, by too much Credulity, for
things received only upon the Devil's Authority, there be a Door opened for a
long Train of miserable Consequences, and Satan get an Advantage over us; for
we should not be Ignorant of his Devices.

As in complaints upon Witchcrafts, there may be Matters of Enquiry, which do
not amount unto Matters of Presumption; and there may be Matters of
Presumption, which yet may not be reckoned Matters of Conviction, so it is
necessary, that all Proceedings thereabout, be managed with an excee^^^g
Tenderness toward those that may be complained of; especially if they have
been Persons formerly of an unblemished Reputation.

When the first Enquiry is made into the Circumstances of such as may ly under
any just Suspicion of Witchcrafts, we could wish, that there may be admitted as
little as is possible of such Noise, Company, and Openness, as may too hastily
expose them that are Examined; and that there may nothing be used as a Test for
the Trial of the Suspected, the lawfulness whereof may be doubted among the
People of God: But that the Directions given by such judicious Writers as
Perkins and Bernard, be consulted in such a Case.

Presumptions, whereupon Persons may be committed, and much more Convictions,
whereupon Persons may be condemned, as guilty of Witcherafts, ought certainly
to be more considerable, than barely the Accused Persons being represented by a
Spectre to the Afflicted: Inasmuch as it is an undoubted, and a notorious
Thing, that a Demon may be God's Permission, appear, even to ill Purposes, in
the shape of an Innocent, yea, and a Virtuous Man: Nor can we esteem
Alterations made in the Sufferers, by a look or touch of the Accused, to be an
infallible Evidence of Guilt; but frequently liable to be abused by the Devil's
Legerdemaines.

We know not whether some remarkable Affronts given to the Devils, by our
disbelieving of those Testimonies whose whole Force and Strength, is from them
alone, may not put a Period unto the Progress of a direful Calamity begun upon
us, in the Accusation of so many Persons, whereof, we hope, some are yet clear
from the great Transgression, laid unto their Charge.

The Ministers of the Province also being Jealous, left this Counsel should not
be duly followed, requested the President of Harvard-Colledge to Compose and
Publish, (which he did) some Cases of Conscience referring to these
Difficulties: In which Treatise he did, with Demonstrations of incomparable
Reason and Reading evince it, That Satan may appear in the Shape of an Innocent
and a Virtuous Person, to afflict those that suffer by the Diabolical
Molestations: And that the Ordeal of the Sight, and the Touch, is not a
Conviction of a Covenant with the Devil, but liable to great Exceptions against
the lawfulness, as well as the Evidence of it: And that either a Free and Fair
Confession of the Criminals, or the Oath of two Credible Persons proving such
Things against the Person Accused, as none but such as have a Familiarity with
the Devil can know, or do, is necessary to the Proof of the Crime. Thus, Cum
misit Natura Feras, and Monstra per Orbem,
Misit and Alciden qui Fera Monstra domet.


The Dutch and French Ministers in the Province of New York, having likewise
about the same Time, their Judgment asked by the Chief Judge of that Province,
who was then a Gentleman of New England, They gave it in under their Hands,
That if we Believe no Venefick Witchcraft, we must Renounce the Scripture of
God, and the Consent of almost all the World; but that yet the Apparition of a
Person Afflicting another, is a very Insufficient Proof of a Witch; nor is it
Inconsistent with the Holy and Righteous Government of God over men, to permit
the Affliction of the Neighbors, by Devils in the shape of Good men; and that
a Good Name obtained by a Good Life, should not be Lost by Mere Spectral
Accusations.

Now upon a Deliberate Review of these Things, His Excellency first Reprieved,
and then Pardoned many of them that had been Condemned; and there fell out
several strange Things, that caused the Spirit of the Country to run, as
vehemently upon the acquitting of all the Accused, as it by mistake ran at
first upon the Condem^ing of them. Some that had been zealously of the Mind,
that the Devil's could not in the Shapes of good Men, afflict other Men, were
terribly Confuted, by having their own Shapes and the Shapes of their most
intimate and valued Friends thus Abused. And though more than twice Twenty, had
made such voluntary, and harmonious, and uncontrolable Confessions, that if
they were all Sham, there was therein the greatest Violation made by the
Efficacy of the Invisible World, upon the Rules of Understanding Humane
Affairs, that was ever seen since God made Man upon the Earth, yet they did so
recede from their Confessions, that it was every clear, some of them had been
hitherto, in a sort of a Praeternatural Dream, wherein, they had said of
themselves, they knew not what themselves.

In fine, The last Courts that sat upon this Thorny Business, finding that it
was impossible to Penetrate into the whole Meaning of the Things that had
happened, and that so many unsearchable Cheats were interwoven into the
Conclusion of a Mysterious Business, which perhaps had not crept thereinto at
the Beginning of it, they cleared the Accused as fast as they Tried them; and
within a little while the Afflicted were most of them delivered out of their
Troubles also: And the Land had Peace restored unto it, by the God of Peace,
treading Satan under foot. Erasmus, among other Historians, does tell us, that
at a Town in Germany, a Demon appearing on the Top of a Chimney, threatened
that he would set the Town on Fire, and at length scattering some Ashes abroad,
the whole Town was presently and horribly Burnt unto the Ground.

Sir William Phips now beheld such Demons hideously scattering Fire about the
Country, in the Exasperations, which the Minds of Men were on these Things
rising unto; and therefore when he had well Canvased a Cause, which perhaps
might have puzzled the Wisdom of the Wisest Men on Earth to have managed,
without any Error in their Administrations, he thought, if it would be any
Error at all, it would certainly be the safest, for him, to put a stop unto all
future Prosecutions as far as it lay in him to do it.

He did so; and for it, he had not only the Printed Acknowledgments of the
New-Englanders, who publicly thanked him, As one of the Tribe of Zebulun,
raised up from among themselves, and Spirited as well as Commissioned to be the
Steers-man of a Vessel befogg'd in the Mare Mortuum of Witchcraft, who now so
happily steered her Course, that she escaped Shipwreck, and was safely again
Moored under the Cape of Good Hope; and cut asunder the Circaean Knot of
Enchantment, more difficult to be Dissolved than the famous Gordian one of Old.

But the QVEEN also did him the Honor, to write unto him, those Gracious
Letters, wherein Her Majesty commended his Conduct in these Inexplicable
Matters. And I did right in calling these Matters Inexplicable. For if, after
the Kingdom of Sweden (in the Year, 1669. and 1670.) had some Hundreds of their
Children by Night often carried away by Specter, to an Hellish Rendezvous,
where the Monsters that so Spirited them, did every way Tempt them to Associate
with them; and the Judges of the Kingdom after extraordinary Supplications to
Heaven, upon a strict Enquiry, were so satisfied with the Confessions of more
than Twenty of the Accused, agreeing exactly unto the Depositions of the
Afflicted, that they put several scores of Witches to Death, whereupon the
Confusions came unto a Period; yet after all the chiefest Persons in the
Kingdom would Question whether there were any Witchcrafts at all, in the whole
Affair; it must not be wondered at, if the People of New England are, to this
Hour, full of Doubts, about the steps which were taken, while a War from the
Invisible World was Terrifying of them, and whether they did not kill some of
their own side in the Smoke and Noise of this Dreadful War. And it will be yet
less wondered at, if we consider, that we have seen the whole English Nation
alarumed with a Plot, and both Houses of Parliament upon good Grounds, Voting
their Sense of it, and many Persons most justly Hanged, Drawn and Quartered,
for their share in it: When yet there are enough, who to this Day, will pretend
that they cannot comprehend how much of it, is to be accounted Credible.
However having related these wonderful Passages, whereof, if the Veracity of
the Relator in any one Point be contested, there are whole Clouds of Witnesses
to vindicate it, I will take my leave of the Matter with an wholesome Caution
of Lactantius, which, it may be, some other Parts of the World besides
New England may have occasion to think upon; Efficient Daemones, ut quae non
sunt, sic tamen, quasi sint, conspicienda Hominibus exhibeant.

But the Devils being thus vanquished, we shall next hear, that some of his
most devoted and resembling Children, are so too.

SECT. 17.
AS one of the first Actions done by Sir William, after he came to the Age of
Doing, was to save the Lives of many poor People from the Rage of the
Diabolical Indians in the Eastern Parts of the Country, so now he was come to
the Government, his Mind was very vehemently set upon recovering of those
Parts, from the Miseries, which a New and a Long War of the Indians had brought
upon them. His Birth and Youth, in the East, had rendered him well known unto
the Indians there; he had Hunted, and Fished many a weary Day, in his Childhood
with them; and when those rude Savages had got the Story by the End, that he
had found a Ship full of Money, and was know become all-one-a-King! They were
mightily astonished at it: But when they farther understood that he was become
the Governor of New England, it added a further Degree of Consternation to
their Astonishment. He likewise was better acquainted with the Situation of
those Regions, than most other Men; and he considered what vast Advantages
might arise, to no less, than the whole English Nation, from the Lumber, and
Fishery and Naval-stores, which those Regions might soon supply the whole
Nation withal, if once they were well settled with good Inhabitants.

Wherefore Governor Phips, took the first Opportunity, to raise an Army, with
which he Traveled in Person, unto the East-Country to find out and cut off the
Barbarous Enemy, which had continued for near four Years together, making
horrible Havoc on the Plantations, that lay all along the Northern Frontiers
of New England: And having pursued those worse than Scythian Wolves, till they
could be no longer followed, he did, with a very laudable Skill, and unusual
Speed, and with less Cost unto the Crown, than perhaps ever such a Thing was
done in the World, erect a strong Fort, at Pemmaquid,

This Fort, he contrived so much in the very Heart of the Country now possessed
by the Enemy, as very much to hinder the several Nations of the Tawnies from
Clanning together, for the common Disturbance; and his Design was, that a
sufficient Garrison being here posted, they might from thence, upon Advice,
issue forth to surprise that ferocient Enemy. At the same time he would fain
have gone in Person up the Bay of Funda, with a convenient Force, to have
spoiled a Neast of Rebellious Frenchmen, who being Rendezvouzed at St. John's,
had a yearly Supply of Aminunition from France, with which they still supplied
the Indians, unto the extreme Detriment of the English, but his Friends for a
long time, would not permit him to expose himself unto the Inconveniences of
that Expedition.

However, he took such Methods, that the Indian Kings of the East, within a
little while, had their Stomachs brought down, to sue and beg for a Peace; And
making their Appearance at the New-Fort, in Pemmaquid, Aug. 11. 1693. They did
there Sign an Instrument, wherein, lamenting the Miseries which their Adherence
to the French Counsels, had brought them into, they did for themselves and with
the Consent of all the Indians from the River of Merrimack, to the most
Easterly Bounds of all the Province, acknowledge their Hearty Subjection and
Obedience unto the Crown of England, and solemnly Covenant, Promise, and Agree,
to and with Sir William Phips, Captain General and Governor in Chief over the
Province, and his Successors in that Place, That they would for ever cease all
Acts of Hostility toward the Subjects of the Crown of England, and hold a
Constant Friendship with all the English. That they would utterly abandon the
French Interests, and not succor or conceal any Enemy Indians, from Canada or
elsewhere, that should come to any of their Plantations within the English
Territories: That all English Captives, which they had among them, should be
returned with all possible speed, and no Ransom or Payment be given for any of
them; That their Majesty's Subjects the English, now should quietly enter upon,
and for ever improve and enjoy all and singular their Rights of Lands, and
former Possessions, within the Eastern Parts of the Province, without any
claims from any Indians, or being ever disturbed therein: That all Trade and
Commerce, which hereafter might be allowed between the English and the Indians
should be under a Regulation stated by an Act of the General Assembly, or as
limited by the Governor of the Province, with the Consent and Advice of his
Council. And That, if any Controversy hereafter happen between any of the
English and the Indians, no Private Revenge was to be taken by the Indians, but
proper Applications to be made unto His Majesty's Government, for the due
Remedy thereof: Submitting themselves herewithal to be Governed by His
Majesty's Laws.

And for the Manifestation of their Sincerity in the Submission thus made, the
Hypocritical Wretches delivered Hostages for their Fidelity; and then set their
Marks and Seals, no less than thirteen Sagamores of them, (with Names of more
than a Persian length) unto this Instrument.

The first Rise of this Indian War, had hitherto been almost as Dark as that of
the River Nilus: It Is true, if any Wild English did rashly begin to provoke and
affront the Indians, yet the Indians had a fairer way to obtain Justice, than
by Bloodshed: However, upon the New-English Revolution, the State of the War
became wholly New: The Government then employed all possible ways to procure a
good Understanding with the Indians, but all the English Offers, Kindnesses,
Courtesies were barbarously requited by them, with New Acts of the most
perfidious Hostility. Notwithstanding all this, there were still some Nice
People, that had their scruples about the Justice of the War; but upon this New
Submission of the Indians, if ever those Rattle-snakes (the only Rattle-snakes,
which, they say, were ever seen to the Northward of Merimack-River) should stir
again, the most scrupulous Persons in the World must own, That it must be the
most unexceptionable piece of Justice in the World for to extinguish them.

Thus did the God of Heaven bless the unwearied Applications of Sir William
Phips, for the restoring of Peace unto New England, when the Country was quite
out of Breath, in its Endeavors for its own Preservation, from the continual
outrages of an inaccessible Enemy, and by the Poverty coming in, so like an
armed Man from the unsuccessfulness of their former Armies, that it could not
imagine, how to take one step further in it is Wars. The most Happy Respite of
Peace beyond Merimack-River being thus procured, the Governor immediately set
himself to use all possible Methods, that it might be Peace, like a River,
nothing short of Everlasting.

He therefore prevailed with Two or Three Gentlemen to join with him, in
sending a Supply of Necessaries for Life, unto the Indians, until the General
Assembly could come together to settle the Indian-Trade for the Advantage of
the Public, that the Indians might not by Necessity be driven again, to become
a French Propriety; although by this Action, as the Gentlemen themselves were
great Losers in their Estates, thus He Himself declared unto the Members of the
General Assembly, that he would upon Oath, give an Account unto them of all his
own Gains, and count himself a Gainer, if in lieu of all, they would give him
one Beaver-Hat. The same Generosity also caused him to take many a tedious
Voyage, accompanied sometimes with his Fidus Achates and very Dear Friend,
Kinsman and Neighbor, Colonel John Philips, between Boston and Pemmaquid; and
this in the bitter Weeks of the New-English, which is almost a Russian Winter.

He was a sort of Confessor under such Torments of Cold, as once made the
Martyrdom of Muria, and others commemorated in Orations of the Ancients; and
the Snow and Ice which Pliny calls, The Punishment of Mountains, he cheerfully
endured, without any other Profit unto himself, but only the Pleasure of
thereby establishing and centinuing unto the People the Liberty to Sleep
quietly in their warm Nests at home, while he was thus concerned for them
abroad. Non mihi sed Populo, the Motto of the Emperor Hadrian, was engraved on
the Heart of Sir William: NOT FOR MY SELF, BUT FOR MY PEOPLE: Or that of
Maximin, Quo major, hoc Laboriosior, the more Honorable, the more Laborious.

Indeed the Restlesness of his Travels to the Southern as well as the Eastern
Parts of the Country, when the Public Safety called for his Presence, would
have made one to think on the Translation which the King of Portugal, on a very
extraordinary occasion, gave the Fourth Verse in the Hundred and Twenty first
Psalm. He will not slumber, nor will he suffer to sleep, the Keeper of Israel.
Nor did he only try to Cicurate the Indians of the East, by other Prudent and
Proper Treatments, but he also furnished himself with an Indian Preacher of the
Gospel, whom he carried unto the Eastward, with an Intention to teach them the
Principles of the Protestant Religion, and unteach them the mixed Paganry and
Popery which hitherto Diaboliz'd them. To unteach them, I say; for they had
been Taught by the French Priests this among other things, That the Mother of
our Blessed Savior was a French Lady, and that they were Englishmen by whom
our Savior was murdered; and that it was therefore a meritorious Thing to
destroy the English Nation. The Name of the Preacher whom the Governor carried
with him, was Nahauton, one of the Natives; and because the passing of such
Expressions from the Mouth of a Poor Indian may upon some Accounts be worthy of
Remembrance, let it be Remembered, that when the Governor propounded unto him
such a Mission to the Eastern Indians, he replied, I know that I shall probably
Endanger my Life by going to Preach the Gospel among the Frenchified Indians,
but I know that it will be a Service unto the Lord Jesus Christ; and therefore
I will venture to go.

God grant that his Behaviors may be in all things, at all times, according to
these his Expressions! While these things were doing, having Intelligence of a
French Man of War, expected at St. John's, he Dispatched away the
Non-such-Frigat thither to intercept him; nevertheless by the gross Negligence
and perhaps Cowardice of the Captain, who had lately come from England, with
Orders to take the Command of her, instead of one, who had been by Sir William
a while before put in, and one who had signalized himself by doing of notable
Service for the King and Country in it, the Frenchman arrived, unladed, and
went away untouched. The Governor was extremely offended at this notorious
Defici(...)y; it cast him into a great Impatience, to see the Nation so
wretchedly served; and he would himself have g^^^ to Saint John's with a
Resolution to Spoil that Harbor of Spoilers, if he had not been taken off, by
being sent for home to Whitehall, in the very midst of his Undertakings.

But the Treacherous Indians being poisoned with the French Enchantments, and
f^rnished with brave New-Coats, and New Arm^ and all new Incentives to War, by
the Man of War newly come in, they presently, and perfidiously, fell upon two
English Towns, and Butchered and Captived many of the Inhabitants, and made a
New War, which the New-Englanders know not, whether it will End, until either
Canada become an English Province, or that State arrive, wherein they shall
beat Swords into Plough-shares and Spears into Pruning-books. And no doubt, the
taking off Sir William Phips, was no small Encouragement unto the Indians in
this Relapse, into the Villainies and Massacres of a New Invasion upon the
Country.

SECT. 18.
READER, It Is Time for us to view a little more to the Life, the Picture of the
Person, the Actions of whose Life, we have hitherto been looking upon. Know
then, That for his Exterior, he was One Tall, beyond the common set of Men,
and Thick as well as Tall, and Strorg as well as Thick: He was, in all
Respects, exceedingly Robust, and able to conquer such Difficulties of Diet and
of Travel, as would have killed most Men alive: Nor did the Fat, whereinto he
grew very much, in his later Years, take away the Vigor of his Motions.

He was well-set, and he was therewithal, of a very Comely, though a very Manly
Countenance: A Countenance where any true skill in Physiognomy, would have read
the Characters of a Generous Mind. Wherefore passing to his Interior, the very
first Thing which there offered it self unto Observation, was a most
incomparable Generosity.

And of this, besides the innumerable Instances, which he gave in his usual
Hatred of Dirty, or Little Tricks, there was one Instance for which I must
freely say, I never saw Three Men in this World that Equaled him; this was, His
wonderfully Forgiving Spirit. In the vast Variety of Business, through which he
Raced in his Time, he met with many, and mighty Injuries, but, although I have
heard all, that the most venomous Malice could ever Hiss at his Memory, I never
did hear unto this Hour, that he did ever once deliberately Revenge an Injury.

Upon certain Affronts, he has made sudden Returns, that have showed Choler
enough, and he has by Blow as well as by Word, chastised Incivilities: He was,
indeed, sufficiently impatient of being put upon, and when Base Men, surprising
him at some Disadvantages (for else few Men durst have done it) have sometimes
drawn upon him, he has, without the Wicked Madness of a Formal Duel, made them
feel that he knew how to Correct Fools. Nevertheless, he ever declined a
Deliberate Revenge of a Wrong done unto him; though few Men upon Earth, have in
their Vicissitudes, been furnished with such frequent Opportunities of Revenge,
as Heaven brought into the Hands of this Gentleman.

Under great Provocations, he would commonly say, It Is no Matter, let them
alone; sometime, or other they will see their Weakness and Rashness, and have
occasion for me to do them a Kindness: And they shall then see, I have quite
forgotten all their Baseness. Accordingly, 'twas remarkable to see it, That few
Men ever did him a Mischief, but those Men afterward had occasion for him to
do Them a Kindness; and he did the Kindness with as forgetful a Bravery, as if
the Mischief had never been done at all. The Emperor Theodosius himself could
not be readier to Forgive; so worthily did he verify that Observation.

Quo quisque est Major, magis est Placabilis Ira,
Et Faciles Motus, Men's Generosa capit.
In those Places of Power whereto the Providence of God, by several Degrees
raised him, it still fell out so, that before his Rise thereunto, he underwent
such Things, as he counted very hard Abuses, from those very Persons over whom,
the Divine Providence afterward gave him the Ascendant.

By such Trials, the Wisdom of Heaven still prepared him, as David before him,
for successive Advancements; and as he behaved himself with a mavelous
Long-Juffering, when he was Tried, by such Mortifications, thus when he came to
be Advanced, he convinced all Mankind, that he had perfectly Buried all the old
Offenses, in an Eternal Amnesty. I was my Self an Ear-witness, that one, who
was an Eyewitness of his Behavior under such Probations of his Patience, did,
long before his Arrival to that Honor, say unto him, Sir, Forgive those that
give you these Vexations, and know that the God of Heaven intends, before he
has done with you, to make you the Governor of New England! And when he did
indeed become the Governor of New England, he showed that he still continued a
Governor of himself, in his Treating all that had formerly been in ill Terms
with him, with as much Favor and Freedom, as if there had never happened the
least Exasperations: Though any Governor, that Kens Hobbianism, can easily
contrive Ways enough to wreak a Spite, where he owes it.

It was with some Christian Remark, that he read the Pagan-story of the
Renowned Fabius Maximus, who being preferred unto the highest Office in the
Commonwealth, did through a Zeal for his Country, overcome the greatest
Contempts that any Person of Quality could have received. Minutius the Master
of the Horse, and the next Person in Dignity to himself, did first privately
Traduce him, as one that was no Soldier, and less Politician; and he
afterward did both by Speeches and Letters, prejudice not only the Army, but
also the Senate against him, so that Minutius was now by an unpresidented
Commission brought into an Equality with Fabius.

All this while the great Fabius did not throw up his Cares for the
Commonwealth, but with a wondrous Equality of Mind, endured equally the Malice
of the Judges, and the Fury of the Commons; and when Minutius, a while after,
was with all his Forces, upon the Point of perishing by the victorious Arms of
Hannibal, this very Fabius, not listening to the Dictates of Revenge, came in,
and helped him, and saved him; and so by a rare Virtue, he made his worst
Adversaries, the Captives of his Generosity.

One of the Ancients, upon such an History, cried out, If Heathens can do thus
much for the Glory of their Name, what shall not Christians do for the Glory of
Heaven! And Sir William Phips did so much more than thus much, that besides his
meriting the Glory of such a Name, as PHIPPIVS MAXIMUS, he therein had upon him
the Symptoms of a Title to the Glory of Heaven, in the Seal of his own Pardon
from God. Nor was this Generosity in HIS EXCELLENCY, the Governor of
New England, unaccompanied with many other Excellencies; whereof the Piety of
his Carriage toward God, is worthy to be first mentioned.

It is true, He was very Zealous for all Men to enjoy such a Liberty of
Conscience, as he judged a Native Right of Mankind: And he was extremely
Troubled, at the over-boiling Zeal of some good Men, who formerly took that
wrong Way of reclaiming Heretics, by Persecution. For this Generosity it may
be, some would have compared him unto Gallio, the Governor of Achaia, whom our
Preachers, perhaps with Mistake enough, think to be condemned in the Scripture,
for his not appearing to be a Judge, in Matters which indeed fell not under his
Cognizance.

And I shall be content that he be compared unto that Gentleman; for that
Gallio was the Brother of Seneca, who gives this Character of him, That there
was no Man, who did not love him too little, if he could Love him any more;
and, That there was no Mortal so Dear to any, as he was to all; and, That he
hated all Vices, but none more than Flattery.

But while the Generosity of Sir William, caused him to desire a Liberty of
Conscience, his Piety would not allow a Liberty of Profaneness, either to
himself or others. He did not affect any mighty show of Devotion, and when he
saw any that were evidently careful to make a show, and especially, if at the
same Time they were notoriously Defective, in the Duties of Common Justice or
Goodness, or the Duties of the Relations, wherein God had stationed them, he
had an extreme Aversion for them.

Nevertheless, he did show a Conscientious Desire to observe the Laws of the
Lord Jesus Christ in his Conversation; and he conscientiously attended upon the
Exercises of Devotion in the Seasons thereof, on Lectures, as well as on
Lords-Days, and in the Daily-Sacrifice, the Morning and Evening Service of his
own Family; yea, and at the Private Meetings of the Devout People kept every
Formight in the Neighborhood.

Besides all this, when he had great Works before him, he would Invite good Men
to come and Fast and Pray with him at his House for the Success thereof; and
when he had succeeded in what he had undertaken, he would prevail with them to
come and keep a Day of Solemn Thanksgiving with him. His Love to Almighty God,
was indeed, manifested by nothing more, than his Love to those that had the
Image of God, upon them; He Heartily, and with a Real Honor for them, Loved
all Godly Men; and in so doing, he did not confine Godliness to this or that
Party, but wherever he saw the Fear of God, in one of a Congregational, or
Presbyterian, or Antipaedobaptist, or Episcopalian Persuasion, he did, without
any Difference, express toward them a Reverent Affection.

But he made no Men more welcome, than those Good Men, whose Office it is to
promote and preserve Goodness in all other Men; even the Ministers of the
Gospel: Especially when they were such as faithfully Discharged their Office:
And from these at any Time, the least Admonition or Intimation of any good
Thing to be done by him, he entertained with a most obliging Alacrity. His
Religion in Truth, was one Principle that added Virtue unto that vast Courage,
which was always in him to a Degree Heroical. Those Terrible Nations, which
made their Descents from the Northern on the Southern Parts of Europe, in those
Elder Ages, when so to swarm out was more frequent with them, were inspired
with a valiant Contempt of Life, by the Opinion, wherein their famous Odin
instructed them. That their Death was but an Entrance into another Life,
wherein they who Died in Warlike Actions, were bravely feasted with the God of
War for ever: It Is inexpressible, How much the Courage of those fierce Mortals
was fortified by that Opinion.

But when Sir William Phips was asked by some that observed his Valiant
Contempt of Death, What it was that made him so little afraid of Dying, he gave
a better grounded Account of it, than those Pagans could; his Answer was, I do
humbly believe, That the Lord Jesus Christ shed his Precious Blood for me, by
His Death procuring my Peace with God: and what should I now be afraid of Dying
for?

But this Leads me to mention the Humble and Modest Carriage in him, toward
other Men, which accompanied this his Piety. There were certain Pomps belonging
unto the several Places of Honor, through which he passed; Pomps, that are
very taking to Men of little Souls: But although he rose from so little, yet he
discovered a mavelous Contempt of those Aerie Things, and as far, as he
handsomely could, he declined being ceremoniously, or any otherwise than with a
Dutch Modesty waited upon. And it might more truly be said of him, than it was
of Aristides, He was never seen the Prouder for any Honor, that was done him
from his Countrymen.

Hence, albeit I have read that complaint, made by a worthy Man, I have often
observed, and this not without some Blushing, that even good People have had a
kind of shame upon them, to acknowledge their low beginning, and used all Arts
to hide it. I could never observe the least of that Fault in this worthy Man;
but he would speak of his own low beginning with as much Freedom and Frequency,
as if he had been afraid of having it forgotten.

It was counted an Humility in King Agathocles, the Son of a Potter, to be
served therefore in Earthen Vessels, as Plutarch has informed us: It was
counted an Humility in Archbishop Willigis, the Son of a Wheel-wright,
therefore to have Wheels hung about his Bedchamber, with this Inscription,
Recole unde Veneris, i. e. Remember thy Original. But such was the Humility and
Lowliness of this Rising Man! Not only did he after his return to his Country
in his Greatness, one Day, make a splendid Feast for the Ship Carpenters of
Boston, among whom he was willing at his Table, to Commemorate, the Mercy of
God unto him, who had once been a Ship Carpenter himself, but he would on all
occasions permit, yea, Study to have his Meannesses remembered.

Hence upon frequent occasions of Uneasiness in his Government, he would choose
thus to express himself, Gentlemen, were it not that I am to do Service for the
Public, I should be much easier in returning unto my Broad Ax again! And
hence, according to the Affable Courtesy, which he ordinarily used unto all
sorts of Persons (quite contrary to the Asperity, which the old Proverb,
expects in the Raised) he would particularly, when Sailing in sight of
Kennebeck, with Armies under his Command, call the Young Soldiers and Sailers
upon Deck, and speak to them after this Fashion; Young Men, It was upon that
Hill, that I kept Sheep, a few Years ago; and since you see that Almighty God
has brought me to something, do you Learn to fear God, and be Honest, and Mind
your Business, and follow no bad Courses, and you don't know what you may come
to! A Temper not altogether unlike, what the Advanced Shepherd had, when he
wrote the Twenty Third Psalm; or when he Imprinted on the Coin of his Kingdom,
the Remembrance of his old Condition: For Christianus Gerson, a Christianized
Jew, has informed us, That on the one side of David's Coin, were to be seen his
old Pouch and Crook, the Instruments of Shepherdy; on the other side, were
Enstamped the Towers of Zion.

In fine, our Sir William was a Person of so sweet a Temper, that they who were
most intimately acquainted with him, would commonly pronounce him, The best
Conditioned Gentleman in the World! And by the continual Discoveries and
Expressions of such a Temper; he so gained the Hearts of them who waited upon
him in any of his Expeditions, that they would commonly profess themselves
willing still, to have gone with him to the End of the World.

But if all other People found him so kind a Neighbor, we may easily infer
what an Husband he was unto his Lady. Leaving unmentioned that Virtue of his
Chastity, which the Prodigious Depravation, brought by the Late Reigns upon the
Manners of the Nation, has made worthy to be mentioned as a Virtue somewhat
Extraordinary; I shall rather pass on to say, That the Love, even to Fondness,
with which he always treated her, was a Matter not only of Observation, but
even of such Admiration, that every one said, The Age afforded not a kinder
Husband! This Kindness appeared not only in his making it no less his Delight
than Study, to render his whole Conversation agreeable to her, but also, and
perhaps chiefly, in the Satisfaction which it gave him, to have his Interests
very much at her Command. Before he first went abroad, upon Wrack Designs, he,
to make his long Absence, easy unto her, made her his Promise, that what
Estate the God of Heaven should then bestow upon him, should be entirely at her
Disposal, in Case that she survived him.

And when Almighty God accordingly bestowed upon him a Fair Estate, he not only
rejoiced in seeing so many Acts of Charity done every Day by Her bountiful
Hand, but he also (not having any Children of his own) Adopted a Nephew of
Here Is to be his Heir: And reckoning that a Verbal Intimation unto her of what
Pious and Public Uses, he would have any Part of his Estate, after his Death
put unto, as well as what Supports he would have afforded unto his own
Relations, would be as much attended by Her, as if he had otherwise taken the
most effectual Care imaginable, he contented himself with Bequeathing all he
had entirely to Her, in his Last Will and Testament; He knew very well, that
Her Will, in Point of a Liberal Disposition to Honor the Lord with the
Substance, which the Lord had in so strange a manner enriched them withal,
would not fail of being equal with his own.

But we must now return to our Story.

SECT. 19.
When Persons do by Studies full of Curiosity, seek to inform themselves of
things, about which the God of Heaven has forbidden our curious enquiries,
there is a mavelous Impression, which the Demons do often make on the Minds
of those their Votaries, about the Future or Secret Matters unlawfully enquired
after, and at last there is also an horrible Possession, which those Fatidic
Demons do take of them. The Snares of Hell, hereby laid for miserable Mortals
have been such, that when I read the Laws, which Agellius affirms to have been
made, even in Pagan Rome, against the Vaticinatores, I wonder that no English
Nobleman, or Gentleman signalizes his regard unto Christianity, by doing what
even a Roman Tully would have done, in promoting An Act of Parliament, against
that Paganish Practice of Judicial Astrology, whereof, if such Men as Austin
were now Living, they would Assert, The Devil first found it, and they that
profess it, are Enemies of Truth and of God.

In the mean Time, I cannot but relate a wonderful Experience of Sir William
Phips, by the Relation whereof something of an Antidote may be given against a
Poison, which the Diabolical Figure-Flirgers, and Fortune Tellers that swarm
all the World over, may insinuate into the Minds of Men. Long before Mr. Phips
came to be Sir William, while he sojourned in London, there came into his
Lodging an Old Astrologer, living in the Neighborhood, who making some
Observation of him, though he had small or no Conversation with him, did
(howbeit by him wholly undesired) one Day send him a Paper, wherein he had,
with Pretenses of a Rule in Astrology for each Article, distinctly noted the
most material Passages that were to befall this our Phips, in the remaining
Part of his Life; it was particularly Asserted and Inserted, That he should be
engaged in a Design, wherein by Reason of Enemies at Court, he should meet with
much Delay; That nevertheless in the Thirty Seventh Year of his Life, he should
find a mighty Treasure; That in the Forty First Year of his Life, his King
should employ him, in as great a Trust beyond Sea, as a Subject could easily
have: That soon after this, he should undergo an hard Storm from the Endeavors
of his Adversaries to Reproach him, and Ruin him; That his Adversaries though
they should go very near gaining the Point, should yet miss of doing so; That
he should hit upon a vastly Richer Matter than any that he had hitherto met
withal; That he should continue Thirteen Years in his Public Station, full of
Action, and full of Hurry; And the rest of his Days he should spend in the
Satisfaction of a Peaceable Retirement.

Mr. Phips received this undesired Paper with Trouble and with Contempt; and
threw it by among certain loose Papers, in the Bottom of a Trunk, where his
Lady some Years after accidentally Lit upon it. His Lady with Admiration, saw
step after step, very much of it accomplished; but when she heard from England,
that Sir William was coming over with a Commission to be Governor of
New England, in that very Year of his Life, which the Paper specified, she was
afraid of letting it ly any longer in the House, but cast it into the Fire.

Now the Thing which I must invite my Reader to Remark is this; That albeit
Almighty God may permit the Devils to predict, and perhaps to perform very many
particular things to Men, that shall by such a presumptuous and unwarrantable
Juggle, as Astrology (so Dr. Hall well calls it!) or any other Divination,
consult them, yet the Devils which fore-tel many True Things, do commonly
fore-tel some that are False, and it may be propose by the Things that are True
to betray Men into some fatal Misbelief and Miscarriage about those that are
False.

Very singular therefore was the Wisdom of Sir William Phips, that, as he ever
Treated these Prophecies about him with a most Pious neglect, so, when he had
seen all but the two Last of them very punctually fulfilled, yea and seen the
beginning of a Fulfillment unto the Last but one also, yet when I pleasantly
mentioned them unto him, on purpose to Try whether there were any occasion for
me humbly to give him the serious Advice, necessary in such a Case, to
Anticipate the Devices of Satan, he prevented my Advice, by saying to me. Sir,
I do believe there might be a cursed Snare of Satan in those Prophesies: I
Believe Satan might have leave to foretell many Things, all of which might come
to pass in the beginning, to lay me asleep about such things as are to follow,
especially about the main chance of all; I do not know, but I am to Dye this
Year: For my Part, by the Help of the Grace of God; I shall endeavor to live
as if I were this Year to Dye. And let the Reader now attend the Event!

SECT. 20.
IT IS a Similitude which I have Learned from no less a Person, than the great
Basil. That as the Eye sees not those Objects which are applied close unto it,
and even ly upon it; but when the Objects are to some distance removed, it
clearly discerns them: So, we have little sense of the Good, which we have in
our Enjoyments; until God by the removal thereof, teach us better to prize what
we once enjoyed. It is true, the Generality of sober and thinking People among
the New-Englanders, did as highly value the Government of Sir William Phips,
whilst he lived, as they do his Memory since his Death; nevertheless it must be
confessed, that the Blessing which the Country had in his indefatigable Zeal,
to serve the Public in all it is Interests, was not so valued as it should have
been.

It was mentioned long since, as a notorious Fault in Old Egypt, That it was
Loquax and Ingeniosa in Contumeliam Praefectorum Provincia; si quis forte
vitaverit Culpam, Contumeliam non effugit: And New England has been at the
best, always too faulty, in that very Character, A Province very Talkative, and
Irgenious for the vilifying of it is Public Servants.

But Sir William Phips who might in a Calm of the Commonwealth have
administered all things, with as General an Acceptance, as any that have gone
before him, had the Disadvantage of being set at Helm in a Time as full of
Storm as ever that Province had seen; and the People having their Spirits put
into a Tumult by the discomposing and distempering Variety of Disasters, which
had long been rendering the Time Calamitous, it was natural for them, as it is
for all Men then, to be complaining; and you may be sure, the Rulers must in
such Cases, be always complained of, and the chief Complaints must be heaped
upon those that are Commanders in Chief. Nor has a certain Proverb in Asia been
improper in America, He deserves no Man's good Word, of whom every Man shall
speak well.

Sir William was very hardly Handled (or Torgued at least) in the Liberty which
People took to make most unbecoming and Injurious Reflections upon his Conduct,
and Clamor against him even for those very Actions, which were not only
Necessary to be done, but highly Beneficial unto themselves; And though he
would ordinarily smile at their Frowardness, calling it, His Country Pay, yet
he sometimes resented it with some uneasiness; he seemed unto himself sometimes
almost as bad as Rolled about in Regulus's Barrel; and had occasion to think on
the Italian Proverb, To wait for one who does not come; to ly a Bed not able to
sleep; and to find it impossible to please those whom we serve, are three
Griefs enough to kill a Man.

But as Forward as the People were, under the Epedemical Vexations of the Age,
yet there were very few that would not acknowledge unto the very Last, It will
be hardly possible for us to see another Governor, that shall more entirely
Love and serve the Country: Yea, had the Country had the Choice of their own
Governor, it is judged their Votes, more than forty to one, would have still
fallen upon him to have been the Man: And the General Assembly therefore on all
occasions renewed their Petitions unto the King for his Continuance.

Nevertheless, there was a little Party of Men, who thought they must not sleep
till they had caused him to fall: And they so vigorously prosecuted certain
Articles before the Council Board at White-hal against him, that they imagined
they had gained an Order of His Majesty in Council, to suspend him immediately
from his Government, and appoint a Committee of Persons nominated by his
Enemies, to hear all Depositions against him; and so a Report of the whole to
be made unto the King and Council.

But His Majesty was too well informed of Sir William's Integrity, to permit
such a sort of Procedure; and therefore He signified unto His most Honorable
Council, that nothing should be done against Sir William, until he had
Opportunity to clear himself; and thereupon He sent His Royal Commands unto Sir
William to come over. To give any retorting Accounts of the Principal Persons,
who thus adversaried him, would be a Thing so contrary to the Spirit of Sir
William Phips himself, who, at his leaving of New England, bravely declared,
that he freely forgave them all, and if he had returned thither again, would
never have taken the least revenge upon them, that This alone would oblige me,
if I had no other Obligations of Christianity upon me, to forbear it; and it
may be for some of them, it would be to throw Water upon a drowned Mouse.

Nor need I to preduce any more about the Articles which these Men exhibited
against him, than This; that it was by most Men believed, that if he would have
connived at some Arbitrary Oppressions too much used by some kind of Officers,
on the Kings Subjects, Few perhaps, or None of those Articles, had ever been
formed; and that he apprehended himself to be provided with a full Defense
against them all.

Nor did His Excellency seem loath to have had his Case Tried under the Brazen
Tree of Gariac, if there had been such an one, as that mentioned by the
Fabulous Murtadi, in his Prodigies of Egypt, a Tree which had Iron Branches
with sharp Hooks at the End of them, that when any false Accuser approached, as
the Fable says, immediately flew at him, and stuck in him, until he had ceased
Injuring his Adversary.

Wherefore in Obedience unto the Kings Commands, he took his leave of Boston on
the seventeenth of November, 1694. attended with all proper Testimonies of
Respect and Honor from the Body of the People, which he had been the Head
unto; and with Addresses unto their Majesty's, and the Chief Ministers of State
from the General Assembly, humbly imploring, that they might not be deprived of
the Happiness which they had in such an Head.

Arriving at White Hall, he found in a few Days, that notwithstanding all the
Impotent Rage of his Adversaries particularly vented and Printed in a Villainous
Libel, as well as almost in as many other ways, as there are Mouths, at which
Fyal sometimes has vomited out its Insernal Fires, he had all Humane Assurance
of his returning in a very few Weeks again, the Governor of New England.

Wherefore, there were especially two Designs, full of Service to the whole
English Nation, as well as his own particular Country of New England, which he
applied his Thoughts unto. First, He had a new Scene of Action opened unto him,
in an opportunity to supply the Crown with all Naval Stores at most easy
Rates, from those Eastern Parts of the Massachuset Province, which through the
Conquest that He had made thereof, came to be Inserted in the
Massachuset-Charter. As no Man was more capable than He, to improve this
opportunity unto a vast Advantage, so his Inclination to it, was according to
his Capacity.

And he longed with some Impatience, to see the King furnished from his own
Dominions, with such floating and stately Castles, those Wooden-Walls of Great
Britain, for much of which He has hitherto Traded with Foreign Kingdoms. Next,
if I may say next unto this, he had an Eye upon Canada; all attempts for the
reducing whereof had hitherto proved Abortive.

It was but a few Months ago, that a considerable Fleet, under Sir Francis
Wheeler, which had been sent into the West Indies, to subdue Martineco, was
ordered then to call at New England, that being recruited there, they might
make a further Descent upon Canada; but Heaven frowned upon that Expedition,
especially by a terrible Sickness, the most like the Plague of any thing that
has been ever seen in America, whereof there Died, e're they could reach to
Boston, as I was told by Sir Francis himself, no less than Thirteen Hundred
Sailers out of Twenty One, and no less than Eighteen Hundred Soldiers out of
Twenty four.

It was now therefore his desire to have satisfied the King, that his whole
Interest in America lay at Stake, while Canada was in French Hands: And
therewithal to have laid before several Noblemen, and Gentlemen, how beneficial
an Undertaking it would have been for them to have pursued the
Canadien-Business, for which the New-Englanders were now grown too Feeble;
their Country being too far now, as Bede says England once was, Omni Milite and
floridae Juventutis Alacritate spoliata.

Besides these two Designs in the Thoughts of Sir William, there was a Third,
which he had Hopes that the King would have given him leave to have pursued,
after he had continued so long in his Government, as to have obtained the more
General welfare which he designed in the former Instances. I do not mean the
making of New England the Seat of a Spanish Trade, though so vastly profitable
a Thing was likely to have been brought about, by his being one of an
Honorable Company engaged in such a Project.

But the Spanish Wreck, where Sir William had made his first good Voyage, was
not the only, nor the Richest Wreck, that he knew to be lying under the Water.
He knew particularly that when the Ship, which had Governor Boadilla Aboard,
was cast away, there was, as Peter Martyr says, an entire Table of Gold of
Three Thousand, Three Hundred and ten Pound Weight.

The Duke of Albemarl's Patent for all such Wrecks now expiring, Sir William
thought on the Motto, which is upon the Gold Medal, bestowed by the late King,
with his Knighthood upon him, Semper Tibi pendeat Hamus: And supposing himself
to have gained sufficient Information of the right Way to such a Wreck, it was
his purpose upon his Dismission from his Government, once more to have gone
unto his old Fishing-Trade, upon a mighty Shelf of Rocks and Bank of Sands,
that ly where he had informed himself.

But as the Prophet Haggai and Zechariah, in their Psalm upon the Grants made
unto their People by the Emperors of Persia, have that Reflection, Man's
Breath goes forth, he returns to his Earth; in that very Day his Thoughts
perish. My Reader must now see what came of all these considerable Thoughts.
About the middle of February 1694. Sir William found himself indisposed with a
Cold, which obliged him to keep his Chamber; but under this Indisposition, he
received the Honor of a Visit from a very Eminent Person at White Hall, who
upon sufficient Assurance, bad him, Get well as fast as he could, for in one
Months Time he should be again dispatched away to his Government of New England.

Nevertheless his Distemper proved a sort of Malignant Fever, whereof many,
about this Time dyed in the City; and it suddenly put an End at once unto his
Days and Thoughts, on the Eighteenth of February; to the extreme surprise of
his Friends, who Honorably Interred him in the Church of St. Mary Woolnoth,
and with him, how much of New-England's Happiness!

SECT. 21.
ALTHOUGH he has now no more a Portion for ever in any Thing that is done under
the Sun, yet Jastice requires that his Memory be not forgotten. I have not all
this while said, He was Faultless, nor am I unwilling to use for him the Words
which Mr. Calamy had in his Funeral Sermon, for the Excellent Earl of Warwick,
It must be confessed, least I should prove a Flaterer, He had his Infirmities,
which I trust Jesus Christ has covered with the Robe of his Righteousness: My
Prayer to God is that all his Infirmities may be Buried in the Grave of
Oblivion, and that all his Virtues and Graces may supervive, although perhaps
they were no Infirmities in that Noble Person, which Mr. Calamy counted so.

Nevertheless I must also say, That if the Anguish of his Public Fatigues
threw Sir William into any Faults of Passion, they were but Faults of Passion,
soon Recalled: And Spots being soonest seen in Ermin, there was usually the
most made of them that could be, by those that were least Free themselves.

After all, I do not know that I have been, by any personal Obligations or
Circumstances, charmed into any Partiality for the Memory of this Worthy Man;
but I do here from a real Satisfaction of Conscience concerning him, declare to
all the World, that I reckon him, to have been really a very Worthy Man; that
few Men in the World rising from so mean an Original, as he, would have
acquitted themselves with a thousandth Part of his Capacity or Integrity; that
he left unto the World a notable Example of a Disposition to Do Good, and
encountered and overcame almost invincible Temptations in doing it.

And I do most solemnly Profess, that I have most conscientiously endeavored
the utmost Sincerity and Veracity of a Christian as well as an Historian in the
History, which I have now given of him. I have not written of Sir William
Phips, as they say Xenophon did of Cyrus, Non ad Historiae Fidem, sed ad
Effigiem very imperii; what should have been, rather than what really was. If
the Envy of his few Enemies, be not now Quiet; I must freely say it, That for
many Weeks before he died, there was not one Man among his personal Enemies,
whom he would not readily and cheerfully have done all the kind Offices of a
Friend unto: Wherefore though the Gentleman in England, that once published a
Vindication of Sir William Phips against some of his Enemies, chose to put the
Name of Publicans upon them, they must in this be counted worse than the
Publicans of whom our Savior says, They Love those that Love them.

And I will say this further; That when certain Persons had found the Skull of
a Dead Man, as a Greek Writer of Epigrams has told us, they all fell a Weeping,
but only one of the Company, who Laughed and Flouted, and through an unheard of
Cruelty, threw Stones at it, which Stones wonderfully rebounded back upon the
Face of him that threw them, and miserably wounded him: Thus, if any shall be
so unchristian, yea, so Inhumane as libellously to throw Stones at so deserved
a Reputation, as this Gentleman has dyed withal, they shall see a Just Rebound
of all their Calumnies.

But the Name of Sir WILLIAM PHIPS will be heard Honorably mentioned in the
Trumpets of Immortal Fame, when the Names of many, that Antipathied him, will
either be Buried in Eternal Oblivion, without any Sacer Vates to preserve them,
or be remembered, but like that of Pilate in the Gospel, or Judas in the Creed,
with Eternal Infamy.

The old Persians indeed, according to the Report of Agathias, exposed their
Dead Friends to be Torn in pieces by Wild Beasts, believing that if they lay
long unworried, they had been unworthy Persons; but, all attempts of surviving
Malice, to demonstrate in that way, the worth of this Dead Gentleman, give me
leave to Rate off with Indignation.

And I must with a like Freedom say, That great was the Fault of New England,
no more to value a Person, whose Opportunities to serve all their Interests,
though very Eminent, yet were not so Eminent as his Inclinations. If this whole
Continent carry in its very Name of AMERICA, an unaccountable Ingratitude unto
that Brave Man, who first led any numbers of Europeans thither, it must not be
wondered at, if now and then, a particular Country in that Continent afford some
Instances of Ingratitude: But I must believe, that the Ingratitude of many both
to God and Man, for such Benefits, as that Country of New England enjoyed from
a Governor of their own, by whom they enjoyed great quietness, with very
worthy Deeds done unto that Nation by His Providence, was that which hastened
the Removal of such a Benefactor from them.

However, as the Cyprians buried their Friends in Honey, to whom they gave Gall
when they were Bo^n; thus whatever Gall might be given to this Gentleman while
he lived, I hope none will be so base, as to put any thing but Honey into their
Language of him now after his Decease. And indeed, since it is a frequent thing
among Men, to wish for the Presence of our Friends, when they are Dead and
gone, whom, while they were present with us, we undervalued; there is no way
for us to fetch back our Sir William Phips, and make him yet Living with us,
but by setting up a Statue for him, as it is done in these Pages, that may
out-last an ordinary Monument.

Such was the original Design of erecting Statues, and if in Venice, there were
at once, no less than an Hundred and sixty two Marble, and Twenty three Brazen
Statues, erected by the Order, and at the Expense, of the Public, in Honor of
so many Valiant Soldiers, who had merited well of that Commonwealth, I am
sure New England has had those, whose Merits call for as good an
acknowledgment, and, whatever they did before, it will be well, if after Sir
William Phips, they find many as meritorious as he to be so acknowledged.

Now I cannot my self provide a better Statue for this Memorable Person, then
the Words uttered on the occasion of his Death in a very great Assembly, by a
Person of so diffused and Embalmed a Reputation in the Church of God, that such
a Character from him, were enough to Immortalize the Reputation of the Person
upon whom he should bestow it.

The Grecians employed still the most Honorable and Considerable Persons they
had among them, to make a Funeral Oration, in Commendation of Soldiers that
had lost their Lives, in the Service of the Public: And when Sir William
Phips, the Captain General of New England, who had often ventured his Life to
serve the Public, did expire, that Reverend Person, who was the President of
the only University then in the English America, Preached a Sermon on that
Passage of the Sacred Writ, Isa. 57.1. Merciful Men are taken away, none
considering that the Righteous are taken away from the Evil to come; and in it
gave Sir William Phips the following Testimony.

This Province is Beheaded, and lies a Bleeding. A GOVERNOR is taken away, who
was a Merciful Man; some think, Too Merciful: And if so, it is best Erring on
that Hand; and a Righteous Man; who, when he had great Opportunities of gaining
by Injustice, did refuse to do so.

He was a known Friend unto the best Interests, and unto the Churches of God:
Not ashamed of owning them: No, how often have I heard him expressing his
Desires to be an Instrument of Good unto them! He was a zealous Lover of his
Country, if any Man in the World were so: He exposed himself to serve it; He
ventured his Life to save it: In that, a true Nehemiah, a Governor, that
sought the welfare of his People.

He was one, who did not seek to have the Government cast upon him: No, but
instead thereof, to my Knowledge, he did several Times Petition the King, that
this People might always enjoy the great Privilege of choosing their own
Governor; and I have heard him express his Desires, that it might be so, to
several of the Chief Ministers of State in the Court of England.

He is now Dead, and not capable of being Flattered: But this I must testify
concerning him, That though by the Providence of God, I have been with him, at
Home and Abroad, near at Home, and afar off, by Land, and by Sea, I never saw
him do any Evil Action, or heard him speak any thing unbecoming a Christian.

The Circumstances of his Death, seem to intimate the Anger of God: In that he
was in the Midst of his Days removed; and I know (though Few did) that he had
great Purposes in his Heart, which probably would have taken Effect, if he had
lived a few Months longer, to the great Advantage of this Province; but now he
is gone, there is not a Man Living in the World capacitated for those
Undertakings; New England knows not yet what they have lost!

The Recitation of a Testimony so great, whether for the Author, or the Matter
of it, has now made a Statue for the Governor of New England, which Nec
poterit Ferrum, nec edax abolere vetustas.

And there now remains nothing more for me to do about it, but only to recite
herewithal, a well-known Story related by Suidas, That an Envious Man, once
going to pull down a Statue, which had been raised unto the Memory of one whom
he maligned, he only got this by it, that the Statue falling down, knocked out
his Brains.

But Poetry as well as History must pay it is dues unto him. If Cicero's Poem
entitled Quadrigae, wherein he did with a Poetical Chariot extol the Exploits
of Caesar in Britain to the very Skies, were now Extant in the World, I would
have Borrowed some Flights of That at least, for the Subject now to be Adorned.

But instead thereof, let the Reader accept the ensuing Elegy.

UPON THE DEATH OF Sir William PHIPS, Knt.
Late Captain General and Governor in Chief, of the Province of the
Massachuset-Bay New England, who Expired in London, Feb. 18. 1694/5.
And to Mortality a Sacrifice
Falls He, whose Deeds must Him Immortalize!
REjoice Messieures; Netops rejoice, it is true;
Ye Philistines, none will rejoice but You:
Loving of All He Died; who Love him not,
Now, have the Grace of Publicans forgot.
Our Almanacks foretold a great Eclipse,
This they foresaw not, of our greater PHIPS.
PHIPS our great Friend, our Wonder, and our Glory,
The Terror of our Foes, the World's rare Story.
England will Boast him too, whose Noble Mind
Impelled by Angels, did those Treasures find.
Long in the Bottom of the Ocean laid,
Which her Three Hundred Thousand Richer made.
By Silver yet never Cankered, nor defiled
By Honor, nor Betrayed when Fortune smiled.
Since this bright Phoebus visited our Shore,
We saw no Fogs, but what were raised before:
Those vanished too; harras'd by Bloody Wars
Our Land saw Peace, by his most generous Cares.
The Wolvish Pagans, at his dreaded Name,
Tamed, shrunk before him, and his Dogs became!
Fell Moxus and fierce Dockawando fall,
Charmed at the Feet of our Brave General.
Fly-blow the Dead, Pale Envy, let him not
(What Hero ever did?) escape a Blot.
All is Distort with an Enchanted Eye,
And Height will make what is Right still stand awry.
He was, oh that He was! His Faults we will tell,
Such Faults as these we knew, and liked them well.
Just, to an Injury; denying none
Their Dues; but Self denying often his own.
Good, to a Miracle; resolved to do
Good unto All, whether they would or no.
To make Us Good, Great, Wise, and all Things else,
He wanted but the Gift of Miracles.
On Him, vain Mob, thy Mischiefs cease to throw;
Bad, but alone in This; the Times were so.
Stout to a Prodigy; living in Pain
To send back Quebeck-Bullets once again.
Thunder, his Music, sweeter than the Spheres,
Chim'd Roaring Canons, in his Martial Ears.
Frigates of armed Men could not withstand,
'Twas tried, the Force of his one Swordless Hand:
Hand, which in one, all of Briareus had,
And Hercule's twelve Toyls but Pleasures made.
Too Humble; in brave Stature not so Tall,
As low in Carriage, stooping unto all.
Raised in Estate, in Figure, and Renown,
Not Pride; Higher, and yet not Prouder grown.
Of Pardons full; never to Revenge at all,
Was that which He would Satisfaction call.
True to his Mate; from whom though often flown.
A Stranger yet to every Love but one.
Write Him not Childless, whose whole People were
Sons, Orphans now, of His Paternal Care.
Now lest ungrateful Brands we should incur,
Your Salary we'll Pay in Tears, GREAT SIR!
To England often blown, and by his Prince
Often sent laden with Preferments thence.
Preferred each Time He went, when all was done
That Earth could do, Heaven fetched Him to a Crown.
It Is He: with Him Interred how great designs!
Stand Fearless now, ye Eastern Firrs and Pines.
With Naval Stores not to enrich the Nation,
Stand, for the Universal Conflagration.
Mines, opening unto none but Him, now stay
Close under Lock and Key, till the Last Day:
In this, like to the Grand Aurifick Stone,
By any but Great Souls not to be known.
And Thou Rich Table, with Bodilla lost,
In the Fair Galeon, on our Spanish Coast.
In weight Three Thousand, and Three Hundred Pound,
But of Pure Massy Gold, ly Thou, not found.
Safe, since He Is laid under the Earth asleep,
Who learnt where Thou do under Water keep.
But Thou Chief loser, Poor NEW ENGLAND speak
Thy Dues to such as did thy welfare seek,
The Governor that vowed to Rise and Fall
With Thee, Thy Fate shows in His Funeral.
Write now His Epitaph, 'Twill be Thine own,
Let it be this; A PVBLICK SPIRIT's GONE.
Or, but Name PHIPS; more needs not be expressed,
Both Englands, and next Ages tell the Rest.
FINIS.
Books Printed for, and Sold by Nath. Hiller at the Princes-Arms in Leaden Hall
Street over against St. Mary Axe.
THe Righteousness of God through Faith, upon all without difference who
believe, in two Sermons at Pinners-Hall; on Romans 3.22. by Mr. Nath. Mather
Minister of the Gospel.

A Learned and Accurate Discourse, concerning the Guilt of Sin, Pardon of that
Guilt, and Prayer for that Pardon; written many Years since by the Reverend Mr.
Thomas Gilbert, Minister of the Gospel, lately Deceased at Oxford.

The Conquests and Triumphs of Grace, being a Brief Narrative of the Success
which the Gospel has had among the Indians in New England, by Mr. Matthew
Mayhew, 1695.

Batteries on the Kingdom of Satan by Mr. Cotton Mather, Author of the late
memorable Providence, relating to Witchcrafts and Possessions, and of Early
Piety exemplified, 1695.

A Letter to Dr. Bates, containing a Vindication of the Dr. and Mr. Lob
necessitated, by Mr. Williams his Answer to Mr. Humfrey, by Mr. Stephen Lob,
1695.

The Throne of Grace, discoursed from Heb. 4.6. in thirteen Sermons at
Pinners-Hall, by Mr. Robert Trail, M. A. 1696.

Scripture Proof for singing Scripture Psalms, Hymns, and Spiritual Songs; by
E. H. 1696.

The Figures or Types of the Old Testament, by which Christ and the heavenly
Things of the Gospel were Preached and Shadowed to the People of God of Old; in
sundry Sermons, by Mr. Samuel Mather, sometime Pastor of a Church in Dublin.

FINIS.

