The Way to Prosperity. A SERMON Preached to the HONORABLE CONVENTION Of the
GOVERNOR, Council, and Representatives of the Massachuset-Colony in
New England; on May 23. 1689. By COTTON MATHER.

Jer. 23. 28. He that has My Word, Let him speak speak My Word faithfully.
BOSTON. Printed by Richard Pierce. for Benjamin Harris. Anno Domini MDCXC.

A Prophesy in the Divine Herbert's Church-Militant.
REligion stands on Tip-toe in our Land,
Ready to pass to the American Strand.
When height of Malice and prodigious Lusts,
Impudent Sinning, Witchcrafts and Distrusts,
(The marks of future Bane) shall fill our cup
Unto the Brim, and make our measure up;
-- Then shall Religion to America flee;
They have their Times of Gospel, even as we.
-- Yet as the Church shall thither westward fly,
So Sin shall Trace and Dog her instantly.
The Preface,
THe Occasion which first produced the following Sermon, cannot be expressed in
better Terms, than those which were used by the Worthy Gentlemen that were the
Conservators of our peace, in their humble Address to Their Majesty's, bearing
Date, May 20th 1689. Wherein among other things they say,

-- Your three several Princely Declarations, Encouraging the English Nation,
to cast off the Yoke of a Tyrannical and Arbitrary Power, which at that time
they were held under, have occurred unto the View and Consideration of the
people in this Country, being themselves under alike (if not worse) evil and
unhappy Circumstances with their Brethren in England; First by being
unrighteously deprived of their Charter-Government, and Privileges, without
any Hearing or Trial, and under utter impossibilities of having Notice of any
Writ served upon them; and then followed with the Exercise of an illegal and
Arbitrary power over them, which had almost ruined a late flourishing Country,
and was become very grievous and intolerable; besides, the growing miseries,
and daily fears of a total Subversion, by enemies at home, and Invasion by
foreign force; the people thereby excited, to imitate so noble and heroic an
Exemple, being strongly and unanimously spirited, to intend their own safeguard
and Defense, resolved to sieze upon and secure some of the principal persons
concerned, and most active in the ill management of the illegal and arbitrary
Government, set over them by Commission. Accordingly upon the eighteenth day of
April last past, arose as one man, siezed upon Sr. E. Andros the late
Governor, and other of the evil instruments, and have secured them for what
Justice, Order from your Majesty's shall direct. -- Thus that Address.

Upon the late Revolutions thus described, ensued various debates about the
further Steps that were needful to be taken for the service of Their Majesty's
and this afflicted Country; Which Debates quickly issued in the Return of our
Government, into the Hands of our Ancient Magistrates; who with the
Representatives or Deputies of the several Towns in the Colony, made another
Address unto Their Majesty's, bearing date, June 6. 1689. in which Address
there were these Words,

-- Finding an Absolute Necessity of Civil Government, the People generally
manifested their Desires and Importunity once and again, That the Governor,
Deputy Governor and Assistants, chosen and sworn in May 1686. according to
Charter and Court as then formed, would assume the Government; --

-- the said Governor, Deputy Governor, and Assistents, then Resident in the
Colony, did Consent to accept the present Care and Government of this people,
according to the Rules of the Charter, for the preservation of the Peace and
common safety, and the putting forth further Acts of Authority, upon
Emergencies: until by Direction from England, there should be an orderly
Settlement; which we hope will Restore us to the full Exercise thereof, as
formerly; notwithstanding we have, for some time, been most unrighteously, and
injuriously deprived of it.

That Royal Charter being the sole Inducement and Encouragement unto our
Fathers and predecessors, to come over into this Wilderness, and to plant the
same at their own Cost and Charge.

In Answer to this Address, His Majesty in a most gracious Letter, bearing Date
the 12th of August 1689. unto the Government here, uses these Expressions,

Whereas you give Us to understand, that you have taken upon you the present
care of the Government, until you should receive Our Order therein, We do
hereby Authorize and Empower you to Continue in Our Name, your Care in the
Administration thereof, and Preservation of the Peace, until We shall have
taken such Resolutions, and given such Directions for the more orderly
Settlement of the said Government, as shall most conduce to Our Service, and
the Security and Satisfaction of Our Subjects within that Our Colony.

It was in the time of our greatest Heats and Straits, and at a time appointed
for a General Assembly of this great Colony, that the ensueing Sermon was
expected from me. Through the Grace of God, the Sermon Then was not altogether
unacceptable to some who desired the Publication of it. But I gave not my full
Consent unto their Desire, until now, they had an Opportunity (with their
Renewed Importunity) to join it with another Discourse which they have obtained
from me; and though the little Differences which were among us, when the Sermon
was preached, are now so well Composed, yet I slatter my self with an opinion,
that the things here insisted on, will not, should not be judged Unseasonable.

I confess it is a very Bold thing, for one every way so mean as my self, to
Address the whole Country in such a manner as here I do; but, Si crimen erit,
crimen Amoris erit; and if the general Dispositions of the year will not excuse
a Breach of Order in me, I have but one thing more to offer by way of
Satisfaction for it* There was once a people in the world, with whom it was a
Custom, That when men would Conciliate the Favor of the Ruler, they were to
present his own Son before him, as a Sight which would speak more than any
Advocate. Instead thereof, that I may not want the Favor of my Country, how
blameable soever they may count my freedom with them, I shall only present
them with my own Father; whose cheerful Encounter with an hazardous Voyage unto
a strange Land, and with innumerable Difficulties and Temptations there, for no
other Cause, than that he might Speak FOR them, has at least merited a Pardon
for Me, with whom he has for near two years now left both his Church and
Family, if I have transgressed by taking a Liberty of Speaking TO them at the
same time, the things which may promote our Enjoyment of the Divine Presence
with us. Now, may Salvation be nigh unto us, and Glory dwell in our Land!

Cotton Mather.

The Way to PROSPERITY
It is the Word of the Eternal GOD in II. Chron. XV. 2.
Hear ye me, Asa, and all Judah, and Benjamin: the Lord is with you while you
are with Him.
IT is a Remarkable Occasion which has brought these Words to be the Subject of
our present Meditations; but it was much more a Remarkable Occasion which these
Words were first uttered upon. We find them in the Sacred Book of Chronicles,
which Chronicles are not the Civil Records, in other parts of the Bible referred
unto; but an Inspired History of things that concerned the Line of Christ and
the Church of God for five hundred more than Three Thousand years. It seems as
an Epitome of the Whole, (for so it is in Ierom's Language) to be written as late
as the Last of all the Books in the Old Testament; and the Hebrew Bibles give
it a place accordingly. The Greeks choose to entitle it, The Book of things
(else where) passed by; because, as Lyra notes, according to the Rule of our
Savior, It gathers Fragments that nothing may be lost; and if there were
nothing else but the Story which affords our Text unto us, to justify that
Appellation, it were enough: it is a Story passed by in the Book of Kings; but
worthy to be had in everlasting Remembrance.

The ready Pen of Ezra (for him we conjecture to be the Scribe of the Holy
Spirit here, notwithstanding those few Clauses which may be judged to be added
by another hand after his Decease, I say the Pen of Ezra) is here informing us,
That the people of God had newly been invaded by a vast Army of Cushites; but
we are yet at a loss who these Cushites were? Far more Scholars in the World,
than there were Soldiers in that Army have hitherto been content with our
Translation, which renders them Ethiopians here. But that learned Frenchman
Bochart, by whose happy industry, more than any man's, the Treasures in the
Bowels of the Scriptures have been delv'd into, has with irrefragable
Demonstration proved, That not Ethiopians but Arabians are the Cushites
mentioned in the Oracles of God. These Arabians, tho they have not been called
Saracens (as has been thought) from their word Sarak, that signifies, to Steal;
yet for their Furacious Inclinations, they well deserved such an Etymology;
they were a wild sort of men, that liv^d much upon the Rapin and Ruin of their
Neighbors; and particularly, a Million of them now designed Jerusalem for a
prey. The blessed God gave His people a notable victory over these Invaders,
and they were now returning from Gerar (a place between thirty and forty miles
off) unto Jerusalem. The Holy Spirit of God excited and inclined a Prophet
whose Name was Azariah, to entertain them with a faithful and solid Sermon
hereupon; and in my Text you have the Sum and Substance of it.

We may observe,

First, The Praeface of it; and that is very awful and earnest: Hear ye me Asa,
and all Judah, and Benjamin. As he was probably none of the greatest, so it is
like he was none of the oldest men; for it seems by the eighth verse, that his
Father was yet alive, and present at this time. Yet being to speak in the Name
of the great and eternal God, he expects, he demands the attention of the whole
Army to him.

Secondly, the Design of it; and that is, to decclare both the Rise and Use of
their late Prosperity. The Lord is with you, while you you are with Him; or as
the Vulgar Latin has it, Inasmuch as you have been with him. What follows, is
but an Explication, and Amplification of this. He saw they were taken up with
various Businesses and Contrivances; they had their Enemies under Hatches, and
their minds were full of Thoughts and Cares, What to do next? But he calls them
off to acknowledge the Presence of God, as the cause of their coming off so
well in their late Action, and above all things to obtain and secure the
presence of God, that they might come off as well, in in their future
Enterprises.

I am therefore to call for your Attention unto this Faithful Saying.

DOCT. That The GOD of Heaven will be with a people while they are with Him.

It Is by the ensuing Propositions, that the Explication of this Truth shall be
endeavored.

PROPOSITION. I.
It is the Interest, and should be the Desire, of Every people to have the God
of Heaven With them. But we are to enquire,

What is implied in that presence of GOD, which we are to be solicitous about?

For Answer to this; There is a Threefold Presence of God, mentioned in the
Scripture of Truth.

First, God is Naturally present with all Creatures. He is an Immense Being,
and no Creature can be without him. The Apostle thus argued in the Court at
Athens, in Act, 17. 27. God is not far from every one of us. No, He is near us
all, He is with us all. And Paul could have had the Gentiles themselves
confessing it; for besides what their Seneca did own, One of their own Poets
had said, Iovis omnia plena. It is the Speech of our God, in Ier. 23. 24. Do
not I fill Heaven and Earth, says the Lord? Yea, That He does. The Jews call
God by the Name of Makom, or of Place, because all things are in Him; this is
His Name in the Book of Esther, if I mistake it not. Whether we may count it
proper and physical to speak of an Imaginary, Infinite space, beyond the utmost
Selvige of the world, replenished with our God alone; yet we are sure that the
Heaven of Heavens gives no limits unto His Being; and the Ancients were not
mistaken when they said, Deus Ipse Sibi, et Mundus et Locus et Omnia. We cannot
so well say, That God is in the World, as we may say, The whole World is in
God; and we may say with the Psalmist, in Psalm. 139. ^. Whither shall I flee
from thy presence?

Secondly, God is Gloriously present with the Inhabitants of the Third Heaven.
The Heaven of Heavens has in it most intimate and mavelous manifestations of
God. It is the Place, of which we may say, as it is said of that State, in Rev.
21. 23. The glory of God does lighten it. There the blessed ones have God with
them, so that they Always behold His face; and they are satisfied with His
likeness for ever. When we come to Heaven, then as in 1. These. 4. 17. We shall
ever be with the Lord. So the Lord will be with us for ever. Heaven is the
Throne of the Most High; He is there as a Prince in his Throne; the Great KING
is in a manner very ineffable residing there. To be there, is called in 2. Cor.
5. 4. A being present with the Lord. Hence unto the Heaven, and not unto a
Bible, are we directed to make our Corporal Applications in our Prayers, or our
Oaths before the Lord.

But Thirdly, God is Graciously present with His people, by being Favorable
unto them. And this Gracious presence of God is that which a people ought to be
concerned for. It lies in The Engagement of Divine Providence for the Welfare
of such a people. God is with us when God is for us.

To particularize,

First, God is with a people by Directing of them. When Israel was to pass
through the Wilderness, they had that encouragement, in Exodus 22. 15. The
presence of God going with them. What was that? Why, They had a cloudy siery
Pillar miraculously Leading of them every step of the way; There was a
wonderful Pillar which was a Cloud by day, and a Fire by night; the Lower part
of which rested on the Tabernacle, while the Upper part was to be seen by the
whole Congregation: the Motions of this being managed by the Ministry of
Angels, now God was with them, and He led them forth by the right way. A people
are often brought into a Wilderness of Difficulties and Emergencies: but if God
be with them, He guides them to a good Issue of them all. The Presence of God
appears in His Directing and Inclining of a people to such Actions, as may be
for His Honor and their Safety, and such Methods, as may extricate them out of
all Distresses! When God is with a people, He shapes their Counsels for them,
and he disposes them to the Things that should be done. He supplies them with
Apprehensions beyond the Reach and Verge of their own Wisdom, and He lays
before them Invitations, and Provocations, which as it were push them into the
way wherein they should go. When the Jews were upon a Re-Assumption of the
desirable things which the Babylonians had deprived 'em of, they took a Right
Way to dissappoint all that were desirous to interrupt them in it. We find in
Neh. 4. 13. That while those Exercises continued, they waited in a posture
agreeable thereunto; and when the danger was over, then they returned every one
to his work. How came this to pass? 'Twas because GOD was with them.

Secondly, God is with a People, by Protecting of them. 'Twas the promise of
God unto His people, in Isa. 43. 2. When thou passest through the Waters, I will
be with thee, and through the Rivers, they shall not overflow thee. On which
Text, blessed Bilney after his Condemnation so sweetly paraphrased, that his
Friends caused the whole Sentence to be fairly written on their Tables. A
people may be ready to be swallowed up, by a stormy, gaping Ocean of Troubles,
but if God be with them, they shall escape clear of all. The Presence of God is
a Defense, a Refuge to the people that are partakers of it. It was said unto
David in 2. Sam. 7. 9. I was with thee, and have cut off all thine enemies out
of thy sight. When God is with a people, He distracts and confounds their
enemies, and He troubles those who trouble them. A people who have God with
them, are too strong for all the Malice and Power of their enemies; no
Adversary, no Desolation, shall make such a people miserable; they are the
Jacob, unto whom in Genesis 28. 15. Behold, I am with thee, and I will keep thee,
says the Lord.

Thirdly, God is with a people by His Assisting and Succeeding of them. When
Joshua had a vast Undertaking in hand, it was said unto him in Cap. 1. 9. Be of
good Courage, for the Lord thy God is with thee, whither soever thou go. q.
d. God will Assist thee, and succeed thee, in thy undertakings. The Presence of
God will carry a people comfortably through all that they take in hand. If they
have Canaanites to subdue; if they have Enjoyments to obtain or preserve, the
Presence of God will prosper them in doing all. It was said unto Solomon, in 1.
Chron. 22. 11. My son, the Lord be with thee, and prosper thou, and build the
house of the Lord thy God. Thus, if the Lord be with a people, they shall
prosper in all their Affairs; in every Expedition, they shall come off with
Satisfaction; and they shall not miscarry in any of their Applications. This is
the Presence of the Lord.

Proposition. II.
The Presence of God with a people in His Outward Providence, has a diverse
Foundation and Continuance from His Presence with His People, in the Covenant
of Grace. As it is well observed by the great Owen, in a Discourse unto the
Parliament, These two are to be carefully distinguished. We must not reflect on
the Stability of the New Covenant, for what Variety and Sovereignty we may see
in providential Dispensations, toward this and that people in the world. This
matter seems determined by David, in 2. Sam. 23. 5. Though my house be not so
with God, yet He has made with me an Everlasting Covenant, ordered in all
things and sure. David had promises for the prosperity of his House; He had
also the sure mercies of the Covenant made over to him in the promises of God.
These promises had now a different Establishment; The Sure mercies of the
Covenant, were unto him more Absolute and Immutable; but the prosperity of his
House, we find under another Law, and subject unto a dreadful Alteration.

To bring these things into the case before us.

God has in the Covenant of Grace, promised, That He will be with His people.
This we read in Heb. 13. 5. He has said, I will never leave thee nor forsake
thee. The Alsufficient God, who is HE that answers our Necessities, Let them
be what they will; the Unchangeable God, who is HE still, whatever He was to
the Saints of old; this God has said [and how much better is this Autos
Eireken than the best Ipse dixit in the world! He has said it, and this] with
multiplied Negatives, in the Original, heaped one upon another, I will not, I
will not leave thee, I will not, I will not, I will not forsake thee. Well, but
God is not with a people in His outward Providence just after the manner
therein observed.

This Twofold Presence of God;

First, It has a Diverse Foundation. When we look on the Covenant of Grace,
there the Sins of one are expiated by the Sufferings of another; and so, God
comes to be with His people, for whom the Atonement is thus Procured. Thus it is
said in 2. Cor. 5. 25. Christ was made sin [or a Sin-offering] for us, that we
might become the Righteousness of God in Him. Now come to outward Providence,
and there you see other measures taken. Here God is with a people, according to
those Terms, in Ezekiel. 18. 20. The Soul that sins IT shall dye; one shall not
bear the Iniquity of another.

Again, It has a Diverse Continuance. When we look on the Covenant of Grace,
there God has bound Himself to be with His people for ever; yea, to see that
they shall therefore for ever be with Him. He there says as in Jer. 32. 40. I
will not turn away from them to do them good, but I will put My fear in their
hearts, that they shall not depart from Me. Now come to outward Providence, and
there you see it is otherwise. God is with a people for a while; and upon their
misbehaviours and provocations, He changes the Tenor of His Dispensations to
them. It Is with them, as it was with that family, in 1. Sam. 2. 30. I said
indeed, that thy house should walk before me forever; But now the Lord says,
that be far from me.

The sense of these things will prepare your Thoughts for one Conclusion more,
which is,

Proposition. III.
A People must be with God, or God will not be with them. And here also, to
prevent Mistakes, Let that one Text be always carried in our Minds; Neh. 9.
18. Being merciful, thou for sookest them not; there is Mercy in the Whole of
this matter. Let it be noted, That though this Condition seems to be imposed upon
us; yet it is Grace, pure Grace, rich Grace that helps us, when we are helped
unto the performance of it. When a people have so been with God, as that He has
been with them, they are to shout, Grace, Grace! concerning all. It is also to
be noted, that this Benefit dos not depend upon that Condition, as an Effect
upon the real and proper Cause of it. When a people has been with God, this
does not merit, and so procure that God should be with them; but that is barely
the Antecedent unto which, this is the Conse-

Having praemsed this I must now affirm, God is with you, while you are with
Him. We need only reflect on the People of Israel, for an Instance of it. That
whole History, which almost fills the Bible, proclames nothing more than this;
it loudly declares, That while a people are with God, God will be with them;
but that He will be very Terrible in His providential Dispensations toward
such a people as do forsake Him.

But, What is it for a people to be With God? In short,

Our being With God, implies the Whole of our Obedience to Him. Our Duty to God
must be attended, that we may have the Presence of God. The Whloe of this Duty
is comprised in that Expressir^ of our being with the Lord. Particularly the
Hebrew Particle [Gnim] in our Text, admits of three Significations; it
signifies, With, and For, and Like, [which last Signific^tion I make the more
free withal, because a little Philology will acquaint us with many Exemples of
it: for instance, When David says in Psalm. 120, 5. I dwell in (Gnim Hebr.) the
tents of Kedar; a very great Interpreter translates it so, I dwell As the tents
of Kedar. i. e. Like the inhabitants of the Stony Sunburned Arabia; whom indeed
I don't Remember David ever was among.] Accordingly, a people have Three Things
incumbent on them, if they would enjoy the Presence of God.

First, A People should be with God, by Communion [With] Him. This it is to be
With Him; There are Certain means of Communion between God and us; and these
we must be continually approaching to Him in. We are With God, while we are at
Prayer before Him; hence in our Context here, it immediately follows, If you
seek the Lord, He will be found of you. While we do seek Him, we are with Him.
The Psalmist was a man much in prayer, and therefore he could say as in Psalm.
73. 23. I am continually with thee. A people much in Prayer may say the same,
We are continually with the Lord. A people that will pray upon all occasions, a
people that will pray over all Businesses, a peothat will retire into the Mount
for Prayer (and Fasting too) at every turn; that people is with the Lord. And
the whole Worship of God must be, diligently, graciously, faithfully frequented
by a people that would be with Him. We are with God, when we are at His House.
A people should support and esteem, and use all the Ordinances of God among
them. The Church of God has His very special Preseuce in it; the Name of the
Church is that in Ezekiel. 48. 35. Jehovah Shamm^h, the Lord is there. We should
all be there too, and there give those Encouragements which are due to the
Institutions of God; So shall we be with the Lord.

Secondly, A people should be with God by Activity [For] Him. To be For God is
to be with God. It was once the Summons given in Exodus 32. 26. Who is on the
Lords lide? And all the Sons of Levi gathered themselves; they were with God in
doing so. It Is a Summons given to the world in every Generation, Who is on the
Lords side? They that obey the Summons are with the Lord. A people full of
Contrivances for the Interest of God, are with Him. A people should set
themselves to advance the Glory of God; they should own His Truths, and His
Ways; and endeavor to draw all about them into the Acknowledgement of the
same. A people should propound the Glory of God as their cheef End and the main
Scope of all that they do; and they should think much of no Cost, no Pains, nor
(tho, as a Martyr once expressed himself, though every hair on their heads were a
life) should a Thousand Lives be dear unto them, in the promoting of it. Then
are they with the Lord; they are so, when God can say of them, as in Isa. 43.
10. Ye are my Witnesses, says the Lord, and my servant.

Thirdly; A people should be With God, by Behavior [Like] Him. To be Like God
is to be with God. They that are with Him, do not walk contrary to Him. God and
we should be One. A people should have the same Designs, the same Desires,
which the Written Edicts of Heaven declare to be in the blessed God; and not
only so, but the same Virtues too. Is God Holy? Thus a people should not bear
with them that are evil. Is God Righteous? Thus a people should abhor all
Injustice and Oppression. Is God Merciful? Thus a people should be disposed
unto all fair acts of Pity and Kindness. Then they will be with the Lord; and,
O that this people were so with Him!

This is the USE to be now made of what has been delivered.

Let us all now, Be with God, that God may Be with us. I suppose, whatever else
we differ in, we generally concur in that wish, 1. King. 8. 27. The Lord our
God be with us, as He was with our Fathers, let Him not leave us nor forsake
us. O that we might all as much concur in an endeavourous Resolution, to be
with God, as our Fathers were with Him; not to leave Him, nor forsake him.
There is as much of New England in this great Congregation as can well be
reached by the voice of one Address; it is indeed, the best part of New England,
that is, at least Represented in this Assembly. As the great Council at
Jerusalem satt near the Temple, thus the whole Convention of the Massachusetts,
is here come into the House of God this day: Wherefore I take the boldness to
say, Hear ye me Asa, and all Judah, and Benjamin. The Cheef Sinner and least
Preacher among all your Sons, now takes a Liberty to mind you, That God will be
with you while you are with Him. Now that we may be all of us inspired with a
Zeal for this great thing this Day,

Let us Consider, First,

How Desirable, How Necessary a Thing it is, that we should have God with us.
Truly, This is the Unum Necessarium of New England!

Nothing is more Desirable, for us, than the Presence of our God. The Jews
have a Fable of their Manna, That whatever any man had a mind to taste, he
presently found in the Manna a Savor and a Relish of it. It is very true of
this Blessed Presence; all manner of Blessings are enwrapped in it. There is a
multitude of Blessings which we are desireous of; but they are all contained in
this comprehensive thing: It will give every honest man, all that he wants.
This will extricate us out of all our Labyrinths; This will set all things to
rights among us; This will wonderfully carry on all the Salvations which have
been begun for us, by the God of our Salvations. If Christ, if God be aboard,
our little Vessel will not sink in the gaping, roaring, formidable Waves now
tossing of it. Well did the Apostle say, in Romans 8. 31. If God be for us, who
can be against us? Thus, If God be with us, we have All for us. One GOD will
weigh down more than ten Worlds. If we have the Presence of that God, Who made
and moves the Universe by a Word; if we have the Presence of that God, Who can
Command and Create our Deliverances, O most Happy We! We may then join in such
Triumphant Acclamations as that in Psalm. 118. 6. The Lord is on my side, I will
not fear; what can man do unto me? We may then defy, even the Gates of Hell it
self, for, Cur metuat hominem homo in sinu Dei positus? and though abroad at this
day, The earth is removing, and the Waters roar, and are troubled, and the
mountains are shaking, splitting, tumbling, with the swelling thereof; Though the
great and the terrible God be at this Day, coming out of His place, to make all
Europe a stage of blood and fire, and make the Nations everywhere drink deep of
the Cup that shall make them giddy with all manner of Confusion and
Astonishment; Yet WE shall be helped right early, for God is in the midst of us.

Add to this; Nothing is more Necessary for us, than the Presence of God. We
are undone, thrice, and four times Undone, if we have it not. Methinks I hear
the Almighty GOD with a voice more awful than that of the loudest Thunder,
saying over us, as in Hos. 9. 12. Woe to them when I depart from them. And Woe to
us indeed; we are in a most woeful estate, if it come to that! How can we endure
the mention of it, without our most importunate Deprecations, O our God, leave
us not! We can have a prospect of nothing but horrible Disorders, Agonies and
Vexations, if we lose the Presence of our Lord: We ly open to no less than a
fearful Dissipation, and more than all our late Oppressors would rejoice to see
brought upon us. We have lately been complaining of Burdens, that were grievous
to us; but I may warn you of our danger to feel one Burden more, which will
infinitely exceed them all; it is that in Jer. 23. 33. What Burden? I will even
forsake you, says the Lord. Behold a Burden that will sink us into a
bottomless Abiss of Calamities! The Presence of GOD, This is no less than the
very Soul of New England; We are dead and gone, if that withdraw. When Israel
was nimbly enough possessing themselves of the promised Land, which God had
given them such a CHARTER for, they perished in the Attempt; for in Deuteronomy, 1.
42. The Lord said, go not up, for I am not among you. Alas, if we don't in the
first place look to this, That God be among us, we cannot avoid all manner of
Dissappointments, Desolations.

Let us Consider, Secondly: What uncomfortable Symptoms we have had of God's
not being with us. It seems as if God had fulfilled that sad Word on this poor
Land, in Deuteronomy. 31. 17. I will forsake them, and many evils shall befall them, so
that they will say in that day, Are not these evils come upon us, because God
is not among us? There is a vast number of Calamities, which have given us
lamentable cause to fear, That God has forsaken us. Why have we suffered such a
Blast, both on our Trade, and on our Corn, that the Husbandman complains, I
Iooked for much, and lo, it came to little! and the Mariner complains, I went
out full, and came home empty! It Is Because our God is not among us. Why have we
had Fire after Fire, laying our Treasures in Ashes? What means the heat of this
Anger, that Boston, the most noble, and vital Bowel of the Territory, has with
a twice repeted Conflagration suffered such a Loss of that which in the Body
politic answers to Blood in the Body natural? It Is Because our God is not among
us. Why have we had War after War, made upon us by a Foolish Nation? Why have
the worst of the Heathen had renewed advantages to disturb our Peace? And why
have so many of our Brethren and Neighbors been made a prey to the most Savage
Murderers in the world? It is Because our God is not among us. Give me leave to
say, as in Judge. 6. 12. If the Lord be with us, why then is all this befallen
us? But we may find Humiliation enough to convince us of this deplorable thing,
from what we have endured upon the Loss of our Government. She of old said unto
our Lord Jesus, in I-h. 11. 21. Lord, if thou had been here, my brother had
not dyed. So, If the Lord had been here, it is possible we had not Died. If the
Lord had been with us, would he have made our Wall so feeble, that (as they
said of Jerusalem) the going up of a poor Fox upon it, should break it down? If
the Lord had been with us, had all the wild Creatures that passed by this
Vineyard, found such Opportunities to be plucking at it? No, Our God would have
kept us, as A vineyard of red Wine; and lest any should have hurt us, He, (the
Lord) would have kept it, night and day. If the Lord had been with us, had you
ever thought you had seen cause to Declare, as you have lately and justly done,
That a Company of abject strangers had made a mere Booty of us? Had we ever
felt the sore grievances of an illegal and arbitrary Government? No; The God of
Heaven was not with that oppressed people, to whom He said in Isa. 1. 7. Your
Country is desolate; your land, Strangers devour it.

What shall I say? It was an Appeal made in Joel, 1. 2. Hear this, ye old men,;
has this been in your days? Even so, I may say to the old men within the
hearing of it; My Fathers, You Remember how we were, when God was with us;
pray, was it so in your days, as it has been in ours? Were you visited with
Plague after Plague, in a long Series of heavy Judgments, as We your poor
Children are? Surely, They will tell us; God is not with us, as He was with
them.

In all these matters, our Case may at least have some Correspondence with that
in Luc. 23. 28. He made as though He would havegone; but they constrained Him,
saying, Abide with us!

Let us Consider Thirdly;

If we are not With God, we shall be guilty of an Apostasy, and that under
very shameful, very direful Aggravations too.

We shall be Apostates, and O let us not be so, lest our God say, My soul can
have no pleasure in them. But if we are so, we shall be of all Apostates the
most inexcusable Let us Consider, what Fathers we have had; they were with God.
I may say of 'em as in hos. 9. 8. They were with my God: and they are gone to
be so forever. What an unaccountable thing will it be for us, to have that
Character, which we have been so much cautioned against, There arose another
generation which knew not the Lord? What? Shall the Grandchildren of Moses turn
Idolaters? and shall the Children of Samuel become the Children of Belial?
Shall we forget the Hope of our Fathers, or forsake our Fathers Friend? The
very Graves of those blessed men, every Post, every Stone upon their Graves, is
a Witness against us, if we do. With dismal Accents, Methinks, their very
Ghosts, will groan unto us, Alas, Is our posterity come to this! Nay, Abraham
would be Ignorant of us, and Israel would not acknowledge us, if we should be
so degenerate as to lose the Presence of the Lord.

Let us also consider, what Warnings we have had. It may be said unto us, as in
Jer. 25. 4. The Lord has sent unto you all His Servants the prophets. This
Country has been blessed with a most faithful Ministry, by which, I suppose,
every Assembly in this Territory, has been called upon, to Be with God, and to
keep with Him. Especially the Sermons which our ELECTIONS have put the
Ambassadors of God upon Preaching and Printing of; these have been so many
loud Warnings unto us, That we leave Him not. In them we have been faithfully
warned, That our true Interest is Not to Lie unto God. We have been Warned,
That the latter end of our Misbehaviours will be Destruction from the Lord. We
have been Warned, That We must Repent and do our first Works, or have the
Candlestick of the Lord Jesus removed from us. In a word, We have been warned
from Heaven, That If we forsake our God, He will cast us off for ever. O
miserable We, if we do it after all.

These Considerations, will not have their due Force, unless they expire in a
Threefold Request, which I must now lay before you; and I may justly assert
concerning the Things contained therein, They are not Vain Things, they are Our
Life. Wherefore, Hear ye me, Asa, and all Judah, and Benjamin; Hear ye these
things, all ye people of the Massachusetts!

First, Let us Return to the Lord. We must Come to Him, if we would Be with
Him. We have marvellously backsliden from our God, but He calls after us,
Return ye backsliding Children, and I will heal your Backslidings. O that we
may all as one man Reply what is in Jer. 3. 22. Behold, we come unto thee, for
thou art the Lord our God! If we ask that Question, in Mal. 2. 7. Wherein shall
we return? Methinks, it were an harder Quaestion, Wherein should we not? But,
Behold, We have had a great voice out of the Temple in answer thereunto. We
have had the Elders and Messengers of our Churches, conven d in a SYNOD,
solemnly informing of us, Wherein we shall Return. God forbid the Advice of
that Synod, should only serve to Convict us and Condemn us, in the Day when He
shall take vengeance on us for our Contemning of it. That were dreadful indeed!
But in Compliance with it, Let every man seriously now enquire of himself, What
have I done? Mark what I say, That man who does not suspect himself, of having
a share in the Sins which have driven away from us the Presence of our God;
That man, I may safely affirm it, is one of the principal Troublers of this
Israel; I do without any Scruple say it, Thou art the man. Let us all then
Examine our selves, and set upon the Reforming of our own Hearts and Lives, and
the Renewing of our Covenants with the Lord.

Indeed, both the Objects in which, and the Authors from whom we have endured
our Calamities, those are enough to indigitate what Sins they are that have
exposed us thereunto. Let me in two or three instances use a plain dealing with
you, agreeable to my station here this day.

What have been the Objects in which we have been afflicted? Our Fruits have
been blasted; and were they not abused in the excesses of Sensuality? Our Lands
have been threat'ned; and were not They the Idols, for the sake of which we
have offended GOD, and almost Renounced all that was Holy, and Just and Good?
The most happy and easy Government in the world, was changed with us, into what
has by the most impartial men been confessed to have become Intolerable; Why,
Did not men despise the Best of Governments, and procure other things to be set
over them, because they endeavored to make Loggs of what they before enjoyed?
To pass on, Were we not in the late unreasonable Extortions of the Law, invited
to consider, Whether our needless Multiplications of Litigious Contentious
Lawsuits, formerly amongst us, were not a Scandal thus chastised? Were we not
in the late unsufferable Injuries, Abuses, and Exactions of them, that under
the pretense of the Excise carried on very outrageous Villainies, put upon
Considering, Whether the Multitude or Quality of Drinking-Houses, in the midst
of us, had not once been a Stumbling Block of our Iniquity!

Again, What have been the Authors from whom we have been afflicted? Our
Molestations have risen very much from Indian Hands. And Alas, have we not very
much Injured the Indians? I do not mean, by taking from them Their Land; For it
was Hardly possible they should be more fairly dealt withal than they have been
in that particular; but by Teaching of them, Our Vice. We that should have
learned them to Pray, have learned them to Sin. Endeavors for their Conversion
have by many people been blown upon; but there have been wicked English, who
have taught them to drink, yea, and to curse, and swear; things which they knew
not the meaning of, till they came to School unto such White Pagans as some
that wear the Christian- Livery among our selves. And have not we also Followed
the Indians? The Indians are Infamous, especially for Three Scandalous
Qualities: They are Lazy Drones, and love Idleness Exceedingly! They are also
most impudent Liars, and will invent Reports and Stories at a strange and
monstrous rate; and they are out of measure Indulgent unto their Children,
there is no Family-Government among them. But, O how much do our people
Indianize in every one of those Abominable things! We must repent of these our
miscarriages, or else our God will take up that Resolution concerning us, I
will even for sake them, says the Lord.

Secondly, Let not Sin be With us, and God will be so. It Is the purpose of our
God, in Josh. 7. 12. I will not be with you except ye destroy the Accursed
Thing, from among you, Let us then Destroy that Accursed thing.

Especially, Let us take heed of the Sins, which at this Time, we have a
peculiar Disposition to. It was complained in Hos. 7. 1. When I would have
healed Israel, the iniquity of Ephraim was discovered. It has bin thus, but God
will not be With us, if it still be thus among our selves. Our good God, the
Lord our Healer, is now Healing of us: O let us not now be impatient patients,
lest that our blessed Physician deal hardly and roughly with us. Impatiens
aegrotus crudelem facit Medicum. Let us now no more discover Revengefulness
against them that have deserved Ill of us. Let the Law, and not the Sword
measure out their due unto them. No more discover an Unthankfulness unto them
that have deserved Well of us. Requite them not with Censure and Hatred for
their unwearied pains to preserve our Peace. No more discover a Contempt of the
Ministers, who set themselves faithfully to Declare the Whole Counsil of God,
and to Lift up their voice like a Trumpet in showing us our sins. They are all
agreed (I hope) as one man to live and dye studying of your Welfare; but if
they are unjustly ill-treated with you, the great God, whose Messengers they
are, will take notice of it, and say, Ye have despised Me!

And O let us no more Discover such a Spirit of Lying as we have made our
selves worthy to be reproved for. We find mention of an Evil Spirit, that said
in 1. King. 22. 22. I will go forth, and I will be a lying spririt in the mo^th
of all the prophets. Doubtthe same Devil has been saing for a License to go
forth and be a Lying Spirit in the month of near all the people here: I would
to God, this Devil were in a Shorter Chain! I beseech you Let not this Land
have that Character, A Country full of Lies.

But of all our Errors, There is none of such dangerous and threatening
Consequence as the (...) which we are too prone to break forth into. We are too
much a Con^entio^s, and that will soon render us a Wretched and a Ruined
people. A Divided and Quarrelsome People, do even say to the Almighty, Depart
from us; for He is the God of Peace. But O, What is our meaning then, to make a
fall submission and entire resignnation of our sel^es to the Tyranny of our own
Passions, as we have too much done, wh^le we have been debating about the
Measures of another Submission and Resignation in our various Revolutions! I
have read of a people with whom it was a Law, That in a Fray, where Swords were
drawn, If a Child did but cry PEACE, they must End the Quarrel, or else he dyed
that struck the first blow after PEACE was named. He that Considers the
Feavourish Paroxysms which this Land is now raging in, through mere
Misunderstandings about the Means leading to the End wherein we are generally
agreed, and how ready we are to treat one another with siery Animosities, had
need cry, Peace, Peace! with a very speedy importunity. For my own part, I
confess my self but a Child, and among the meanest, the smallest of your
Children too; but yet I am old enough to cry Peace! and in the Name of God I do
it. Peace! my dear Contrymen; Let there be Peace in all our Studies, Peace
in all our Actions, and Peace notwithstanding all our Differences. We cannot
avoid having our Different Sentiments; but Peace! I say; O let not our Dissents
put us upon Hatred and Outrage, and every evil work. It has not a little
surprised me to read in a Greek Author, who wrote Fifteen hundred years ago;
that in the times long praeceding his, there was a Tradition among them, that
Europe, and Asia, and Africa, were Islands, encompassed by the Ocean, without
and beyond which was another as big as They: in which other World, were mighty
and longliv'd people, inhabiting of great Cities; the two greatest whereof were
called, one of them, The Fighting City; the other of them, The Godly City.
Behold very Ancient Footsteps of the knowledge which the old World had of our
America, some Thousands of years ago. But I pray, which of them American
Cities, must New England become Incorporate into? Truly, If we are a Fighting,
or a Disagreeing People, we shall not be a Pious one. We have hitherto,
professed our selves, A Country of Puritans; I beseech you then let us have
the wisdom to be first pure, then peaceable. Every man should count himself
liable to follies, and mistakes, and Misprisions not a few. Are you so, or are
you not? If you are not, what do you here in this Lower World, where you can
find no more of your own Seize? If you are so, then be patient and
peaceable toward those who see not with your eyes! Let us all condescend one
unto another; and let no man be in a foaming Rage, if every Sheaf do not bow to
hi^. There is one ingenious way to unite this people, if it were so heeded as
it ought to be. I remember, an inquisitive person of old, that he might know
which was the Best Sect among all the Philosophers, he asked one and another,
and every one still preferred the Sect which he was of himself: But he then
asked them, successively, Which do you reckon the next best? and they all
agreed, that next to their own, Plato's was the Best: upon which, he chose
That, as indeed the Best of all. Thus, We all have our several Schemes of
things, and every man counts his own to be the Best; but I would say to every
man, Suppose your Scheme laid aside, What would you count the Next Best?
Doubtless we should be of One mind as to That: And if we could act by the
common measures of Christianity, we should foon be united in it. O that we
could receive the Word of the Lord Jesus, in 2. Cor. 13. 11. Brethren, live in
peace, and the the God of Love and Peace shall be with you.

Thirdly. Let every man do his Part, and his Best in this Matter, That God may
be with us.

Behold, a work provided for all sorts of men.

Pardon me, that I first offer it unto You, that are or may be our Superiors.
It was said in Hos. 11. 12. Judah rules with God. When Rulers are with God, O
happy Government! Unto YOU, much Honored, I would humbly address this
Petition, That Your first work may be to think on some considerable Expedient,
by which the Presence of God may be secured unto us. A little Consultation may
soon produce, what all New England may bless you for. Yea, it is very much in
your Power to do what may have a Tendency to perpetuate the Presence of God
unto the succeeding Generations. I cannot for bear uttering the Wish of the
great Chytr^us in this Honorable Audience, Urinam potentes rerum Domini
majorem Ecclesiae et Scholarum curam susciperent! May a godly and a learned
Ministry be every where encouraged: and no Plantations allowed to live without
a good Minister in them. May the College be maintained, and that River the
wholesome streams whereof have made glad the City of God, and blessed us with a
privilege above the other Outgoings of our Nation, be kept Running, with
Issues beyond those from the Seminaries of Canada or Mexico; may Schools be
countenanced, and all good ways to nourish them and support them in every
Town, be put in Execution; you shall then probably leave the Presence of God,
as a blessed Legacy with such as may come after you. I know not whether we do,
or can at this Day, labor under an iller Symtom, than the too general Want of
Education in the Rising Generation; which, if not prevented, will gradually,
but speedily, dispose us, to that sort of Criolian Degeneracy, observed to
deprave the Children of the most noble and worthy Europaeans, when transplanted
into America. The Youth of this Country, are very sharp, and early ripe in
their Capacities, above most in the world; and were the Benefits of a Religious
and Ingenuous Education bestowed upon them, they would soon prove an Admirable
People; and as we know that England afforded the first Discoverers of America
in these latter Ages, whatever the Spaniards may pretend unto the Contrary; for
it may be proved that both Britains and Saxons, did inhabit here, at least
Three or Four hundred years before Columbus was born into the world, which the
Annals themselves of those times do plainly enough Declare; So our little
New England may soon produce them that shall be Commanders of the greatest
Glories that America can pretend unto. But if our Youth be permitted to run
wild in our Woods, we shall soon be Forsaken by that God, Whom our Fathers
followed hither, when it was a land not sown; and Christianity, which like the
Sun, has moved still Westward, unto these Goings down of the Sun, will Return
to the old World again, leaving here, not a New-Ierusalem, as Doctor ^wiss
hoped, but a Gog and Magog, as Master Mede feared; for the last of the Latter
days. Now may the God of Heaven, bless the Wisdom and Goodness of Your
Endeavors, for the continuance of His Presence, with those that may rise up in
your stead, when you shall be gone to be forever with the Lord. Allow me to
say, unto the Fathers of this Country, what was said unto the Judges of old,
Deal courageously, and the Lord shall be with the good.

And as for Us, that are and shall be Inferiors, Let us also do what we can,
That our God may be still among us. We ought all of us humbly to lay before our
worthy Rulers that Encouragement in Ezr. 10 4. Arise, for this matter belongs
to thee, we also will be with thee, be of good courage and do it. Let there be
a public Spirit in us all, for the good of the whole; the Rarity and Mortality
whereof among us, New England bewails among the greatest of its Calamities.
Especially, Let us Pray hard, That God would not leave the Land. It was a
Public Spirit which was in that Famous Prince of Orange, who was the first
Captain General of the United Provinces an hundred years ago; and the Ancestor
of that Illustrious Person, whose glorious Design and Service, we have lately
with so much Unanimity Declared for; that when he was basely murdered by the
Pistol of a papist, His dying and only words were, O my God, take pity of my
soul, and of this poor people. When he had but one breath to draw in the world
His poor people had half of it! O Let this poor People have no less than Half
our Cares, half our Prayers. Let no man say, I am a sorry Creature, of what
account can my prayers be? For You that can do little else but pray, can yet be
the instruments of saving this poor people, by the Presence of the Lord. We
find in Amos. 7. 2. That a poor Herdsman and Huckster, kept the great God from
Leaving of the Land. A poor Husbandman, yea a poor Woman, by lively prayers,
may do incredibly much toward the Keeping of our God yet among us.

And if God be With us, then His Rod, and Staff, His mighty Crook, which
horribly breaks the bones of all that it falls upon, will crush and wound all
that shall go to make this Wilderness, A valley of the shadow of Death unto us;
and beat away all that may essay to do us any Harm. So shall we be Led and Fed
among the Sheep of our GOD; He will Restore us, and His Goodness and Mercy
shall follow us all our Days.

MANTISSA.
THus have the Words of God been Calling upon us, to beware of Loosing His
gracious Presence. Now the Presence of God, will either go or stay with His
Gospel; and the Principal Danger of New England lies in its giving an ill
Entertainment unto that glorious Gospel of our Lord Jesus. Let us then see
wether the Works of God, have not also been calling upon us to take heed of
that Epidemical Evil; and let what has befallen some of our Neighbors, in our
days be produced as a Warning unto us to avoid any Contempt of that Gospel,
which others have smarted for the Slighting of.

I would fill the Remaining pages of this sheet with a Discourse fetched from a
Reserved Collection of MEMORABLE PROVIDENCE, not improper to be produced on
this Occasion.

MATTHEW. X. 14. 15. Whosoever shall not receive you, nor hear your Words, It
shall be more tolerable for Sodom and Gomorrah in the day of Judgment, than
for that City.
To Despise and Reject the Glorious Gospel of Jesus Christ, is an Evil, than
which none is more evil; and yet nothing is more ordinary than this
extraordinarily sinful Sin; which Unbeleef may be accounted, as Tertullian of
old esteemed Idolatry, the Praecipuum ^rimen Humani generis, the grand Crime of
Mankind. Low thoughts about the Person, and the Office, and the Beauty of the
Lord Jesus; contemt^uous Apprehensions of His Truths and His ways, and His
Ordinances; these are the Things which bring the most Signal slery Wrath of God
upon the Children of unperswadeableness. The peculiar Controversy of God with
man, in the managing of which the most High God inflicts upon particular
persons, at once a Blasting on their Estates, and a Blindness on their Spirits
here, as the Prologue to the Hottest Vengeance of Eternal sire in the dismal
vaults of Hell below, is not so much on the score of all their other Profanity
and Iniquity, as this one thing, They slight the Redeemer of their souls. And
this is that thing, by which whole Nations and Peoples bring swift Destruction
upon themselves; that thing for which all the Seals, all the Trumpets, all the
Vials in the Apocalypse, have brought in the direful plagues of the Almighty
upon the Pagan and the Papal, after the Ruin of the Jewish World. They have
maintained a vile Praejudice against the Saving and the Ruling Hands of a
Gracious Mediator. O that, besides the other innumerable Rebukes of Heaven upon
mankind for this Madness in their hearts, the following Instances of Divine
Displeasure may awaken us to Take heed of an evil heart of Unbelief.

Exemple I.
AMong all the Nations of wild Salvages by which the vast Territory of
New England was inhabited, scarce any was more potent or populous than that of
the Narragansetts. Unto those miserable Heathen was the Gospel, and a Gospel
without charges too, offered by some English preachers of it, but they
peremptorily with much affront and contempt refused the Glad tidings of
Salvation by Jesus Christ, praeferring their own devilish Rites and gods
before the New Thing tendered unto them. An holy man, then famous throughout
our Churches, hereupon let sall a speech to this purpose, I speak altogether
without the Spirit of God, if this nation be not speedily and remarkably
destroyed. And so it happened. This Nation, much against the advice of the more
aged men among them, engaged in the late bloody armed Conspiracy with the other
Indians in the Country to cut off the English: in prosecution of which, after
they had done many Acts of Hostility, the English Army took the just
provocation in the depth of Winter to assault the strong Fort and Swamp in
which was their General Rendezvous. The Number of our Forces was much inferior
unto theirs, but with a wonderful Valor, and memorable Success, on our part,
the Day was carried against the tawny Infidels. Their City was laid in Ashes,
two and twenty of their Cheef Captains were killed, with we know not how many
Hundreds or Thousands of the common Indians; after which, mortal Sickness and
horrid Famine pursued the Remainders of them; so that there are scarce any of
them that we know of, to be now seen upon the face of the Earth.

Exemple. II.
The Ringleader of the last War which the Indians asslicted the English in
this Land withal, was Philip the Prince of the Wompanoags. That gracious and
laborious Apostle of the Indians, the Reverend John Eliot, made a Tender of the
Gospel to this Monster, who after the Indian mode of joining signs with words,
pulling off a Button on the good man's Coat, told him, He did not value what he
said so much as that: and he moreover hindered his subjects from embracing the
Christian Religion through a fear which he expressed, That it might obstruct
something of their Civil absolute unlimited Obedience to him. After his
Invasion of the English with some unhappy Success, the Hand of God so fell upon
him, as that after many Calamities, one of his own Vassals upon a disgust at
him, for killing an Indian who had propounded an Expedient of Peace with the
English, ran away from him, informing our Forces where he was; and they came
upon him in the Thicket, just as he was telling his Counselors of his Dream
the night before, that the English had taken him, and while he endeavored an
Escape an Indian shot him through the heart, whereof he dyed immediately, nor
are any considerable part of his people now to seen any where out of their own
place.

Exem. III.
Some time since there were Sundry well disposed persons in Virginia, upon
whose affectionate Letters, full of desires, that they might enjoy the means
of eternal Salvation, diverse worthy Ministers were sent from hence unto them,
Mr. Thomson, Mr. Knowles, and Mr. James; who after a passage so tedious and
dangerous as made them almost suspect their Call, at length arrived there,
where God gave them a blessed Success of their labors, with a loving and a
liberal Entertainment in the Country: Yet it was not long before the Rulers of
the Plantation drove them away by an Order, That all such as would not Conform
to certain things, which the consciences of these Gentlewere known to scruple,
should leave the Country by such a day. Before that black day came, the
Indians, who for some hundreds of Miles had entered into a Confoederacy to cut
off all strangers, made a dreadful massacre of the English, and 300 at least
were suddenly killed by the natives there: A grievous Mortality by Sickness did
also accompany the said Massacre, so that many removed from thence, and many of
the Rest glorified and magnified the Justice of God, thus avenging the Quarrel
of His Refused Gospel.

Finis.

