A FARTHER ACCOUNT OF The ACTIONS OF THE INNISKILLING-MEN.

LICENSED,

June 17. 1691.

A FARTHER IMPARTIAL ACCOUNT OF THE ACTIONS OF THE Inniskilling-men. CONTAINING
The REASONS of Their First RISING: Their Declarations, Oaths, and
Correspondencies with several Parts of the Kingdom. Together with many other
Remarkable Passages of Their Behavior and Management, not yet Published.

Written by Capt. WILLIAM Mc-CARMICK, One of the first that took up Arms in
Inniskilling, for the Defense of that Place, and the Protestant Interest.

LONDON: Printed for Ric. Chiswell, at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's
Churchyard. MDCXCI.

A TRUE AND IMPARTIAL ACCOUNT OF THE ACTIONS OF THE Inniskilling-men.
I DO Protest, That I in no ways undertake this with a design of Reflecting
upon Mr. Andrew Hamilton (who has writ on this Subject before), he being a
Gentleman that I have, and ever had a very great esteem for; my whole intention
being only to make the truth of some things appear, that either has slipped Mr.
Hamilton's memory; or that he has not been rightly informed in.

About the beginning of December, 1688, we were alarmed, as most of the
Protestants of the Kingdom were, by a Letter sent us from the Earl of
Mount-Alexander, directed to him from an unknown hand, acquainting him, That
there was a Design of a general Massacre of the Protestants, Man, Woman, and
Child, throughout the Kingdom of Ireland, to be Acted by the Irish Papists and
their Adherents, the Ninth Day of the said Month: This Letter, what its
operation was in other Places, I know not; but it made so deep an impression on
the minds of most in and about Inniskilling, (the Cruelties of the Irish in
Forty one, being yet fresh in many of their Memories) that several of the
Country sent in their best Household Furniture and Papers to Iniskilling;
thinking them more secure there, than with themselves: And we observing that
the Irish were gathering themselves together on all hands in great Numbers,
having for a long time before employed all the Smiths of their sort, in making
Skeens ( viz. a kind of sharppointed Baggonets) and Pike-heads, wherewith to
Arm themselves privately; we were struck into great Consternation; but resolved
not to have our Throats Cut asleep, the most of the Townsmen the Day and Night
of the designed Massacre, keeping strict Guards with what sort of Weapons they
had; and there being a Friary then in Town, one Anthony Murry Guardian of the
Friary, a Cunning, Subtle Fellow, making his remarks of our keeping Guards, went
out of Town in the Morning, about Four Miles, where a Multitude of his sort met
him, to hear a Sermon as they alleged; where in the end of his Discourse, he
acquainted his Hearers, that Inniskilling-Men were taking up Arms, and going to
Rebel; that he see a great many of them in Arms in the Streets that Morning,
Headed by one Mac-Carmick, a great Rebel, as he termed him, but he hoped ere
long to make them quiet enough. Several of the Friars being afraid, slipped out
of Town; but this Impudent Guardian stayed, and did not stick to say, That he
would have a Red Cross very soon, at every door in Town. And truly I believe
was instrumental, in causing two Foot Companies of Soldiers, viz. Capt.
Nugents, and Capt. Shirlo's, belonging to Sir Thomas Nucoman's Regiment, to be
sent to Garrison upon us: But as the great Providence of God would have it, our
Provost (that is the Chief Magistrate in Town) the second day after the Massacre
should have been committed, received a Letter by the Lord Tyrconnel's
directions, then Lord Deputy of Ireland, from Secretary Ellice, ordering him to
provide Quarters for two Foot-Companies. A thing never practicable before, to
send Orders for providing of Quarters, ere the men that were to Quarter, showed
their Patent. But had it not been for this, these Two Companies had been in our
Town, ere we had known of their March. But this struck deep upon our spirits;
we did then begin to consider the dangerous condition we were in, and did think
it high time to use our diligence in endeavoring the preservation of the
Protestant Religion, as well as our Lives; it being either already, or suddenly
like to be, crushed in most Parts of the Kingdom; therefore resolved (if
possible) to support it in that Corner.

The Townsmen upon this, were called together, where it was debated, Whether we
should refuse entrance to the two Companies, or not; there were various
opinions, both Arms and Ammunition being wanting; but in the general, it was
thought advisable to consult one Capt. James Corry, a very leading-Gentleman in
that County, in this so weighty an affair, he living within a small Mile of the
Town. But he not willing to countenance us in this, neither to assist us with
his Advice, we again assemble our selves; but being still divided in Opinion,
we could conclude on nothing.

There was one William Browning, Robert Clark, and William Mac-Carmick, got
privately into a Back Room, where came to them James Euart, and Allen Cushcart.
These Five resolved, in spite of all opposition, to deny entrance to these two
Companies of Soldiers, and defend the Town with their Lives: To that purpose
dispatched Expresses, in name of the Townsmen, about midnight, to most of the
Gentlemen of the Country, acquainting them of their Resolution, and desiring
their Assistance; and that they would give us timely notice which Road the
Soldiers Marched, that we might put our selves in a posture of receiving them.
In the mean time Mac-Carmick gets Timber brought into Town, and sets Carpenters
a work to get up the Draw-Bridg upon the East End of the Town; the Bridge being
newly built of Stone, and the Draw not put up.

Next Night, about Midnight, came an Express from Danid Eccles Esquire with this
following Letter.

GENTLEMEN,
PAssing all Complements of Thanks; We are so assured that two Companies of
Foot are Marching to Inniskilling, that Capt. Nugent, with other Officers, are
in Clownish this night on their March thither; but as for their Soldiers,
though they were expected there, it is thought they will go by Newtown-Butler,
and it is supposed they are in Drum. We Pray God bless you, and can only tell
you, That a Troop of Dragoons came to Ardmagh Saturday last, where the
Inhabitants offered them Candle, Fire, and Salt; so that if they expected any
further necessaries, they were to pay beforehand; whereupon the Lieutenant
Marched to his Capt. Coll. Bryan, Mac-Maghow at Charlemont, and the Townsmen
went to Church with their Arms, of which two Sentinels were placed on the
Steeple, to Pire their Firelacks, and Ring the Bells, as a signal to the
Country, if they had offered any thing ill; of which we had no further account.

As to what other things you propose, assure your selves, we shall be as ready
to offer all Testimony of Friendship, as may be expected from such as are not
wanting to pray for you; and are expecting a particalar Correspondence from
you, as you shall have from us, etc.

To Mr. William Mc-Carmick at Inniskilling.

This came no sooner to hand, than Mac-Carmick went to the Provost, and some
others of the Townsmen, entreating them as soon as Day appeared, to set the
Carpenters again to work at the Drawbridge, getting a Horseback himself, and
Rides immediately to Cornet Gustavus Hamilton, a Gentleman that lived on the
West side of the Town, in the Barony of Maghreboy, about five Mile from the
Town, to know his and the other Neighbouring-Gentlemens Resolutions; who were
all very ready and willing to join in the Defense of Inniskilling; several of
them, together with Cornet Hamilton, coming into Town with Mc Carmick, but upon
the way were met by an Express from the Provost, with this following Letter.

Dear Sir,
MR. Latournall came just now from Captain Corry, and in his coming into the
Town, commanded the Carpenters to leave off working at the Drawbridg, and also
came to me and begged I should send for my Brethren, and dissuade them from the
Resolution of denying the Soldiers Entrance, and to provide them Quarters as
speedily as I could. My request to you is, That you will immediately give the
Gentlemen in these parts an Account of my design, which is to give them
entrance, and that you will make all the haste you can home to assist me, is
all from

Inniskilling, Dec. 13th. 1688. Yours to serve you whilst I am, PAVL DANE.

To Mr. William Mc-Carmick, These.

By this you may see how strangely men's minds were hurried, and what a hard
task it was to unite a divided multitude; yet this Letter hindered not our
coming into Town, where Captain Corry, and several other Gentlemen, livers on
the East side of Loghearne, were assembled. Things again were debated, but most
were for admitting the two Companies, alleging the strength of the Irish in
that Country, they being well armed and provided in Ammunition, having all the
Arms, Magazines and Garrisons of the Kingdom in their hands, save Londonderry;
we wanting both Arms and Ammunition, wanting Soldiers amongst us, and the
uncertainty of a headstrong multitude, being likely that they would as soon
throw down their Arms as they took them up, when they either see an Enemy, or
were reduced to any hardships or want; yet all could not do, the Townsmen with
the Gentlemen that came out of the Barony of Maghreboy, stood firm to the
Resolution of neither submitting themselves to be slaves, nor to assist the
making of others so; Carpenters were set to work again at the Bridge. And
indeed though Captain Corry would not at all comply with our Resolution, yet
when we sent for the Chains and Irons that had formerly belonged to the Bridge,
he sent them in to us; we soon got up the Drawbridge, and again sent to all
the Neighborhood, entreating them to join with us both for their own
preservation and ours, promising them free quarter in Town both for themselves
and Horses; upon this several of the Country came in, being thereunto much
encouraged by the industrious solicitation of one Mr. Kelsy a Nonconformist
Minister, who indeed labored both publicly and privately, in animating his
hearers to take up Arms, and stand upon their own defense, showing example
himself, by wearing Arms, and marching in the head of them, when together.

Our next Care was to turn all Papists out of Town, seizing Anthony Murry the
forenamed Friar-Guardian, and committing him to the Castle, where he continued
Prisoner a good while, and after by a Rope made his Escape over the Wall, so
got off in a Boat; but although the Rope set him at liberty then, yet it may
send him to another world ere long.

Upon Saturday the 15th of December, Mr. James Baird and Mr. James Johnston
were sent on Horseback to view and bring intelligence of the Enemies approach,
who returned upon Sunday about Ten of the Clock, with assurance of the Enemies
being within four or five miles of the Town; most of the Inhabitants being in
Church, got immediately to their Arms; our number not two hundred Foot, and
they not near half Armed; our Horse about 150. such as they were; who took the
field with a resolution to fall in upon the Enemies Rear, if they had offered
to enter the Town by force; but they coming within a mile, and meeting several
of their own sort that were turned out of Town, acquainting them that we were
resolved to fight, and indeed magnifying our number, the Soldiers were so
discouraged, that they immediately Retreated, the most of their Officers being
at Dinner in Captain Corry's; upon intelligence of which our Horse, with
threescore Firelooks pursued them; their Officers perceiving our Horse to move
toward them, fled likewise after their men; we hearing that they had several
Horse-loads of spare Arms, and Ammunition good store along with them for arming
the Country, were resolved to have them, these being the chief things we
wanted; but our Horse being met by Captain Corry, were persuaded to return, to
the great dissatisfaction of the Foot; he having, as we were told, past his
word for the Enemies safety while they were in our Country; they marched that
night to Mc Guiers Bridge, eight miles from us, and there stood upon their
Guard all night, next day to Newtown Buttler, where in the night time they had
like to have seized three Gentlemen of ours that we sent to observe their
motion, and to know if any of the Country joined them, viz. Mr. William
Browning, Mr. (...) and Mr. James Corry, who lighting in their Quarters, and
assuming other Names, after finding out their number, strength, and resolution,
having discoursed several of their Officers, were discovered to be Inniskilling
men; and ere they could well mount their Horses, were surrounded by a strong
Guard of the Enemy; but our men made their way through them, and escaped to the
County of Cavan, where they stayed in Captain Sanderson's, while the two
Companies marched past them to Cavan, then returned; the two Companies stayed
some small time in Cavan, then marched to Firmah, twelve miles further, being
alarmed that the Inniskilling men were coming to disarm them.

Gustavus Hamilton during their being near the Town, kept at a place called
Portoragh, within a quarter of a mile of the Town, with near a hundred Horse,
to support and assist the Townsmen if any force had been offered them by the
two Companies; but as for carrying meat or drink out of Town to treat them, or
sending any of our number to persuade them to return, there was no such thing;
it is true indeed, they did not show their Patent, nor once desire to be
admitted into Town.

After this, we always kept strict Guards; and being sensible that a Body
without a Head seldom lives long, our next care was to make choice of some
Gentleman to Command us, the Irish indeed every day growing more insolent than
usual, and gathering themselves together in Companies, Exercising, and learning
to handle their Arms; yea, and taking away the Protestants Cattle both
publicly and privately; nay more, they were grown to that height of Impudence,
that upon the 16th. of December they took from an honest man of the name of
Fosset, his Cattle; he followed, and overtaking the men that were driving them
away, the Rogues seized the honest man, and in a most Barbarous manner ripped
up his Belly, and tore out his Intestions, and so left him; this measure in all
probability we should have met with, had not the Almighty God put it in our
hearts to refuse a Popish Garrison into our Town.

The Townsmen Assembling themselves, Sir Michael Cole, Proprietor of the Town,
being then in England, made choice of Gustavus Hamilton Esquire to be our
Governor, a Gentleman very well descended, and one reputed to be of just and
good Principels; but ere this Election, or his coming to take the charge upon
him, we had a Randezvous of all the Country that would join with us, upon
Thursday the 20th. where came Sir Gerard Ervin and the forenamed Captain Corry,
and seeing Mr. William Browning coming into Town in the head of a party of
Horse, they caused him to be seized, and was writing his Mittimus to send him
to Goal, for appearing in Arms, thinking by this to fright us from our
Resolution of holding out the Town; but we soon set him at liberty, and sent in
one Lieutenant Smith, an ancient Gentleman, and Justice of Peace in the County,
to Sir Gerard and Captain Corry, to tell them, that we took it unkindly their
offering to secure any of our number, or to fright or deject the spirits of
those that were willing to join in defense of their Lives and Religion;
desiring them immediately to leave the Town, and give us no farther trouble,
else we must be forced to send them where they were a sending Mr. Browning;
this Message startled them; they called Quarters, and immediately took their
Horses, and left the Town; yet Captain Corry made it his business after, to
hinder his Tenants, or any other he had influence upon, to join with us; but we
were not long troubled with him, for he left the Kingdom the March following.

This was not the only discouragement we met with; for Mr. (...), a Servant of
Sir Michael Coals, whose Town Inniskilling is, dwelling at that time in Sir
Michael's Castle, the only strength of the Town, refused us entrance into it,
or to deliver it, or any of the Arms in it up to us, while Mr. Henry Smith, and
Mr. Malcome Cathcart, both Captains in the Army since, took it by surprise; so
we got possession, and kept a strong Guard in it ever after.

Notwithstanding all Difficulties and opposition we met with, we stood firm to
our first intention, and Gustavus Hamilton being, as I said before, elected our
Governor, he embraced it, and removing his Family, came into Inniskilling
Castle to live.

The first thing he did, calling the Townsmen together, he thought it
advisable ( Londonderry at that time likewise holding out, having refused
entrance to the Lord Antrim's Regiment) to settle a true Correspondence betwixt
Derry and us, and likewise to know, if possible, my Lord Mountjoy's
Inclinations toward us; and to procure some Arms and Ammunition at Derry; to
which purpose Mr. Allen Cathcart, and Mr. William Mc.-Carmick were sent; but
ere they got the length of Londonderry, they had capitulated with Lord
Mountjoy, and admitted six Companies of his Regiment into their City, what
Papists were in the said Companies being first turned out; we were very kindly
received by the Citizens, they promising us help of Ammunition and Arms, and to
bear a true and constant Correspondence with us, as we promised to them. Then
our Messengers returning, deliver this following Letter to my Lord Mountjoy at
Newtownstewart.

YOUR Lordship cannot but know what dreadful Apprehensions we were struck with,
when from several parts of this Kingdom we received the sad Account of a
designed Massacre of the Protestants; in the midst of which fears, to heighten
our sorrows, we had news of two Companies of Foot, all Papists, ordered to
garrison upon us; and further, to deject our despairing Spirits, the Threats of
the Officers of these Companies, of treading us in the Kennels, and dragging of
our Intestins about the Streets, was assured us; nay more, my Lord, the
frequent assembling of the Irish in great Companies on all hands of us, their
restless pains in making Skeins and Pikes; insomuch, that a man, and he of a
mean Fortune, dispersed in one Week threescore; and having likewise the
intelligence of your Lordship's being confined, for only desiring that the
Protestants might have liberty to buy Arms for their own defense, did create in
us so great fear, that we could not propose safety, or the preservation of our
lives in any humane probability, but by refusing these two Companies entrance
into our Town. My Lord, our Resolutions are firm and fully fixed to preserve
this Place, as a Refuge for many Souls to fly to, if any Massacre should be
attempted, which we daily fear and tremble to think of.

These things seriously considered, and seeing so great and apparent Dangers
hovering over our heads, we can do no less than unanimously resolve not to
admit any Popish Garrison here; which we hope your Lordship will represent
favorably to the Government; We return very humble and hearty thanks for your
kind and prudent Message by Mr. Marvin, and do assure your Lordship, That we
will demean our selves with all the sobriety imaginable; neither did it ever
enter into our thoughts, to spill one drop of Blood (unless we be thereunto
forced in our own defense) or to take from any man the value of one Farthing;
which we entreat your Lordship to believe from,

December. 21. 1681. My LORD, Your Lordship's most Humble and Obedient Servants,
The Inhabitants of Inniskilling.


My Lord, after perusing this Letter, enquired what strength we might be of;
and being answered, he said, we must receive a Garrison of the King's Soldiers.
Mc-Carmick replied, That we knew not how far that could consist with our
safety, or the general preservation of the Protestant Interest in Vlster;
Inniskilling being the only Inlet from Connought to that Province, from whence
they would as an Inundation overflow our Country; and they having no other Pass
for above Forty Miles over Longhearne, we did believe we could not in any way
be secure, if we admitted a Popish Garrison there. My Lord answered, the King
will protect you. But Mr. Cathcart sharply replied, that he could not protect
himself; At which my Lord turned, and walked a good while without speaking;
then told us, That we might return home, and desired, that his Service might be
given to our Townsmen, whom he would come and converse with on Wednesday
following; in the mean time entreated, that we might be cautious of falling
into blood; which we promised, and so parted; but in place of my Lord's coming
according to his promise, he sent Mr. Marvin to excuse him; he going to Dublin
(being sent for by Tyrconnel) and so into France.

At the Return of our Messengers, we began to form Companies, Captain Allen
Cathcart, William Mc-Carmick his Lieutenant, Ralph Picking Ensign, raising the
first; and Captain Malcome Cathcart, the second, (most consisting of
Nonconformists, as they term them; that party effectually espousing our
interest, and never declined us in the most dangerous times.) The Governor a
Company of Foot in the Country, where he had lived, and a Troop of Horse in and
about the Town.

At this time We were put to great toil, in breaking the Ice round our Town
every Day; it standing in an Island, and having no other Walls save the Water,
which Frose so extremely up, that Both Foot and Horse might March over it with
safety.

Toward the latter end of December, we had an Express from my Lord Blany, with
advice, not rashly to admira Garrison of Papists into our Town, but rather to
continue in the condition we were in, while we knew what measures were taken by
the Nobility and Gentry of the Counties of Antrim, Down, Ardmagh, and Managhan,
and a Letter enclosed, sent to his Lordship from Belfast, which was this.

My Lord,
WE herewith send you a Copy of the Capitulation betwixt Lord Mountjoy, and the
City of Derry: Whereupon that Place was put into the hands of
Lieutenant-Collonel Lundy: We also send your Lordship a Narrative of what past
betwixt my Lord Mountjoy and a Gentleman we entrusted from hence, to manage
both with his Lordship and the City; by all which your Lordship may perceive,
that Lord Mountjoy proposes managing the Protestant Interest by less hazardous
means than was intended: And we are unwilling to suspect his Lordship's
sincerity, and think it may be prejudicial to us as yet to thwart his Lordship;
whereupon we think it most advisable for us, to defer putting any thing in
execution, till a new notice is given; and that in the mean time we may take
care that his Lordship be discoursed herein; and we thereby judge what are the
measures most proper for us to pursue. We believe your Lordship has wrote to
Lord Granard, and Lord Kingston; and we now desire that you will, with the
utmost speed, give them and other our Friends intimation of this our altering
our resolutions, with the motives thereunto; we also desire that you would
acquaint Lord Granard, that we do however rely so much on him, that if he
judges our method best, and either has or will make any step toward
countenancing thereof, so as to think his Honor in the least engaged, that we
will all unanimously stand by him. Your Lordship perceives, that it is likewise
intended, that Inniskilling submit as Derry has done; we refer it to your
Lordship, to consider if means ought to be used, that they at least delay so
doing: and for your Lordship to Act therein, or Prevent it, as you think fit,
etc.

Belfast December 26.

You see by this, it was concluded, That the Holding out Inniskilling was
thought convenient, and indeed we had firmly resolved it; but wanting
Ammunition, Arms and Commissions, we in January sent Mr. Hugh Hamilton, and Mr.
Allen Cathcart into England, with an Address to the Prince of Orange, hearing
King James had left that Kingdom: And in their way to Donoghadee (where they
were to take Shipping for Scotland, toward their more secure passage) to
discourse the Lords and Gentlemen of the North-East; to whom we wrote this
following Letter.

My Lord.
WHILST we and all the Protestants of this Kingdom, groaned under the fear of
approaching Misery; and there was nothing, but an universal dread of eminent
Ruin suggested to our thoughts, and that we see our Religion, our Laws,
Liberties, Lives, and our all at stake, so that nothing could be added to our
danger, but our willingness to lie under whatsoever was imposed upon us; the
Law of Self-preservation (one of the Ancientest of the World) constrained us,
rather to choose an hazardous Undertaking, than a voluntary Slavery; to which we
were the more provoked, by the Insulting Menaces of those, who under pretense
of Quartering upon us, came to Pillage us, and designed to make this their
entrance to the Devastation of this part of the Province. So that not being
willing to be inslaved, and help to make others so too, this Pass being the
only Inlet from Conagh to Ulster, from whence, as by an Inundation, it must
have been overflowed; we stand upon our Guard, and do resolve by the blessing
of God, rather to meet our Danger, than expect it. We doubt not, but your own
Considerations has suggested thoughts of this Nature to you also, which we do
believe may induce you to a necessary Defense of your Selves and Neighbors;
and therefore do humby entreat your candid and sincere advice in the management
of this great Affair, which is too weighty for our weak Shoulders to bear
alone, since we are sure to be the first that shall meet with the dangerous,
and highly incensed, revengful Hands of our Enemies; our great hope is, That
God will incline you to our Assistance, and give us Courage and Success in this
so just an Undertaking; we entreat Credit may be given to our Messengers, who
are well-acquainted with the Proceeddings of those that shall not fail to
continue

To the Right Honorable the Earl of Mount-Alexander, Lord Viscount Massarine,
Sir Arthur Reiden, or any of them, etc.
Your Lordships most Faithful Humble Servants Gustavus Hamilton, and the rest
of the Inhabitants of Innikilling.


We had a very kind and favorable return to this Letter, from the Honorable
Persons it was sent too; we now diligently applied our selves in raising more
men, Capt. Rob. Clark, Capt. Will. Browning, Capt. Alex. Archison, Capt. Robert
Stevenson, Capt. Robert Corry, Capt. Hen. Smith, Capt. Archibald Hamilton, each
raising a Company; Sir John Hume who indeed did from the beginning effectually
espouse our Interest, raised and armed two Foot Companies, and a good Troop of
Horse; joining always with us, when occasion; Fortified and Victualled his own
House, so that it was capable of containing and maintaining a very considerable
Garrison; and sent into England for his Eldest Son, who had been formerly in the
Army there, a very hopeful young Gentleman, who headed his Horse: This Garrison
was no small support to Inniskilling; it lying three miles below the Town, on
Conaught side of the River, and a great defense to the Country about it.

In the beginning of January we received a Letter sent us by Mr. Charles Lesly
from Glaslough, a place in the County of Monaghan where he lived, it was in
Characters, and showed the Intentions of the Irish Priests and Friars, whose
restless spirits left nothing unattempted to drive on their Hellish designs
against the poor Protestants: The Letter was thus, M17t27 McK2nn1,
945r S2lf2 t4g2th2r 553th R4b2rt and 34hn 7t51rt c1pti3n 453nd4n 553ll31m
224rth 1r2 15th4r3726 89 92 c45nc2ll 4f 658l341 t4 72372 5p4n ch1rl2s l27l32
1n6 34hn kn4k7, capt3ne 34hnst4n, th2r2 1r2 1ll74 74m2 c4ntr3526 6273gn7 li36
3n pr1ct37 t4 75rpr372 92ch5rch22 4f 1rdm1gh l5rg1nl37n1g1r592 and 18452 4n
7c4r2 4f 92 pr3nc3p1ll Chr5ch27 4f 3r2l1n6 and all 92 pr274n2r7 1r2 t4 82 71f2
k2pt 543ll f5rth2r 4r62r7 h45 252r g2ntl2m2n 915 1r2 t4 72171 1ll 3n gl17l45gh
Ch5rch pr27n2r7 and r1372 5p 1ll 92 tr5gh t4945r 1737t1n72 th2r24f 945 m57tn44
f13l2, 17 945 553ll 1n7552r2 3t 53th 92 l472 4f 945r l3527 3f 252r 92 554rl6
t5rn7 17 3t 553ll 3f 92 p4p2 c1n 72n6 57 1n 1rm32.

Fr2611th 62c2m82r 92 26. F1th2r G1rl2n. F1th2r 61l9.




This Letter was intercepted by Sir Nicholas Achison, and sent by him to Mr.
Lessly, from whom we had it wrote over thus: Mr. Mc Kenna,
YOur self, together with Robert and John Steward, Captain Ovindon, William
Betagh, are Authorized by the Council of Dublin to seize upon Charles Lesly,
and John Knocks, Captain Johnson; there are also some contrived designs laid in
practice to surprise the Churches of Ardmagh, Lurgan, Lisnagarvy, and above one
score of the principal Churches of Ireland; and all the Prisoners are to be
kept while further orders: However Gentlemen, you are to seize all in Glaslough
Church Prisoners; and raise up all the Trugh to your assistance; thereof you
must not fail as you will answer it with the loss of your lives, if ever the
world turn, as it will if the Pope can send us an Army.

Tredagh Dec. the 26. Father Garland. Father Daly.




About this time came another to us out of Conaught in these words.

SIR,
THE occasion of this trouble to you, is to tell you, That we have undoubted
and repeated advice, that many hundreds of men, Foot and Dragoons, are Arming
themselves in the County of Ruscommon and Mayo, with an intent to fall upon our
Friends in Boil, and this County; and consequently pursue their design down
toward you. We have therefore agreed unanimously to secure this Town, and
bring in the Country people to our aid, but before we stir in what we have
said, there is a party of fifty or sixty to go hence; who are to join in the
County of Roscommon, with some more to be commanded by Captain Coot, upon a
very important design, which if please God may be effected, will be of great
consequence to us all, and of no small disadvantage to our Enemies, that if
possible is to be done within two or three days; now it is the desire of
Captain Coot, that all, or as many of the Protestants as may unite, may gather
into Ballishanan, and Dunnigall, where you may be in a readiness not only to
secure your selves against the Blow that is designed to be given, but also to
be in a condition to relieve us, if by the multitude we be oppressed: Matters
are come to a great height in our neighboring Counties, there being no less
then 24 Captains in one Barony in the County of Mayo; therefore as you tender
your welfare, slight not this matter, communicate it with all prudence to Mr.
Folliat, Mr. Whitway, Lieutenant Smith, and Mr. Atkinson, and the rest of your
Friends: What else is done here you shall know it; we hope to have all done by
Thursday, for we find time is not to be slipped; Lord Kingstone and Captain Coot
comes hither; it is their desire that you should send an Express immediately to
Derry to know if we may have any help of Arms and Ammunition from thence, for
it is the only thing we lack, when at the same time our Enemies are well
stored. Pray desire your Friends to tell what quantity of Arms we may expect,
and the sorts, and how much Ammunition, that we may immediately send for them;
this design is not to be Communicated to any but to those you are sure of: Lord
Granard is now in the Country; Lord Kingston went to him yesterday, and this
night or to morrow morning we expect to know how his pulse beats. Let us know
how Matters are with you: We are told Derry is surrendered.

Sligo, December. 27. 1688.

This Letter was directed, to Mr. John Delap of Bellishannon, and by him sent
to us: By these frequent admonitions from several parts, any man may see what
reason we had to stand upon our Guard, and yet how we might have been
discouraged, having neither number sufficient, Arms, nor Ammunition fit for the
Number we had; but God Almighty gave us an Heart with Courage and Resolution,
that supplied all our wants.

We now every Day wrought hard in Fortifying the Town, making Bulwarks and
Rampires at each place, where the River was fordable; and appointed a certain
Number of Officers, together with Mr. Kelsey the Nonconformist Minister, to sit
in Counsel every Day, to consider what measures were most proper to pursue for
our Preservation; the first things done, were these following orders.

1. A Book to be made, to insert all Orders that were concluded upon; and these
to be Signed by them that were appointed to take inspection, and conclude upon
matters fit, so firmly obeyed by all.

2. That the Country were to do duty, by watching their turns in Town; whereby
to secure that place as a sure refuge for them to fly to, if any mischief
should be offered to them by the Natives; and while they were upon Duty, to
have free Quarters.

3. That Locks be forthwith Provided for the Bridges, and they to be Locked up
at a convenient Hour, and the Keys cared to the Governor, or to the Captain of
the Main Guard, if the Governor should think fit.

4. That Expresses be immediately sent abroad, to engage a True Correspondence
with the Gentlemen in the adjacent Counties, so to receive from them frequent
Intelligence of their knowledge, or what their Resolutions or Observations were.

5. That a considerable quantity of Provisions, viz. Beef, Butter, Cheese, and
Meal, be laid up in Store to subsist the Garrison, if a Seige should happen; and
that the Country be encouraged to send in, and lay up their Provisions, of
Grain or other things, in Town; fearing lest it might be surprised by the
Enemy, and so made use of against us.

6. That good store of Pikes and Sythes, fixed in long Poles be made ready, and
kept in store to Arm all the Country, if occasion were.

7. That a Horse-Guard be kept, for scouring the Country in the night time, for
fear of an Ambush or sudden Attack; and to see that the Watches there be duly
kept.

8. That all the Boats and Cotes upon Longhaven be secured, and brought to the
Castle of Inniskilling; so to prevent the Enemies having the advantage of
surprising us by Water.

9. That all the fire Arms that may be had, together with all the old
Musquet-Barrels that are now in the Castle, be immediately fixed up, and made
fit for Service.

10. That the four small Brass Pieces now in the Castle, be put upon Carriages,
and made fit for Service.

11. That the Papists and Natives of the Country, be not admitted into Town
upon Markets-Days, with Skeens or Half Pikes, neither allowed to stay in Town
all Night.

12. That a General Randesvouz of the Country be appointed, where lists may be
taken of all that join with us, the better to know our strength, and there to
be formed into Companies and Troops, Officers made to Command and Discipline
them, and they obliged to obey their Officers.

Having thus in some measure prescribed our selves some method to walk by, we
put the former Orders punctually in execution, every man observing what he was
Commanded, as duly, as if we had all been under Pay; no man in the least
grudging to perform the hardest Duty; so unanimous we were amongst our selves.

Sir James Caldwell coming about this time to Town, brought with him by Water
from Belturbet, some Gunpowder for the better defense of the Country where he
lived, and left us about Sixty Pounds, which we looked upon to be a great
matter at that time.

In January also came to us from Conought, Thom is Lloyd, and Dan. Hudson Esquire
with their Families, both Ingenious Gentlemen; and I may say indeed, in a good
time for us; for all that we did after, worth taking notice of, was under the
Conduct and Command of Mr. Lloyd; Mr. Hudson by his sound and good Advice in
Counsel, contributed much to our advantage; we shall have occasion to speak
more of Mr. Lloyd hereafter.

We likewise about this time had sent us from my Lord Blany, by Captain Thomas
Cole, a Copy of the Proceedings of the Lords of the North East; the Papers were
these.

IT being notoriously known, not only to the Protestants of the Northern
Counties, but to those throughout this whole Kingdom of Ireland, That the
Public peace of this Nation is now in great and eminent Danger; and that it is
absolutely necessary for all Protestants to agree within their several Counties
in some method, besides those ordinarily appointed by the Laws, for their own
defense; and the preserving as much as in them lies, the public Peace of the
Nation, which is so much endeavored to be disturbed by Popish and Illegal
Counselors, and their Abettors. And for that Unity, Secresy, and Dispatch, are
necessary to the effecting of the said Design: Therefore we the Persons here
under Subscribing our Names, Do in behalf of our selves, and Protestant
Tenants, Authorize and Empower Sir Arthur Reidon Baronet, Sir Robert Colvil,
James Hamilton of Newcastle, John Hawkins, and James Hamilton of Tullimore Esquire
or any three of them, to Assemble at such Time and Place, and as often as they
shall think fit, and to Consult, Advise, and Determine of all matters which
relate to the Public Peace of this County and Kingdom. And we the said Persons
hereunto Subscribing our Names, Protestants in the County of Down, do hereby
engage for our selves, and as far as in us lies, our Tenants aforesaid, To
Perform and Execute all such Orders, Commands, and Directions, as shall from
time to time be made public, or given by the said Persons, or any three of
them as aforesaid. In Witness whereof we have hereunto Subscribed our Names,
this 17th. of January, 1688.

In Witness of the Acceptance of the above Trust; we have hereunto put our
Hands. M. J. H. etc. A. R. R. C. J. H. J. H. J. H.



By the Council of Five of the Counties of Down and Antrim, pursuant to a Trust
reposed in them by the Nobility and Gentry of the said Counties.
HAving an entire Confidence of the Conduct, Valor and Fidelity of the Right
Honorable Hugh Earl of Mountalexander, We do hereby empower his Lordship to
Command all such Forces as shall from time to time be raised by us, and other
the Inhabitants of the said Counties of Down and Antrim, for preserving the
Public Peace of the said Counties, and other parts of this Kingdom, in these
distracted Times, wherein no Lawful Government is established in the Kingdom of
Ireland. In witness whereof we have hereunto set our Hands this 18th Day of
January, 1688.

Antrim, A. R. R. C. J. H.
Down, J. H. J. H.


The forenamed Capt. Cole had Directions from my Lord Blanii, to prevail with
us to Regiment our selves: So to unite in their Association, and to send One or
Two of our Number to the Council of Five, then at Hilsborough, there to reside,
to receive such Orders from time to time as the said Council should think most
convenient, and to be directed in our Undertakings accordingly. Upon which the
Gentlemen of our County had several Meetings, but could not fix in any solid
Method, nor jump in Opinion; so that Capt. Cole, returned to Lord Blanii with
this following Letter from the Townsmen of Iniskilling.

My Lords,
YOurs we have, for which we return humble and hearty Thanks. The Methods of
your Proceedings we likewise received by Capt. Cole, a Messenger from Lord
Blanii. We have had several Meetings with the Gentlemen of this County, to join
our selves in your Association; and now look upon our selves obliged to deal
plainly with your Lordships: When first this poor Corporation unanimously
joined in a firm Resolution of refusing a Popish Garrison, having a regard to
the Consequence of this Place, and the general preservation of this Country;
we addressed our selves to all the Gentlemen in it, to join with us, and stand
by us, in this so necessary an Undertaking; but found the most Leading Men, not
only to refuse us, but to oppose our Resolution to that degree, as to apprehend
some of us, with intention to commit us to Gaol (if admitted). When this
failed, they used their Interest and Power in hindering the Country to join
toward our preservation and their own, and endeavored to represent us ill to
the Government, as we are credibly informed: Yet notwithstanding these
Discouragements, Gustavus Hamilton, a Gentleman of our Country, took us by the
Hand, and hitherto has used his diligence and uttermost endeavors to support
us: He has now Ten Companies of Foot in Arms, each consisting of Seventy Two
Private Men; a very good Troop of an Hundred Horse, well armed with Carbines
and Pistols: And by an Instrument under our Hands, we have elected him
Governor of this Place, and Colonel of our Forces.

The Gentlemen that at first opposed our Intentions, have had of late several
Meetings, and now show a willingness to join, provided Sir Gerrard Ervin may be
made Colonel of Horse, and our Governor his Lieutenant Colonel, and Captain
Corry Colonel of Foot, so consequently our Governor here, who is the Man of
the world we most doubt, we having several Admonishments from very good Hands,
That our Fears are not groundless.

We hope your Lordships considering our weak Rise, the great Dangers we are
now in, the extraordinary kindness and favor we have found from Gustavus
Hamilton, and the Reasons we have to doubt the Sincerity of others, that your
Lordships will be pleased to continue us in your favor, and believe that this
is the true State of our Condition: we doubt not but evil inclined Spirits may
set us forth otherwise, which we hope your Lordships will give no Credit to,
but allow us the Liberty of subscribing our selves,

Your Lordships faithful humble Servants, The Inhabitants of Iniskilling.


Immediately after this we issued this following Declaration.
WE the Inhabitants of Iniskilling, with our Associates, having regard to the
great and eminent danger hanging over our Heads; Receiving frequent
Intelligence from all parts of this Kingdom of Ireland, That the Irish Papists
are with all Diligence and Celerity arming themselves (as is believed) to our
destruction; and being, with the Assistance of Almighty God, resolved to stand
upon our Guards, we thereunto encouraged by a Declaration set forth by the
Nobility and Gentry of the Counties of Antrim, Down and Ardmagh, satisfying us,
That they have taken up Arms in their own defense, we therefore think fit, and
do hereby admonish all Protestants of this County, and the Country adjacent,
to do the same: And for their future security and preservation, we desire, that
all the Inhabitants of this County, and the adjacent parts, may assemble
themselves here with their Arms and Horses, on Monday next, to join with us in
this so necessary an Undertaking; and there to be inlisted, to the end that Men
may be appointed to Command them. We further desire, That all the
Neighborhood may bring in their Provisions to be secured for them in this
Place, as a sure Refuge for them to fly to in time of Trouble; And those that
do not now lay up Provisions for themselves and families, shall not be admitted
to inhabit here, or relieved from hence hereafter.

Dated at Iniskilling the 27th of January, 1688.

A Copy of this, together with the following Letter, and a Copy of the
Declaration of the Lords of the North-East, was sent to all the Gentlemen in
our Country.

SIR,
WE have here enclosed the Resolutions of all the Gentlemen of the Counties of
Down, Antrim and Ardmagh, together with what we resolve to do: This day we had
by Express, from an eminent Person in this Country, Directions to be upon our
Guard, and ready in Twelve Hours warning: Our earnest Request to you is, That
you may give the same Instructions through your Country, and to appear here on
Monday next, with what force you can raise, both Horse and Foot, to the end
they may be inlisted, and Officers appointed; where we will discover more to
you, and consult what further Measures may be taken for our preservation,
according to the Emergency of Affairs. Your Diligence and Compliance in this is
not doubted, by, SIR,

Dated Jan. 27. 1688. Your loving Friends, GVST AVVS HAMILTON, And the rest of
the Inhabitants of Iniskilling.


According to our defire in the above-Letter, we had a General Rendezvous of
our whole Country that joined with us, where we had a very pretty Appearance:
Gustavus Hamilton, our Governor, continued Colonel, and Mr. Thomas Lloyd was
made Lieutenant Colonel of our whole Forces. After this we enjoyed a
considerable quiet, endeavoring to carry on our Fortifications, the most part
of January and February, notwithstanding the Winter. All this time we had
frequent Correspondence with my Lord of Kingston, who had raised a very
considerable Force, both of Horse and Foot, in the Counties of Roscommon and
Sligo, and had made Sligo his Garrison, which he endeavored with all diligence
to fortify, with a firm Resolution of holding out that Place against all
Opposition; but Ammunition being scarce with him, and receiving in February,
Encouragement from Colonel Lundy, who at that time commanded all, to desert
Sligo, and march his Men to Derry, where he should be accommodated with
Provisions for his Men, and forage for his Horses: He left Sligo, and marched
as far as Ballishanon, toward Derry: He had no sooner left his Garrison, than
the Enemy was in it; but he, brave Gentleman, met Assurance at Ballishanon,
that there was not any forage to be had at Derry for his Horses; therefore
constrained to continue where he was, quartering his Men along the Frontier,
upon the North side of Loughhearne, while April following.

In March we had intelligence, That King James was by the Convention of Estates
in England, Voted to have Abdicated, and had placed King William and Queen Mary
in the Throne, who upon the 11th of March we Proclaimed, with all the Joy and
Solemnity we could.

Immediately, upon this, we received a Letter from Colonel Lundy, with one
enclosed, from the Lords of the North-East. Colonel Lundy's was in these Words:

Gentlemen,
THE Enclosed is accompanied with several Letters, intimating the March of the
Irish Army Northward: To oppose which we are making all the Preparations
possible, although our Scarcity of Arms, Ammunition and Moneys, render us not so
fit as we ought for the Undertaking: But we will do what we can, and leave the
Issue to Divine Providence, which orders all Events. On this occasion it is
likely that you and all our friends may be alarmed, if not formally attacked by
their Forces, were it but to keep you from affording us your help, or from
giving them diversion in their Attempts: wherefore you would do well to be
strictly on your Guards, and if possible, (by Espials) to open their Counsels
and Designs; and what you know, pray communicate to your friends in this
Country, and round about you, who, we hope, will observe the like Care, and
continue a constant Correspondence with all friends in these dangerous Times. I
am resolved to march hence within a day or two, with what force I can raise in
this Country, to Donganan, and desire you to have all Men ready to march that
were designed for it, that as soon as I write for them, they may come
immediately to the place assigned for our Rendezvous. I remain,

For Sir John Hume, and the rest of the Gentlemen of the County of Farmanagh,
These. Gentlemen, Your faithful Servant, ROBERT LVNDY.


The enclosed from the Lord Mountalexander, and other Gentlemen of the
North-East to Colonel Lundy. Dated at Lough-brickland, March the 9th, 1688. was
as follows: SIR,
SInce our last to you, dated the 6th, we have this day received the enclosed;
and Mr. Osburne was here himself, and confirms the Contents, with several
Circumstances, which persuades us of the Truth of it: And therefore we most
earnestly entreat you to march up toward Nury, with all possible diligence,
with what Men you can, with as much Provisions and Necessaries as can be
carried; and let us know by Express of their March, and their Numbers. We
remain,

Sir, You are desired to give notice to all Friends. To the Honorable Col.
Lundy, in Derry. Your Humble Servants, Mountalexander. James Hamilton. William
Cunningham. Richard Johnston. Mar. Midleton.



Mr. Osburn's Letter to Lord Mountalexander.
ON the 6th instant, I was introduced by my Lord Granard, to my Lord Deputy's
Presence, in the Castle of Dublin: I have his Pass to come and go through and
back from Ulster. And tho I have not his Excellencies express Commission, yet I
assure you, I am at least permitted by the Lord Deputy, to acquaint the Chief,
and others of the Ulster- Association, with his discourse to me; which was to
the effect following: Viz. That his Excellency does not delight in the Blood of
the Protestants of the said Province; but however, highly resents their taking
and continuing in Arms; the Affront done by them to Him, and His Majesty's
Government thereby; and by some Indignities done to the late Proclamation of
Clemency, issued and dated

Notwithstanding whereof, is willing to receive the said Province into
Protection; Provided, they immediately deliver to his Army, to His Majesty's
Use, their Arms, and serviceable Horses; and provided they deliver to his
Excellency these Three Persons; Viz. (...) if they stay in the Kingdom, and
they may be had. And for further manifestation of his Design to prevent Blood,
is willing to grant Safe Conduct, even to the said Three Persons, or any of
their Party, from his Excellency, and to and from Lieutenant General Hamilton,
Commander of a part of his Army, if they intend any Peaceable and Reasonable
Treaty: But withal, will not, upon the said Account, or any other, stop the
March of that part of his said Army, no, not for an Hour: And if it shall
appear in such Treaty, that they took up Arms merely for Self-preservation, he
will pardon even the said Three Persons: But is hopeless that any such thing
can be made appear, being many of them have accepted and received Commissions
from the Prince of Orange, and displayed his Colors in the Field, as he is
credibly informed. If these Terms be not immediately agreed to, he will, with a
part of his Army, fight them; which part he intends shall be at Nury on Monday
the 11th of this Instant, which will from thence march to Belfast, and from
thence to Colraine and Londonderry, as his Excellency intends: And that the
Country Irish, not of the Army, Man, Woman and Boy, now all Armed with Half
Pikes and Baggonets, in the Counties of Cavan, Managhan, Tyrone and
Londonderry, etc. will, on the Approach of the said part of the Army, and
Resistance thereunto made, immediately enter into a Massacre of the British of
the said Counties; which Force and Violence of the Rabble, his Excellency says,
he cannot restrain. These are the Heads of what I can offer to you from his
Excellency's own Mouth: But I intend to be at Hilsborough to Night.

Alex. Osburne.




These Two, as I said before, came enclosed in Col. Lundy's, directed to Sir
John Hame, Bar. to be communicated to the rest of the Gentlemen in the County
of Farmanagh. Haste.

This, you may believe, put us upon our more strict Guard; but Col. Lundy, in
place of moving, as he mentions in his Letter, ordered the Garrison then kept
at Donganan, to desert that place, and march down to the Lagau: Upon which all
the British in that Country fled to Strabane, the Lagau, and Derry. He likewise
wrote Letters to us (as he did to the County of Cavan Gentlemen that were then
in Arms), immediately to bring off the Women and Children, and repair to the
Lagau: But we had fixed our Resolution otherwise, being highly sensible, that
holding out that Place of Iniskilling, was the only Let to hinder the Conaught
Forces joining with those of Vlster; and consequently all the Support that
Derry could expect: For had we deserted that Place, all Ireland then was in the
Papists Hands, save Londonderry, which of it self could not possibly subsist,
or be able to hold out against the whole Power of the Irish Nation: Whereas, on
the other Hand, our keeping that Place would, at least, (if we could not assist
to relieve Derry) be a great means of diverting their Force from uniting
against it.

The Gentlemen of the County of Cavan, about the 20th of March, the Weather
being very stormy, and the Ways extreme deep, scarce-passable, all, in a most
distracted and confused manner, deserted their Country, and fled to
Iniskilling; telling us, that they had received positive Orders from Col. Lundy
so to do, leaving the most part of what they had behind them; And the poor
People, in a most starving and deplorable condition, thronged into our Town,
filling all Corners full, so that there was above 200 Families forced to get
into the Church, the Sessions House and School-house being likewise filled.
Their Officers used their uttermost endeavors to persuade our Governor to do
the like; Viz. to desert Iniskilling; and indeed some that we expected better
things from, were likewise of Opinion, that it was our safest way: Which, had
this Advice been followed, it would certainly have ruined the whole Protestant
Interest in Ireland, and given the Irish Army the opportunity of passing into
Scotland or England at their pleasure; but Major John Rider gave so weighty and
forcible Reasons of the Necessity of holding that Place, that he overruled
all, and confirmed several (that were really wavering) to be firm in our former
Resolution: But when we had fully pryed into the Reasons of the County of Cavan
Gentry so deserting their Country, being a good Party of Men, and having
several Strengths that they might have held out, we found, that it was more out
of fear of a Party under the Command of the Lord Galmoy, that had marched into
their Country, than any thing else that had brought them off, although I believe
they had a Letter from Col. Lundy to that purpose. The Lord Galmoy indeed, with
the best part of his Regiment of Horse, some Dragoons, with the Rabble of the
Country, came as far as Belturbet, surprising by the way Dean Dixey's House,
taking his Eldest Son, who was Capt. of a Troop of Horse, and one Edward
Charleton, his Lieutenant, Prisoners.

The County of Cavan Men stayed Three Days at Iniskilling, in which time Lord
Galmoy marched his Men as far as Lisnaskey, a pretty Village within Ten Miles
of us, where there is a tolerable strong Castle belonging to Charles Belfore,
Esquire. The Night ever he came there, he sent a Summons to Iniskilling, commanding
them to deliver up the Place, their Arms and serviceable Horses to him, for the
King's use, who, as he said, was then in Dublin; and to receive Protections:
Which if we refused, he was come with an Army to reduce that Country to the
King's Obedience, which he would do by Force: And if we now denied to receive
these Conditions, we should not be favored with the like hereafter. Upon
Receipt of this Summons, the Governor called all the Officers belonging to the
Town together, who with a unanimous Voice, resolved to defend the Place to the
utmost, and returned an Answer immediately to the Lord Galmoy, That they owned
no Power save Their Majesty's King William and Queen Mary, that they had lately
Proclaimed, and that for their use they would hold out the Town to the last Man.

Then we prepared, as indeed it was ever our intention, to meet Galmoy, and
fight him ever he came near our Town, desiring the County of Cavan men to join
with us in giving him a Brush; then, if they had a mind, they might march on to
Derry; but they absolutely refused it, getting out of Town with all speed
imaginable. We then made, by the Governor's Orders, Proclamation, That all
those who left the County of Cavan, and were now upon their march to Derry,
should take their Wives and Children along with them; else any that were left,
should be turned out of Town. This occasioned the stay of Three or Four
Companies of Foot, most of them having Wives and Children, and not able to get
them off; but all the rest, both Horse and Foot, went off, with some of the
Officers of these Companies that stayed.

Our Governor then drew out what Force we had, with a resolution to meet Lord
Galmoy, and fight him; upon the intelligence of which he retreated to Crum, a
Castle holding out for us, lying upon the East side of Loughearne, Three Miles
below Belturbet, which he besieged, drawing on Two Pieces of Battering Cannon,
as was supposed, with great Noise, and imaginary Difficulty; which coming to
our knowledge there was a Detachment of about 200 Firelocks immediately
ordered by the Governor, for the re-inforcing Crum-Garrison, while the other
Forces could be in readiness to march to their Relief. These were sent, some by
Land, some by Water, marching by Night; but Day appearing ever they got the
length of the Castle, the Enemy used all their endeavor to hinder our Men's
landing, firing small shot very thick upon them, but killed none, save one
Boteman: Our Men likewise, together with those in the Castle, fired thick upon
the Enemy, killing several of them, and by force got into the Castle, who when
they were joined, immediately sallied out, beat the Enemy off from their
Trenches, killing 30 or 40 of them, and took their Two great Guns, which proved
to be Boxes of Tin about Two Foot and an half long, Five Inches Diameter, well
bound about with pitched Canvass, and small Cording. They had fired one of them
with a Wooden Bullet, and burst out her Britch: Our Men got some Arms, two
Suits of Armor, and several other things of value. Lord Galmoy upon this
retreated to Belturbet.

E're Galmoy came the length of Lisnaskey, a cursed fellow, one Kemp, with some
of the Rabble of the Country, his Consorts, burnt that pretty Village, to the
great loss of the Inhabitants, and the worthy Gentleman that owned it, as also
a prejudice to In is killing, it being capable of quartering above a Regiment
of Men, and of being made a Frontier to us, we being much straightened in In is
killing for Lodgings. But e're the Town was burnt, we had brought from thence a
many Tuns of Iron, belonging to Mr. Belfore, and most of the Lead of his House,
which proved very serviceable to us, both to Horse and Foot.

The Lord Galmoy having retreated to Belturbet, sends to Lieut. Col. Creighton,
Commander at Crum (whose House it is), he having one Bryan Mac Guier, a Captain
amongst the Irish, Prisoner; and entreats that Mac Guier might be sent him,
obliging himself upon his Honor to send Capt. Dixey in exchange for Mac Guier.
Lieut. Col. Creighton, upon this, sends Mac Guier to Belturbet; but the honest
Lord in place of making good his obliged Honor, called a Court Marshal, where
he had both Dixey and Charlton tried, and condemned, for levying Men by the
Prince of Orange's Commission, which was found in their Pockets. They, as it is
said, were offered their Lives, if they would turn Papists; (which if they had
done, I presume they would have been served as formerly these sort of people
used to serve Protestants, who at any time, through the fear of Death, would
turn Papists for the preservation of their Lives, which was to hang them when
in a good Mind, as they called it): But they (although young men) refusing so to
do, were both hanged upon Mr. Russel's Sign-post, and after, their Heads cut
off, and kicked about the Streets for Foot-balls.

About this time we sent again a Party of Horse to Derry, for a supply of Arms
and Ammunition, having intelligence that good store was arrived there from
England; but all we could procure from Col. Lundy, he having the sole Command
of that Place was, Threescore old Muskets, most without Stocks or Locks, and
Five small Barrels of Gunpowder, which came safe to Iniskilling. We soon fixed
up the Arms.

Now was the Army under the Command of Lieut. Genesis Hamilton, upon their march
to the North-East, where they met but with small resistance, Sir Arthur Reiden
being the only man, as we were informed, that endeavored to give them
opposition at Drummore, from whence he was constrained (having but a small
Party with him) to retreat to Hilsborough; but coming there, and finding that
the Lord Mountalexander, with those under him, had deserted that place, and
fled to Donoghadee, the ready Port for Scotland, Sir Arthur made the best of
his way to Antrim, and from thence to Colraine, where Lieut. Genesis Hamilton
followed, meeting with no resistance while he was there, opposed by Major
Gustavus Hamilton, who beat him back, and forced him to retreat to Ballimony;
but he after, with his whole Army, past the Bandwater, at a place called
Portglanone, so got into the County of Londonderry; upon which Alarm, Col.
Lundy, and the other Officers at Derry, held a Counsel of War; the Result of
which was as follows.

Londonderry, April the 13th, 1689.
AT a General Counsel of War, resolved unanimously, That on Monday next, by Ten
of the Clock in the Morning, all Officers and Soldiers, Horse, Dragoons, and
Foot, and all other Armed Men whatsoever, of our Forces and Friends inlisted,
and not inlisted, that can, and will fight for their Country and Religion
against Popery, shall appear in the fittest Ground near Clady-Ford, Lifford,
and Long Cassiway, as shall be to their several respective quarters, there to
draw up in Battalions, to be ready to fight the Enemy, to preserve our Lives,
and all that is dear to us, from them; and all Officers and Soldiers of Horse,
Foot, and Dragoons, and others that are Armed, are required to be then there,
in order to the purpose aforesaid, and to bring a Weeks Provision at least with
them for Men, and as much Forage as they can for Horses.

Fra. Hamilton. Kill. Brasier. Jo. Richardson. Will. Hamilton. J. Barry. Will.
Stewart. Nic. Atkinson. Robert Lundy. Blany. James Hamilton. Hugh Montgomery.



This was sent us to Iniskilling, accompanied with a very pressing Letter,
acquainting us of the Enemies passing the Band, urging the necessity of our
leaving that Place, it not being tenable; and the inavoidable danger we were
in, if the Irish Army prevailed at Clady, where, he said, he resolved to fight
them.

The like was sent to my Lord Kingston, who lay 20 miles below us, since his
being brought off from Sligo, with this following Letter.

My Lord,
YOu see the Result of our Counsel of War, and we hope your Lordship will give
us your help and assistance. In haste, I am, Your Lordship's most Humble
Servant,

April. 1689. Robert Lundy.


We at In is killing resolved not to stir; but my Lord Kingston receiving
Lundy's Letter about. Twelve of the Clock upon Sunday at Night, at Ballishanan,
where his Lordship then lay, his men lying quartered abroad in the Country,
marched with a few Horse, as early as he could, next morning toward Clady,
leaving Orders for the rest of his Horse and Foot to follow him: But ever he
got that length, the Enemy had past the Clady-water, put all Lundy's Party to
the rout, and were upon the pursuit; so that my L. could not join them, to make
any opposition; therefore counter-marched. And now Lundy beginning to be
suspected by most men, and believing by his Treachery, that all would be lost,
many Gentlemen; nay, people of all sorts, endeavored to get out of the
Kingdom: my Lord of Kingston left the Kingdom likewise, but sent to Iniskilling
Two Troops of Horse, and Six Companies of Foot, all brave men. This was a
considerable Addition to our Strength. Now we resolved firmly, as we ever had
done before, to stick by that place whilst a man of us were alive. When Lundy
sent his last Letter to us, to entreat us off from Iniskilling, there was one
sent from an unknown Hand, directed to Lieut. Carmick, which was this: Dear Sir,
WE know that there are some Expresses gone from hence last night and this day,
that gives an account of the ill success that attends our Forces; and that it
is to be feared it will be hard for any to escape from Colraine hither; it is
likewise believed by most, that advice is sent to Iniskilling to desert that
place, and retire to Derry, which will tend to the ruin of all the Protestant
Interest in Ulster, and, for ought we know, in the whole Kingdom. There are
many well wishers to your Town and Interest, that believe it were better to
stay there than retire. It is a nice point to advise a friend in: what is to be
done, must be with expedition, either to come away immediately, or resolve to
defend that place. Take speedy counsel, and God of his infinite mercy direct
you, that you may escape the cruelty of your Enemies. This place will be so
thronged, that the Walls will not contain the people. Sir, I am yours.




We were fixed in our resolutions e're this came, and indeed had some doubts of
Lundy's Sincerity: Whether he deserved it, or not, I cannot say, yet his usage
to my L. Kingston was suspicious-like; for after bringing him off from Sligo,
as I said before, promising him Provisions both for Horse and Men, and then
receiving Orders for his staying at Ballishanan, alleging he had no Forage
for his Horse, the Enemy having possessed themselves of Sligo as soon as my
Lord left it, created our first Jealousy: but to palliate his so doing, e're
Lieut. Genesis Hamilton past the Band, he wrote this following Letter to my Lord.

My Lord,
YEsterday I received a Letter from the Earl of Shrewsbury, by his Majesty's
Command, giving encouragement of sudden Aid from England, and expressing his
Majesty's great Concern for us, and the Zeal of both Houses, and full
compliance with his Majesty's gracious intentions, I have formed a Garrison
here, and will provide your Lordship and Capt. Coote accommodation for 80
Horse, if you please to come over hither, where it is likely there will be
occasion very soon, if you come and bring Garrons with you. You would do well
to cause your men to load, and bring hither as much Sheaf-Oats, and as much
other forage as you can, which shall be preserved for your own men. I am in
haste, My Lord,

Londonderry, April 11, 1689. Your Lordships most affectionate humble Servant,
Rob. Lundy.


You may see by this how Lundy dealt by that brave and Honorable Person, first
promising him Forage for all his Horses, and Provisions for his men, while he
persuaded him off from Sligo; then but for 80 Horse; Whereas my Lord had at
least Ten full Troops, Two of Dragoons included. This occasioned my Lord's stay
at Ballishanan; for unless he brought Forage with him, as you may see by the
above-Letter, he could expect none, when all Lundy's Promises terminate in
this, to secure what Forage my Lord should bring with him, for his own Men.

About the middle of April we of Iniskilling having intelligence brought us,
that the Enemy were about settling a Garrison in Trillick, a place nine miles
wide of us, upon the stood to Derry, we did believe they would be but
unneighbourly Guests, therefore thought it convenient to prevent their settling
there, and to that purpose, being well reinforced by my Lord Kingstones men, we
marched in the night under the Command of Lieutenant Colonel Lloyd (under whose
Conduct we never failed accomplishing what we designed, but without him, could
not, or never did any thing) and came to Trillick very early in the morning,
where we discovered a Party marching toward us, our Horse advanced with what
speed they could; and our Lieut. Col. alighting, led the Foot through the Bogs
and Mountains, the nearest way he could; with a resolution to have attacked the
Enemy, but they discovering us retreated, leaving all their Cattle and Baggage
behind them: The Lieutenant Colonel perceiving this, immediately detached an
hundred Firelocks, commanding Lieutenant Mac Carmick to lead them on with all
speed, to try if possible he could force the Enemy to a stand, while the Body
could get up; the Country being so bogy that there was no marching for Horse,
but by the Roads; but after near six hours hard pursuit, we were constrained to
make an halt, the Enemy dispersing, and every man shifting the best way he
could for himself, we preyed all the Country, and so returned with a
considerable Booty, which was divided amongst the private men.

We thought it now time, the more to prevent both the insolences of the
private Soldiers, and to take away all pretentions in the future, that any man
might have for declining our interest, to bind ourselves by Oath, the one to
the other, and to this purpose, at a general Randevous, we were all sworn as
follows, The Oath administered to the Governor.
I Gustavus Hamilton do swear by God, and the Holy Contents of this Book, That
I shall Truly, Sincerely, and Faithfully execute and discharge the Office and
Place of Governor of Iniskilling, according to my utmost Power and Ability,
and that I shall with my Life and Fortune defend the Protestant Religion and
Interest, together with the Inhabitants of this Town, and all others under my
Command, and that I shall not act nor do any thing contrary to the Consent and
General Advice of the Officers under my Command, but shall from time to time
and at all times stand by and support the said Interest; neither dissert it,
nor this Place without being by Force beaten from thence. So help me God.


The Oath of the Officers.
I A. B. do hereby testify and declare, and upon the Holy Evangelists swear,
That I will own and acknowledge Gustavus Hamilton, Esquire Chief Governor of this
Town of Iniskilling; and shall give due obedience to him in all his lawful
Commands; and shall to the uttermost of my Power and Ability protect and defend
him and this Place, with the Country adjacent, together with the Protestant
Religion and Interest with my Life and Fortune, against all that shall
endeavor to subvert the same; and that I shall be Just and Faithful, in giving
my Sincere Opinion and Advice, in all Counsels whereunto I am called, for the
General Good and Preservation of the Interest aforesaid. So help me God.


The Oath of the Private Soldiers.
I D. H. do hereby Testify and Declare, and upon the Holy Evangelists Swear,
That I will Own and Acknowledge Gustavus Hamilton, Esquire Chief Governor of this
Town of Inniskilling; and shall give due Obedience to him and my Superior
Officers in all his and their Commands and shall to the uttermost of my Power
and Ability, defend him, them, and this Place, with the Country adjacent,
together with the Protestant Religion and Interest, with my Life and Fortune,
against All that shall endeavor to subvert the same. So help me God, and the
Holy Contents of this Book.




These Oaths were Administered to every Individual person according to their
respective posts; and upon the 28th, of April, we hearing that there was a
Garrison of the Irish put into the Castle of Ougher, a very considerable
strength, with a good Baunwale and Flankers, lying upon the Road to Charlemont,
eighteen miles from us; we again were drawn out under the Conduct of Lieutenant
Colonel Loyde, and in one night marched to Ougher, coming in early upon Sunday
morning, yet notwithstanding our private and speedy march, the Enemy had notice
of our approach, and disserted their Garrison taking away with them what they
could carry; we (seizing what Cattle they had, not being able to overtake them)
Preyed their Country, Burnt their Castle, Levelled their Fortifications, and so
left Ougher; Taking our way through the Mountains, to a place called Shannake,
another strong House they kept Garrison in, near to Clownish, belonging to
Daniel Eccles, Esquire the Gentleman that first gave us notice of the two Companies
approach to Iniskilling, whose House we had a great desire to save, and place a
Garrison there of our own men; upon Monday at night we came within a mile and a
half of it (being toyled with our long march, and the boginess of the
Mountains) we rested three or four hours, with a resolution of falling in upon
the Enemies Garrison by break of day, but they having notice of our approach,
by some of the Country Irish flying before us; e're we could possibly fall in
with them, fled and set the House on Fire, burning to the ground both it and
all the Office houses belonging to it; we pursued them hard into the County of
Managhan, but could not over take them; we Preyed all the Country about,
fetching off both from the County of Managhan and part of the County of Canau,
a great deal of black Cattle, many Horses, which we loaded with the growth of
the Country, as Meal, Malt, Wheat, Oats, Butter, Bedcloaths, and the like, a
considerable number of Sheep, and so returned to Iniskilling the second day of
May; Black Cattle was not at all deer with us, nor any other sort of Provision
during the whole time of our Troubles; but this made them much cheaper than
formerly: For now we could have bought a good milk Cow for sixteen or eighteen
Pence, and a dry one for six pence.

We had rested but one day, when there came an Express from Captain Falliat
Commander of Ballishanan, a Town with a strong Castle twenty miles below us,
standing likewise upon the side of Loughcarne near the Sea; that there was a
considerable Party of Horse and Foot from Conaught, sat down before it; the
Enemy had Summoned them to deliver the Town and Castle, which Summons he sent
to us, desiring speedy relief; Lieutenant Col. Lloyd marched next morning with
a considerable Party both of Horse and Foot to raise the Seige: The Enemy
hearing of our approach drew off the greatest part of their Strength, both
Horse and Foot to a place called Bellick, three miles nearer us, and there
posted themselves very advantagioufly, there being but one narrow Pass by which
they could be attacked, a Bog running from the side of Loughearne all the way
to Bandruse, seven miles to the left hand, not known to be passable in any
place save where the Road led through it, close to the Lough side; this the
Enemy had strongly barrocaded, and before their Works had broke down a Bridge,
and so raised the way that it could not be passed, Col. Lloyd espying this,
caused Faggots to be cut immediately for making the Bog passable, and so drew
up against the Enemy, they making great Huzza's, and inviting us to come on and
fight them; our Stomachs were as good as theirs, if not better for that Trade,
and as we were advancing to force our way, God Almighty sent a man, from whence
I know not, that offered to lead us safe through the Bog, toward our left
Hand, and that our Horse should not need to alight, nor to use their Faggots;
he was as good as his word: when we had past the Bog our advance Guard, led by
Capt. Atchison, endeavored to get, if possible, the Right Flank of the Enemy,
so to prevent their escaping to the Mountains; but they espying it, and our
Body coming on, began to move orderly toward their Right, as if they designed
to prevent their being flanked, we observing their motion marched extreme hard,
but e're we could come within shot the Enemies Foot broke, and run clear away
to the Mountains: The Horse which were upon the Left of the Foot, betwixt them
and the Lough, stood while our Horse were ready to charge them, then wheeled to
the left, and so ran for it without firing a shot; our Horse persued seven
miles, and had not the Night come on I presume few of them had escaped: There
was none that fought save one Fitzgerald, who being overtaken upon his flight,
by one Lieutenant Moloye of our Party, fired his three shot briskly upon him,
and had certainly killed him had he wanted his Armor; but when his shot was
spent they fought it with their Swords, while some of our men came up and took
Fitzgerald Prisoner; he was very much wounded, but because of his courage was
carefully looked after, and brought to Iniskilling, and recovered: There were
killed in the persute and hundred and ninety Horse. Our foot marched unto
Ballishanon, where they took about sixty Prisoners in the Fish Island and about
it, knocking some others on the head that were left to continue the Siege, they
not knowing that their Army was broke, while our men came upon them; we had the
Plunder of their Camp, which was but beggarly; got several good serviceable
Horses, two small Canon, some good Arms, and a small quantity of Ammunition; and
having fully done what we went about, returned to Iniskilling; this was the
first Engagement (if it may be so called) that we had with the Enemy, where we
lost not one man, nor any wounded save Cornet King, that had a shot in the Face
receiving a Carabine from one of the Irish Horse after giving him quarters, but
the Horseman was immediately killed by one James King, a friend of the
Cornets, who soon recovered of his Wound.

During the time of our Ougher and Clownish Expedition, the Governor began a
Fort upon a Hill at the East end of our Town, a very regular Fortification,
laid out by Major Heart and Major Rider, both good Mathematicians; which was
carried on very effectually by the diligence of Major Rider, who spared no
Pains while he finished his Work June following, with a Line of Communication
from it to the East-Bridg, it commands the whole Town, and clears the Roads
leading to it on that end.

Soon after our Return from Ballishannon, we had Intelligence that the Irish
were endeavoring to get to a head in the County of Canau, keeping a Garrison at
Redhill, a strong and large House belonging to Francis White, Esquire and another
at a place called Ballinacarig, to remove which, we again marched under the
Command of Lieutenant Colonel Lloyde, where upon the Road Crum Garrison joined
us, we were twenty two pair of Colors, and a strong Party of Horse: when we
had marched up to Wattle-bridg near the Borders of the County of Canau, we
espied the Enemy on the other side, and did expect they would have disputed
that Pass, the Bridge being down, and the Water deep; but upon our Approach,
seeing us resolved to force our way, they withdrew to the next Hill, so we past
the Ford without Opposition, and marched up toward them again; but they still
retreated from place to place, while they came to Redhill House, where they
left part of their Number to defend it, the rest going off to Ballinacarig, we
immediately drew up against Redhill House, although late in the Evening, and upon
Summons, they surrendered upon mercy; there was not any thing taken from the
Prisoners save their Arms; neither did we prejudice the House out of tenderness
to the Gentleman that owned it, he himself being in England, and his Brother
commanding a Company of Foot in our Party at that time.

Next Morning early we marched to Ballinacarig Castle a very strong House well
valted, that had held out a long time in the former War of Ireland, what
Prisoners were took at Red hill, we had along with us, we drew up against it
about four a Clock in the Aftenoon, and upon Summons, the Garrison surrendered,
upon Condition of setting them, with what Prisoners were taken at Red-hill,
together with the Women and Children at Liberty, with only their wearing
Clothes along with them, which was performed and they Convoyed safe off;
leaving the Castle, their Arms and Ammunition, with abundance of Provisions,
Household goods, and much Rich plunder; when we had removed all was in it, we
undermined the House, set it on fire, and levelled it with the ground; it lying
a great way from Iniskilling in the Enemies Country; therefore not convenient
for us to keep a Garrison at such distance.

In this Expedition we scoured the Country near as far as Kells and Finnah,
where we drove off betwixt five and six Thousand black Cattle, a many Sheep,
and five Hundred and odd Horses, most of which we loaded with Meal, Wheat and
Malt, so returned to Iniskilling.

Soon after we had intelligence, that our approach so near Dublin (for we were
within Twenty seven miles of it) had put that place in a great consternation,
imagining we would have marched that length, our Number consisting in their
opinion of Fourteen or Fifteen Thousand men, and indeed if the Protestants
there, had received any assurance of our coming, so to have been in a readiness
to have joined us; I do not know but we might have gone a great length in
taking that City, there being but few of the Irish there at that time; yet our
Number being small, and wanting Arms and Ammunition, we thought it more
advisable, to return then run so desperate a Riske.

Colonel Sarsfield at this time lay encamped at a place called Manor Hamilton,
in a stone Deer Park of Sir William Gors, with some six or seven Thousand men;
upon the West side of us, at sixteen or seventeen miles distance; he sent a
Drum with Proposals of Exchange of Prisoners, which our Governor embraced,
expecting to have had Sir Thomas Suthwell, and those taken with him enlarged;
to that purpose he sends a List of the Prisoners taken at Ballishanan,
intimating his desire to Sarsfield, but he excused himself, alleging that Sir
Thomas was to be taken into England, to be exchanged for some there; and having
no Prisoners with him of ours, he seises all the protected Protestants, that
lived near Slygo, claping them into Goal, urging them to Petition our Governor
for their enlargement; which the Governor at first refused to do; they not
being taken as Prisoners of War, but forced out of their own private dwellings,
to be made servisable in redeeming these that we had taken in actual Arms; but
some of their Wives having liberty to come to us, but in a sad enough
Condition, entreating every day for the Redemption of their Husbands out of
misery; our Governor at last consented; and the exchange agreed upon: Captain
Francis Gore, with a party of Firelockes, Gonvoyed the Irish Prisoners Eight
miles, where he met a party of Sarsfields men, with the poor Protestants; whom
he brought back with him, and one Captain Jackson being amongst them; upon his
coming to Iniskilling, had liberty to inlist the others that were brought off
with him, of whom he made up a good Company, who were Armed immediately.

About the beginning of June, there were two Troops of Horse, viz; Captain
Francis Gores, and Captain Arnold Casbies sent to Garrison at Trillick, a House
nine miles off us, upon the Road to Omagh, where they had intelligence of the
Enemies Dragoon horses belonging to the Garrison of Omagh, were slightly
Guarded, whereupon they sent for Captain Henry Smith, and Captain Robert Corry,
who Quartred at Newport Town, within four miles of them, these two Captains
with their Companies, joined the two Troops, marched in the night to Omagh,
where they surprised, and brought off the Horses belonging to two Troops of
Dragoones, and some black Cattle without opposition, the Enemy not dareing to
obstruct them, although in view.

Soon after this, we had an Account of the miserable condition the poor
Inhabitants of the City of Londou Derry were in, and that for want of
Provisions, they would be forced to deliver up that place, a Dogs head and
Pluck at that time (as we were assured) yiedling two Shillings and six pence,
all the Horses they had being already eaten, with old Hides, Tallow, Starch,
and what else of that nature, they could purchase; and knowing very well, that
our safety and standing depended much upon that place, for if Derry had been
taken by the Irish; we could not possibly hold out against the whole power of
the Irish Nation having so small a quantity of Ammunition, so few Arms; no
Cannon; and a Town weakly fortified; we therefore resolved to see if possible
we could any way relieve Derry, we did not believe our selves able to raise the
Seige; nay there were we resolved to perish in the attempt; all we proposed to
our selves, was to march with what Provisions we could down to the East side of
Derry River, opposite to the City, and there beat up the Enemies quarter, viz.
Those of them that lay on that side; for their Army lay on the West side of the
River, which is the side the City is on; so to Convoy Provisions into Town, and
to leave them some Horse, the better to assist their Sallies; but indeed we
resolved, when come to that length, that if they thought it advisable, all to
pass the River and give the Enemy a Brush.

To which purpose what force we could make, were drawn out, and the Governor
would himself march in the head of them, although contrary to the advice and
desire of all the Party; we doubted not the security of the Town, leaving
Lieutenant Col. Lloyde there, but rather our own success under the Governors
conduct; having never done any thing to our Advantage, where Lieutenant Col.
Lloyde was wanting; and where the Lieutenant Col. Commanded, we never failed in
accomplishing what we designed; we marched that night to Trillicke nine miles;
next day in the afternoon, toward Omagh upon our march, there were some free
Booters, that scoured on before knocked on the head, amongst them one Mr.
Rowland Betty a very honest Gentleman, who was shot dead off his Horse; as we
marched the Country came into us, one all hands both Horse and Foot, what
British were in it, so that by the time we came to Omagh, we were double the
number we were when leaving Iniskilling; indeed we had but a small quantity of
Powder, yet enough to have carried us to Derry, where we might have been
plentifully supplied; we lay that night within a mile of Omagh: The Enemy upon
our approach, burnt all the Houses, upon or near the Road; next morning we
marched into the Town, there being no Garrison save what lay in a House of
Captain Marvins, at the end of the Town, the House was pretty strong, with a
Banewall clear round it; we drew up our Foot in view, and within shot of the
Enemies Fortification; our advance Guard of Foot, led by Captain Atchison, and
Captain Galbreth, Possessed themselves of several Gardings, Ditches, and Walls
of Houses that the Enemy had burnt, which lay near Captain Marvins House, so
fired at the Walls; the Enemy fireing out very thick, both at them and the body
of Foot that stood in view of them; there was a Trumpet sent down, with a
Summons to Surrender the House; they sent back an Answer in Wrighting, that
they knew no authority we had either to bear Arms, or Summon them; therefore
they would defend that place, unless they see an order from King James to the
contrary, and withal told the Trumpet to come no more with such Messages, else
they would welcome him with their Firelockes.

This while some of our Horse scouting abroad, brought in five Prisoners, taken
upon the Road leading from Donganan to Omagh, who when examined told us that
they belonged to the Lord Clankarty, who lay at Donganan the night before, upon
his march with two Regiments of Foot, one of Horse, and one of Dragoons, to
reinforce the Camp before Derry, and that he would be at Omagh by three of the
Clock in the afternoon.

Its true we very well knew e're our coming abroad that Colonel Sarsfield lay
in Sir William Gores Deer Park; and did not know but he might attack
Iniskilling in our absence, but when the intelligence was given us, of the Lord
Clankarties approach, which was very true, there was a Counsel of War called,
to se what was fit to be done; and finding that we had not one ounce of
Provision for our selves, much less to relieve our Friends in Derry, there not
being one Hoof driven along with us, by whose mistake I wont say; and that
Clankarty coming in our Rear, we might precipitate our selves into the same
Straights that Derry lay under, unless we could be assured of beating the whole
Army that lay before it, and that immediately too, which we could not imagine
our selves capable of performing, therefore upon these grounds it was thought
more advisable, to return to Iniskilling; but had we brought Provisions along
with us to have put into Derry, and sustained our selves while our return, all
the whole party were extremely willing to have gone the length of Derry with
the Provisions, had there been any; and when Derry had been supplied, to have
retreated the Mountain way, and shunned engaging King James's Army; but in
place of that as I told you before we had not a Morsel for our selves, when we
had marched but Eighteen miles, yet we had two and twenty more, e're we could
come at Derry the nearest way; so we retreated meanly to Iniskilling, without
doing any thing, we might have burnt Omagh, but out of the value we had for
Captain Marvin, the worthy Gentleman that owed it; although it was a relief to
the Enemy we forbore; but they burnt it to the ground, at their going off from
the Seige of Derry, so it had been the same thing to Captain Marvin.

Our next Expedition was under our former conducter Col Lloyde, which proved
more Successful, and Advantageous to us, as all his undertakings did, for the
sixteenth of June, we received intelligence from Lieutenant Colonel Creighton
out of Crum Castle; and Captain William Wishart (who at his own Charge, had
Raised and Armed a brave Troop of Horse, and maintained them upon the Frontiers
of our Country, during all our Troubles) that there was a powerful party of the
Enemy, come the length of Belturbet, under whose Command they knew not, but did
believe they would soon be with us; upon which intelligence, Lieutenant Colonel
Lloyde, with what strength we could make, both Horse and Foot marched that very
night, with a resolution of being in with the Enemy are they could have notice
of our approach, but coming to Lisnaskey Ten miles from Iniskilling, that night
and near half way to Belturbet, next morning was so great a Rain, continuing
all day, that we could not possibly march, and keep our Arms dry; our Clothes
being but ordinary: The Eighteen, we marched very early up to Newtown Buttler,
where we drew up, to allow the Men to eat something; upon our halt,
intelligence was brought us by one Vitch who had come from Belturbet, that the
party there was Commanded by one Brigadeer Sutherland, who he said had
intelligence sent him of our march, very early the day before, and that we were
Fourteen or Fifteen Thousand men; so that he was marched off with all speed
toward Managhan, with most of his Men, and two piece of Canon, leaving a small
party at Belturbet, for defense of that place; Lieutenant Colonel Lloyde upon
this notice, called the Officers immediately together, where it was proposed,
whether we should strive to engage Sutherland, or march directly to Belturbet;
but a Troop of Horse returning, that the Colonel had sent upon the gallop to
discover the Enemy, and giving assurance that by that time, they would be near
Managhan, sixteen miles from us, and that they marched very hard and in great
fear, having left some of their Buncarts and Carriages upon the Road, it was
resolved to march directly to Belturbet.

This Resolve was immediately put in practice, Captain Vaghan and Capt.
Galbreth marched with their Dragoons as an advance Guard, the Horse followed;
then Lieut. Mac Carmick with his Company, consisting of an hundred Men, as the
Advance Guard of Foot, Major Wood's followed with eight pair of Colors, Capt.
Francis Gore with fourteen pair, and in the Rear two Troops of Horse. The
Dragoons when they came within something more than a mile of Belturbet, were
beat back by the Enemies Dragoons who had lined the Hedges; but our Horse
coming up, and our Dragoons alighting taking the inside of the Hedges, and our
Horse the Lane, they soon drove them from thence, pursuing them all the way,
killing some of them e're they got to Town: Then these Dragoons that were
routed, together with what of their Men were in Town, got all into the Church
and Churchyard, our Horse surrounding them at a distance to keep them in while
the Foot would march up, who marched extreme hard, having Express upon Express
to hasten them, fearing least the Enemy should sally, and so escape into the
Woods; but the Foot coming up, the Enemy fired very hot from the Churchyard;
some of our men getting into the Town fired out of the Houses, and particularly
from the Archbishop of Dublin's House, which was high overlooking the
Churchyard, from whence they wounded several of the Enemy. The Lieutenant
Colonel as soon as we were drawn up and ready to storm, sent a Trumpet with a
Summons to surrender, and upon condition that their Lives should be saved, the
Officers not stripped, and allowed to keep Ten Pounds of money a man (but they
had not Ten Pounds amongst them all) they surrendered; Mr. Mac Carmick was then
commanded to enter the Fort, which he did, disarming all the Officers, the
private Soldiers grounding their Arms and marching clear of them, their Arms
were secured, themselves taken to the Bishop's House, in number about three
hundred, where they were stripped and kept Prisoners that Night; there was not a
Bullet found about any of them, nor in their Arms, but what was chawed. The
Officers, being sixteen in number, one Lieutenant Colonel Scot, alias Albanagh,
commanding in chief, were put into another House under a Guard.

We got in this Expedition near seven hundred new Arms, (brought to arm a
Regiment to be new raised) besides what the Soldiers had that were taken
Prisoners, two large Barrels of Gunpowder, fifty three Horses with their
Accoutrements, about twenty Tuns of Provision, viz. Bread, Flower, Wheat, Malt,
and the like, which together with the Officers taken Prisoners, were sent by
Water to Iniskilling, the private men by Land there were near two hundred
turned off and allowed to escape together with the Women and Children, the rest
were taken to Iniskilling, where for their meat they were made to work at the
Fort we were then a building.

The Arms and Powder here got did us a singular kindness, both arming our men
that wanted before, and adding to our number several that did no Duty for want
of Arms, besides an additional store of Powder, which we had better Supplies of
very suddenly after, and unexpectedly, on this manner.

About the beginning of July we received a Letter from one Mr. Brown, Chaplain
of the Bonadventure, a Frigot sent about from Lough Sully near Derry to
Killibeggs, commanded by Captain Hobson, advising us that Major General Kirk
was there with some Forces sent from England to supply that Garrison with
Provisions, and to raise that Siege if possible, therefore desired to know what
condition we were in, or if we wanted any thing that he was capable of
supplying us with, and desired that some of the Townsmen might be sent to give
them assurance of our state; for it was then confidently reported by the Irish
Army, as it had been severally times before, that Iniskilling was taken and
all put to the Sword that was in it.

I presume any man will believe this was the most acceptable News that ever we
had in our Lives, hearing at last that England had us in their minds; for
several times before in the night we assembled, making of Bonfires, and firing
of Vollies, (which was more than we could well spair of Ammunition) and
drinking King William and Queen Mary's Health; this did amuse the Enemy and
persuaded them several times to believe the English were landed to our
assistance.

Upon the Receipt of Mr. Brown's Letter Lieutenant Colonel Lloyde was sent to
give Captain Hobson a particular account what state and condition we were in,
and with him some Troops and Companies of Foot to guard what Ammunition or Arms
we should receive. When our Officers went on board they were very kindly
received and treated by Captain Hobson; and after giving him the state of our
Affairs he sent us thirty barrels of Gunpowder, and some few Firelocks, and
assured Colonel Lloyde that we should be very soon relieved from England.

A while before this the Duke of Berwick, who kept a flying Army most of the
time Derry was besieged, which they were constrained to do fearing always
that Iniskilling-men would fall in upon their Camp, marched over Barnsmore and
came upon Dumigall early in the morning, the Garrison held out for us, and e're
our men could be in a readiness, who were commanded by Captain Edward Johnston
and Capt. Hugh Cudwell, a Son of Sir James Cudwell's, the Enemy was in the
Town; our men were forced to betake themselves to the Castle, from whence they
fired so briskly upon the Enemy, killing several of them, that they immediately
retreated, burning the Town e're they went off, yet our men kept that Garrison
during the whole Troubles.

About the fourth of June the Duke of Berwick with his flying Army, having
joined to him Brigadeer Sutherland with what forces he took off from Belturbet,
all consisting of about six Regiments of Foot, four Regiments of Dragoons, and
two of Horse came toward Iniskilling, we had intelligence of his approach, and
marched out to meet him; but e're we could come up, he retreated to Trillicke,
burning Mr. Andrew Hamilton's House upon his Retreat. Mr. Hamilton perhaps did
imagine that this hardship was shown him for being instrumental in bringing
off the Dragoon-Horses from Omagh beforementioned: I could give the Reasons of
his being so dealt by, and I do verily believe had they got him they would have
put him to death; but he is now dead, and I carry a regard to his Reputation,
therefore desire to be excused if I say no more.

During the Dukes incamping at Trillicke, we kept strong Guards upon the Road,
sometimes skirmishing with parties of his Men. But upon the thirteenth of July,
he with his whole Party came on toward Iniskilling; before day in the morning
our Scouts bringing certain intelligence of his approach, all got to Arms, the
Governor getting on Horseback.

Here I cannot but observe, that Mr. Andrew Hamilton in his Relation of this
Passage, is either forgetful, or has been misinformed, where he says that the
Governor sent two Companies to a Pass near the Mill of Iniskilling, by which
the Dukes Army must pass before they could come near the Town, and might have
been easily defended by a few men; when in the mean time the Governor was
getting the rest of his men together to second them, but the two Companies
coming to the Mill and seeing no Enemy near, after some stay they advanced near
a mile further than their Post, and coming to a hallow betwixt two Hills, were
on a sudden surprised with the whole Body of the Enemies Horse and Dragoons
coming upon them.

These are Mr. Hamilton's words, I am sorry he should have been so misinformed,
for when this Engagement was, (therefore not an Eye-witnesh, nor Actor in it)
he was in the Lough of Derry, as will appear hereafter. But now to the Truth of
the Action, which was thus:

As I said before, We having the Assurance of the Enemies Approach, by our
Scouts, we betook our selves to Arms; the Governor being on Horseback, came
to L. Mat-Carmick, he having the Company under his Command drawn up in the
Street earlier than others were got to Arms, and desired the Lieutenant that he
would immediately march his Company and make good Corngrad-House; this House
stands upon a Hill within a quarter of a Mile of the Town, near to the Rode the
Enemy were to march, being but a thatched House, and no way tonable, although
environed with a Bane Wall, save the side the House stood on; but no Port-holes
for the Men to fire out at, and too high by much to fire over, so that we could
not possibly annoy the Enemy out of it; and they with the firing one Pistol
might set the House on fire, the whole Court being full of Thatch and Straw,
the Men could not escape being burnt alive: He therefore retreated to the Mill
of Inniskillin, (without Command) being a very strait Pass, and under the
Cannon-shot from the Fort, there posted himself and his Men. The Governor a
while after, came up with two Troops of Horse, and 30 Foot of Capt. Hudson's
Company; the Horse commanded by Capt. Hugh Montgomery, and Capt. Francis King;
the 30 Foot by Lieut. Robert Starlin, and Ensign Williams: The Governor called
L. MacCarmick, and taking him by the Hand, desired that he would join Lieut.
Starlin, and lead on the Foot as far as the Hedge led upon the left Hand of the
Highway toward the Enemy, telling him, that these two Troops were going to
Charge. The Lieutenant replied, that the Foot were too small a Party, being in
all but 102 Men, whereof the third part were Pikes, which signified nothing to
the Lining of the Hedge, and that he had no great Confidence in the Horse, but
did believe they would desert him if engaged. The Governor swore he would
warrant the Horse not fly one foot, and that he would send a powerful Party of
Foot should be there as soon as they. The Lieutenant answered, that he would go
every step as far as commanded, if he died; but desired the Governor to mind
his Promise in sending a speedy Supply of Foot, so marched on the Men: He
meeting one Lieut. Campbel on Horseback, who told him, the Enemy were at Hand:
He desired him to post after the Governor, and mind him to send more Foot. And
again, meeting Capt. Webster on Horseback, who had been viewing the Enemy, he
prevailed with him to ride hard after the Governor, and mind him of his
Promise in sending more Men. When Lieut. Campbel got up to the Governor, he
was got into the Town, forgetting or neglecting to send away Reinforcement,
although all the way as he went was full of armed Men, and more in the Fort than
it could well contain; Lieut. Campbel telling him, that Mac-Carmick was close
upon the Enemy, and must immediately Engage: His Answer was, Let them Engage,
he would send Boats to bring them off; and when Capt. Webster came up to him,
he was got into the Castle of Inniskillin; he putting him in mind of his
Promise of sending speedy Supplies, the Governor bid Webster to go and command
one Capt. Henry Smith, who was marching his Company to Porsorah-Castle, upon
the other side of the Lough, above two miles from us, to march back again to
our Relief; I say, our Relief, because I was in the Action, and had reason to
know every Circumstance of it: And whereas Mr. Hamilton says, the Foot were
surprised in a Bottom betwixt two Hills, with the whole Body of the Enemies
Horse and Dragoons, it is a great mistake, for we were upon a Hill in full view
of the Enemy, and saw every step they made toward us; so that there was no
surprise, neither did their whole Body move, only 600 Dragoons on Foot, and two
Troops of Horse; when they came up, we fired upon them so hotly, killing
several of them, that the Dragoons turned their Backs and fled, leaving their
Colonel, viz. Lutterell, behind them: Then our Horse, without firing one Shot,
as if they had designed to invite the Enemy to a second Charge upon the Foot,
ran clear away to give them the better opportunity: Which Lutterell seeing,
called out aloud, They run, they run; their Horse are fled. The Dragoons facing
about, and seeing our Horse fled, came on again, where we had a sharp
Engagement; but two Troops of their Horse charging up, and surrounding us, we
were cut to pieces. We lost in this Action Ensign Williams, with above fifty
private Men; Capt. Fulton, Lieut. Mac-Carmick, (who had his eldest Son killed
by his side) Ensign Picking, two Sergeants, and 20 private Men taken Prisoners,
and carried along with the Enemy.

Mr. Hamilton says, that by the time we were broke, the Governor was on his
way to our Relief, which caused the Duke's sudden Retreat; whereas there was
no such thing, for he never came one step toward it, neither sent one Man; it
was so far from that, he went, as I said before, strait to Inniskillin-Castle;
and one Lieut. Fort, a Lieutenant of Horse, meeting him, told him there was a
Party of Horse willing to go on to second us, if he would appoint who should
Command them. The Governor's Answer was very peevish; Don't you see the Enemy
before you? Cannot you go and fight? Lieut. Fort replied, If that be your
Answer, I Will fight none to day. Indeed Capt. Atkinson, and Capt. Robert Corry,
with their Companies, when they heard us engaged, and see our Horse fly, came
from the Fort, without Command, to our Relief; but were too late, for the
Action was over, and the Enemy retreated before they could come up.

Mr. Hamilton likewise says, That the two Companies going beyond their Post,
was the cause of burning Capt. Corry's House, and several Houses about the
Town; whereas all the Houses that were burnt near the Town, were burnt in our
view e're the Engagement, viz. Mr. Paul Danes the then Provost of our Town, and
Mr. Lautournal's, and Capt. Corry's House was not burnt while three a Clock in
the Afternoon, by which time the Enemy were in their Camp nine Miles off. I
admire that Mr. Hamilton speaks nothing of the two Troops that were to second
the Foot going beyond their Posts; he says, they wheeled off without fighting.
Now if they stood at this Pass at the Millen he speaks of, there was no need of
their wheeling from thence, for the Millen was under the Cannon-shot from the
Fort, and the Enemy never came within Cannon-shot of the Millen, nor so much as
once in sight of it; if they went on with the Foot, sure if the Foot disobeyed
Command, they did the like, which he mentions not; but perhaps their running
away expiated their Crime.

Now by what has been said, You may see it was not any fault in these that were
commanded to line the Hedge, (unless fighting bravely against an Enemy be a
Fault) for they went not one Step further than they were commanded; and would
have routed the Enemy, had the Horse but stood by and looked at them; but in
place of that, or doing as Men ought to do, they basely ran away; which
encouraged the Enemy to come on again, after they were once put to the Retreat.

Mr. Hamilton likewise, says, That we were the only Prisoners that were taken,
and received Quarter by any of the Irish Army, and not murdered after; which he
attribures wholly to the Governor's writing a threatening Letter to the Duke,
that he would be revenged on the Prisoners then in his hands, if they offered
us any Violence. I know nothing of the Governor's writing any such Letter; but
this I am sure of (although I do not speak this in favor of the Irish, for I
hate them, and have as much Reason for it as any Man) that when I was taken
Prisoner by one Burke a Captain of Horse, the same that had formerly taken Sir
Thomas Suthwell and his Party Prisoners, he immediately brought me to the Duke
of Berwick; where I told the Duke, that it was his fortune to get the better of
our small Party that Morning, and that his Officers had been pleased to give
some of us Quarters, which I hoped he would confirm: he answered, We should
have very good Quarters, and called out twice or thrice as loud as could, that
no Man upon pain of Death, should touch a Prisoner, or take any thing that he
had from him, and gave particular Orders to Capt. Burke, to command the Guard
to have a particular Care of us: and I am sure this was before the Governor
could write, or know that we were Prisoners. And while we were kept Prisoners,
which was near three Weeks, (and had been there still for ought I know for all
our Governor, had not Col. Woolsely released us) we were kindly dealt by, and
well provided for; here is the truth of the whole Action: But we now found the
want of Lieut. Col. Lloyd, our brave and vigilant Conducter, for had he been
with us, who was now at Ballishannon, we had undoubtedly routed the Duke and
his Army to Derry Camp; for Col. Lloyd was a good Sort of Man, he was vigilant,
careful, active, of a great Soul, very observing, slipped no Opportunity that
offered to gain his End; and besides, a Man of unwearied Industry, and good
Intelligence, and for his Personal Valor; few went beyond him.

Mr. Hamilton says, That the Duke next day after this Engagement, went to the
Camp near Derry; whereas the Duke stirred not from Frillick next day; indeed
upon Monday following, he marched as far as Omagh, upon Tuesday to Castlesin,
upon Wednesday to a Deer-Park called Cavan, which is but three Miles from
Castlesin, where he left his Horse and Foot; but he himself with a Party of
Dragoons went upon Friday near to Lutterkeny, on Saturday to Rathmollan, where
he had an Engagement with some of Maj. Genesis Kirk's Men, and was worsted; upon
Sunday he returned to the Park at Cavan, and there continued while the Siege of
Derry rose; so that he never went near that Camp after leaving Inniskillin.
This I certainly know, being Prisoner with him, and marched along upon foot to
all these Places.

Soon after this Sir Gerrard Ervin joined with us, and headed our Horse in an
Expedition against Col. Sarsfield, who had removed from Sir William Gore's
Deer-Park, and lay encamped at a place called Bendruse, betwixt Ballishannon
and Sligo upon the Seaside, where he had posted himself so advantageously, and
so well flanked with Cannon, that our Men could not move him; nor he durst not
draw out to engage us, although many more in Number than we were; so we marched
back to Inniskillin.

We began now to understand, though we doubted Sir Gerrard Ervin in the
beginning, that he had been no bad Friend to us, but rather had been a Means of
hindering any of the Irish Army coming against Inniskillin while we recovered
Strength, and were pretty able to cope with them; but the Methods he took for
doing this caused our Suspicion; for he wanting Arms and Ammunition in the
beginning, and likewise knowing it was our want also; he made application to
the Government, who gave him complete Arms and Accouterments for a hundred
Horse, with Ammunition, believing he would have reduced Inniskillin to their
Obedience; whereas his Resolution was, if he had got his Arms safe down, to
have joined and declared himself publicly for us, but the County of Cavan
Gentlemen, seized them upon the Road, and took them all from Sir Gerrard, so
rendered him incapable of arming his Men, and appearing as he would; this was
the cause of his so long lying quiet, yet he fortified his House very well in
the beginning of our trouble; and when the Duke of Berwick came to encamp at
Frillick, he demanded his House to have placed a Garrison in it, which Sir
Gerrard absolutely refused. After the Duke's going off from Frillick, he raised
a good Troop of Horse, with which he marched to Dundalk Camp, doing good
Service there under General Schonberg, and was in very much favor and esteem;
but contracted a Fever before the raising of that Camp, and there died.

During Col. Lloyd's stay at Ballishannon, he sent Maj. Rider, and Mr. Hamilton
by Sea about to the Lough of Derry to satisfy Maj. Gen: Kirk what Condition
Inniskillin was in, and to solicit for Arms, Ammunition, and Commissions. When
the Maj. Genesis knew how things were with us, he sent us Arms and Ammunition,
Bullets and Match, with Commissions for a Regiment of Horse consisting of 16
Troops, a Regiment of Dragoons of 12 Troops, 3 Regiments of Foot each
consisting of 18 Companies, and some very good Men for our Officers, viz.
William Woolsely Col. of Horse, and Commander in Chief; Will. Barry his Lieut.
Colonel, and Charles Stone Major; James Winn Col. of Dragoons; and for the
Foot, Col. Tiffany our Governor, and Col. Tho. Lloyd; for Aid Maj. General,
Capt. Price; for Ingenier, Capt. H. Johnston. The Officers came by Sea to
Ballishannon the 26th of July, from thence by Water to Inniskillin, where they
landed the 28th to the great satisfaction of all there; we having with a
longing Desire many a time prayed for the landing of the English, and now when
we see some of them come to our Assistance and Relief, it may be judged how
much overjoyed we were.

But they were no sooner come, than they had Work cut out for them; for that
very Night came an Express from Lieut. Col. Creighton, giving an Account that
Lieut. Genesis Mackarty was with an Army come before Crume, there forming a Camp
to besiege the Castle, and had brought Cannon with him to batter it: Next day
came another Express, assuring us, that Lieut. Genesis Maskarty had made his
Approaches very near the Castle, and played hard upon it with his Cannon. They
therefore desired we would endeavor their Relief, with what speed we could;
they having no Cannon in the Castle, only small-shot, with which they killed
several of the Enemy.

Col. Woolsely returned answer, That he would endeavor to relieve them upon
Wednesday following; and immediately sent to Ballishannon for what of our
Forces were there that could be spared, who marched up to Inniskillin upon
Tuesday the 30th of July, 20 long Miles, and next Morning 15 Miles e're they
fought the Enemy. Which was on this Manner;

Lieut. Col. Barry was sent upon Tuesday to Lisnaskey, a Castle ten Miles from
Inniskillin, and toward the Enemy, there to place a Garrison if tenable,
otherwise to burn it: but when he had viewed the Castle, he found it so out of
order, that it was not fit to put a Garrison in, neither could it signify much
to the Enemy, so he left it without burning, and that Night lay Abroad with his
Men; next Morning marched on two Miles further toward the Enemy, where his
Scouts brought him Intelligence of the Enemies approach toward him: He not
thinking it advisable to engage with so small a Party as he had with him,
retreated toward Lisnaskey, but the Enemy pressed so hard that they disordered
several of our Men; and had not Lieut. Col. Barry several times faced about
with a Troop or two of Horse, which always put the Enemy to a stand to draw up,
they had certainly routed us to Inniskillin; but our Horse getting through a
River below one Mrs. Lenard's, about a Mile from Lisnaskey, toward Inniskillin,
at a very Boggy deep Pass; and Capt. Malcome Cashcart coming up with about 120
Foot: The Horse by the Industry and Persuasion of Capt. Martin Armstrong
rallied; Capt. Cashcart came to the Officers of Horse, and promised that if
they would stand by him, and not serve him and his Men as they had served
Lieut. Mac-Carmick, he would beat back the Enemy; and if they would not stand
by him, to deal plainly with him. The Officers of Horse protested that they
would assist him, and not a Man of them would turn their Backs; upon which
Capt. Cashcart places an Ambush of about 18 or 20 Firelocks in a Thicket of
Bushes on the Enemies Flank, as they must come on to charge, on the Enemies
side of the River; commanding them not to fire a Shot while he, and they that
were with him, first fired: then he ranked the remainder of his Men along the
other Bank of the River, as much in Covert as he could. The Enemy by this time
were come up, and seeing our Horse Rally and draw up, and our Foot to make good
the Pass, resolved to force it: To that purpose Col. Anthony Hamilton commanded
a Regiment of Dragoons to alight; he led them on, firing very thick as they
came on, while within forty Yards of the River; then Capt. Cathcart commanded
his Men (who had not yet fired one shot) to fire; at which Volley they killed
several of the Enemy, and wounded Col. Hamilton: then these in Ambush being
close upon the Enemies Flank, fired, killing some of the Enemy. Hamilton being
wounded, went off, sending another Officer to command the Dragoons; but Capt.
Cathcart plied them so warmly with his Shot, that Officer being killed, the
Dragoons were commanded to face to the Right-about, to draw them further out of
our Shot: But as soon as they faced, they ran for it; our Horse and Foot
immediately charged through the River, which the Enemies Horse perceiving, fled
likewise; we had the pursuit of them three miles, all which way the Road was
filled with their dead Bodies. By this time there were fresh Recruits of the
Enemy coming up; which our Men perceiving, being weary with so vigorous a
pursuit, retreated to the Mote of Lisnaskey, where they met Gol. Woolsely with
the rest of our Forces.

Col. Woolsely returning Thanks for that Morning's Work, which was a good
Introduction to gaining the Battle in the Afternoon, immediately assembled the
Officers to consult what was farther fit to be done, telling, that their
Resolves must be speedy, the Men that came along with him having made such
haste up to the Relief of their Fellows, that scarce any of them had brought a
Meal of Meat along with them, it was immediately concluded amongst the
Officers, that it was fit to go on; and the Question put to the Soldiers, they
unanimously cried out, to march and fight the Enemy, for indeed they had never
been accustomed, when they saw an Enemy, to turn their Backs, save the
ill-managed Business at Omagh, and the runaway Horse in the Engagement with
the Duke of Berwick, which was occasioned by one Horse-Officer. Col. Woolsely
finding the Men so willing to engage the Enemy, immediately formed the Foot
into three Battalions; the Right and Left Wings led by Col. Lloyd (who never
yet had failed in any thing he attempted) and Col. Tiffon, a worthy Gentleman,
and an excellent Soldier; the main Body he led himself; the Horse he ordered a
Detachment for an Advance Guard, who marched on before at a little distance,
some Troops to second the Right and Left Wings; and the main Body of Horse in
the Rear, led on by the Lieut. Col. and Major; the Dragoons divided in two
Parties to assist the Flanks; so marched on toward Newtown-Butler.

Lieut. Genesis Mac-Carty hearing of our Approach, drew off his Men and Cannon
from Crum-Castle, near to a place called Newtown-Butler, betwixt it and
Wattle-Bridg, where he posted them very advantagiously; his Cannon in a Lane,
facing a narrow Pass through a Bog, that not above one Horse could could come
abreast; his Foot upon the Right and Left of the Lane, all under Covert, that
not a Man of them could be seen save those that were about the Cannon; his
Horse upon the Right of all, drawn up upon a Hill.

When we had marched within half a mile of Newtown-Butler, we discovered some
of the Enemy drawn up on a Hill before us; so that the Foot upon both Wings
marched through a Bog to come in with the Enemy; the Horse were forced to keep
the Causway, which was but narrow; and Col. Woolsely with the Body moved slowly
on: The Enemy fired very hard, but before we came in shot of them, they
retreated orderly: We advanced apace, having command not to break our Ranks. As
the Enemy retreated through Newtown-Butler, (which they did very orderly,
firing always in the Rear as they went off) they set the Town on fire, and so
went to their main Body. When we marched up near them, our Pikes and Colors
were left in a Body by themselves, being near a third part of our Number, and
only the Firearms marched on as formerly, taking the Bog upon the Right and
Left Hand of the Road, the Horse not being able to advance, by reason of the
narrowness of the Road, and the Enemies Cannon playing so hard upon them. When
our Foot were advanced through the Bog, the Enemy fired extreme thick upon our
Men, notwithstanding we could not see a Man of them; but when we came close
upon them, we fell a firing where we saw their Smoke rise, and soon was in with
them, beating them out of their Covert, killing many of them; our Foot
immediately seized their Cannon, where one lusty Man that formerly had belonged
to my Lord Kingston, finding one Fellow with a Hatchet, repairing somewhat
about the Cannon, snatched the Hatchet out of his Hand, and laid so well about
him, that in the twinkling of an Eye he killed seven or eight of those that
were guarding the Cannon, some with the Edg of the Hatchet, and some with the
Head of it; our Horse seeing their Cannon seized, charged eagerly through the
Pass; which their Horse perceiving, wheeled off and fled amain toward
Wattle-Bridg; their Foot betook themselves to the Bogs, most of them throwing
away their Arms; our Horse pursued the Enemies near Cavan, which is about ten
miles from the Place of Battle; but the way being so narrow, leading through
very great Bogs, they could do the Enemy little Prejudice; but what they did
not do, our Foot made up, for they were as good of Foot as the Enemy, slaying
abundance of them in the pursuit; and many took the Lough and were drowned, for
they took the Water in several parts, especially near Wattle-Bridg, where six
or seven hundred of them in a Body thought to have escaped: but our Horse
having left a good Guard to prevent their escaping that way, the Enemy drew up
in order in a Meadow near the Bridge, and marched briskly toward the Horse as
if they designed to force their Passage over; but some of our Foot coming up,
and our Horse charging down upon them, they, without firing, (many of them
having thrown away their Arms before) all in a Body took the Water together,
where they every Man died save one that swam through. Their Lieutenant General,
after their Cannon was seized, and one Capt. George Cooper with a Party of
Firelocks left to guard them, charged in upon the Cannon, with a small Party of
Horse with him, but our Men soon brought him down, killing his Horse; but by
the goodness of his Armor he escaped, having received several Shots, some
whereof upon his Armor, one through the right Thigh, one in at his left Loin,
through the lower part of the Backbone, and out at the right Thigh, and one in
the Groin, which would certainly have killed him had it not been for his Watch,
which the Bullet beat all to pieces; and the Wheels of the Watch cut the Bullet
into many parts, whereof one entered his Groin a little; so had Quarter given
him, and the others that were with him. Our Men followed the Pursuit all that
Night, and till near ten of the Clock next Day; by which time they had scarce
left any alive that fled toward the Lough. Upon their return, they gleaned up
several amongst the Bushes that they gave Quarter to.

Lieut. Genesis Mac-Carty, and some of the Officers, were sent to Inniskillin by
Water, the other Prisoners by Land, to the number of 300 and odd. Their whole
Party was reputed to consist of 6000 Men, and these the Choice of the Irish in
that Kingdom, and the best fitted-out Army with all things necessary; but we
could never learn that 2000 of them got off. We took seven Cannon, 12 or 13
Barrels of Powder, all their Colors, Drums, and abundance of Arms, with the
Pillage of their whole Camp, and several Carts and Wagons. When their General
was taken, although he had no Money in his Pockets, there was a Letter found in
them writ from Col. Sarsfield, two or three days before, acquainting, that he
lay near Inniskillin, attending his Lordship's Motion; that if his Lordship and
the Duke of Berwick, would attaque Inniskilling on the East, he with those
under his Command, were ready to attaque it on the West. But here you see, that
by the great and never-failing Mercy and Providence of God, we were delivered
from them, and they prevented of their Design, and received from a handful of
Men, not without a Miracle, that which they came with a Resolution to give
others. Our Loss being so small in this Action, that we had but one Capt. Corry
lost, and he supposed to be killed by his own Men; and one Cornet Bell, with
not half a score private Men, and very few wounded.

This Action gave the greatest blow to the Irish that ever they had met with,
for their whole Dependence was in a manner upon this Part of their Army, being
so brave Men, so well fitted in every thing necessary, (save Courage) and
having so excellent a General as they looked upon Lieut. Genesis Mac-Carty to be.

Next day we returned to Inniskillin, where Lieut. Genesis Mac-Carty desired to
have liberty of sending to K. James, to acquaint him what Condition he was in;
which was granted him. The King sent one Dr. Connor a Physician, and Mr. Huben
a Chyrurgeon, to attend him, with Money, Wines, and other Necessaries fit for
one in his Circumstances, also Moneys to the other Officers taken with him.

Upon Friday the second of August, we marched toward Ballishannon, with a
Resolution to Engage Col. Sarsfield who lay still at Bandruse upon the
Seaside: But as we marched, we met an Express sent by Capt. Folliot, giving an
Account, that Col. Sarsfield hearing of Lieut. Genesis Mac-Carty's Defeat, had
raised his Camp and retreated to Sligo; also telling us, that the Arms and
Ammunition sent by Maj. Genesis Kirk, were landed at Ballishannon. Upon this Col.
Tiffon, and Lieut. Col. Gore, with a Party of Horse and Foot, were sent to
Ballishannon, to secure that Place in case Sarsfield should return and attempt
any thing against it: As also to take care in transmitting the Arms and
Ammunition to Inniskillin: The rest of our Men marched back to Inniskillin,
where the certainty of the Irish Army marching from Derry, and burning the
whole Country as they went off, was assured them; for our Men that were taken
and kept Prisoners by the Duke of Berwick, being now by Col. Woolsely
exchanged, returned Home, who had seen the Irish Army march off.

Col. Woolsely upon this Intelligence sent a Troop of Horse, under the Command
of Lieut. William Charlton, to observe the Enemies Motion in their March,
fearing lest they might make Incursion into our Country; but he going as far
as Castle-Caulfield, saw the Rear of their Army pass that Place, which is
within seven Miles of Charlemont, near 30 from us, so returned and gave that
Account.

We now having Quiet on all Hands from the Attempts of our watchful Enemies,
set a Day apart, as it was our Duty, to return Thanks to the great God of
Heaven, who had manifested his Power in our Weakness, and so miraculously
delivered us, beyond all Human Probability, being but a handful, out of the
Hands and Power of our numerous and merciless Enemies, etc.

After this Maj. General Kirk sent to Col. Woolsely for 500 Horse and 200
Dragoons, for the more safe marching the Foot, under his Command to join D.
Schonberg, who was landed at Carickfergus; and desired likewise that our Men
should take 200 of the Irish Prisoners down to Derry to assist the poor People
there in cleansing the Town, and emptying the Store-ships. Our Horse and
Dragoons marched down according to the Maj. General's Order, taking the 200
Prisoners with them. Upon our Men's arrival, the Maj. General marched to join
the Duke by the way of Colraine, and came to Carickfergus without any
Opposition.

Col. Sarsfield after his leaving Bandruse, stayed not long at Sligo; for Col.
Tiffany resolving to have him out of that, not liking his Neighborhood, sends
Lieut. Col. Gore with a Party of Horse and Foot to scour the Country as near
Sligo as they could, and if possible, to discover what Strength Sarsfield might
be of, and how posted. Lieut. Col. Gore upon his march, takes an Irishman
Prisoner, who he set at liberty again, designedly to amuse the Enemy, telling
him that all the Forces that Maj. Genesis Kirk had brought out of England together
with Derry and Inniskillin Men, were marching to fall in upon Sligo: This so
alarmed the Country that they all ran with their Cattle to Roscommon, Galloway,
or Athlone, and the Army under Sarsfield did the like, taking little or nothing
with them. Sarsfield being forced to follow, so Lieut. Col. Gore marched into
Sligo without Opposition, getting there several of the Enemies Cannon, and
other things they had left behind.

In September, D. Schonberg commands Col. Woolsely with all the Horse belonging
to Inniskillin (Col. Lloyd's Troop excepted) Col. Winn's Dragoons, Col.
Lloyd's, and Col. Tiffany's Regiments of Foot, immediately to march to Dundalk
Camp, which they did: Col. Woolsely first sending Col. Lloyd with his own Troop
of Horse, and six Companies of Foot of Col. Hamilton's Regiment, with some of
Sir Albert Cunningham's Dragoons to Sligo, for the Defense of that Place.

Col. Lloyd had not been long there, e're he received Intelligence that the
Enemy were drawing to a Body at Abbey Boil, a Town belonging to my Lord
Kingston, and as it was his natural Inclination never to be idle, he resolves
to give them a Visit, and if possible to prevent their getting to a Head; he to
that purpose marched what Force he had from Sligo by Killowney, so to
Ballinafad, and over the Curlues, with as much privacy as he could, marching in
the Night, and falling down near Boil in the Morning early, where he thought
to have surprised the Town: but in the place of that he found the Enemy both
Horse and Foot drawn up in very good Order to receive him, and far exceeding
his Number; he was not long e're he with his accustomed Fortitude engaged them,
and as soon put them to the Rout, killing about 300 of their Foot, and several
of their Horse, who he had the Pursuit of near to Roscommon. Upon this Victory
he marched immediately to James-town, where the Enemy had a Garrison, and took
it; together with Col. Mac-Donnel's House, a strong House called Drumsnaw, near
to James town: Here he got a vast Prey of black Cattle, Sheep and Horses, with
all the Growth of the Country. Col. Lloyd upon this sends an Express, and
acquaints D. Schonberg of his gaining so great a Part of the Country, and
desires to know what to do, he having no Men to Garrison these Places he had
taken: The Duke sends him a positive Command not to lose one Foot of Ground,
and that he should be soon supplied with what he wanted. Col. Lloyd, in
obedience to the Duke's Command, was forced to divide his Men to Garrison
James-Town, Drumsnaw, and Abbey Boil, going himself to Sligo; sending several
times to Inniskillin for Ammunition, but none being sent him, and the Duke not
sending Supplies early enough, our Men a while after (being divided in so small
Parties, and not capable of getting together) were beaten from all these Places
by the Irish; our loss of Men I confess was not great, yet we lost one Lieut.
Casbcart, and Capt. Wiere, commonly called Leird Wiere, a valiant brave Fellow;
and indeed his loss was much lamented, for we had not a more forward Man
amongst us.

The Duke after sent a Detachment of Horse, together with Col. Winn's Dragoons,
and some. Foot and Granadiers, under the Command of Coll. Russel to reinforce
Sligo; but Col. Sarafield making as good haste back as he had made away, came
up to Sligo e^e the Party sent by the Duke was able to get that length: Col.
Russel who had Authority to Command in Chief at Sligo, with some few came in
there late, the Night e're Sarsfield came; our Men drew out in the Morning to
meet him, what of them were there, but they being so small a Number, and
wanting Ammunition, Sarsfield with an overpowring Party, being at least ten to
one, fell in with them, and beat them back into Town.

Our Horse were forced to retreat to Ballishannon, our Foot got into the Fort
of Sligo, Maj. Woods having saved a small Cask of Powder for the last
Extremity, which he brought into the Fort with him; they held out three Days,
killing abundance of the Enemy, sallying out, and bringing in Provisions for
themselves by Force, while at last they had what Conditions desired; then they
surrendered, marching out with Drums beating, Colors flying, Arms loaded, light
Matches, and every Man took along with him what he had; Col. Sarsfield treated
the Officers very kindly with a Dinner, performing his Articles fully, so sent
them safe to Ballishannon, and here ended the Actions of Inniskillin-men.

I know I might have enlarged this Discourse in several Places, and upon
several Occasions, but here you have a Brief of all that happened, with a great
deal of Sincerity and Truth.

FINIS.

